CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
 
____________ 
Adopted December 15, 1992 
Effective December 15, 1992 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Thomas R. Mariani 
Mayor 
____________ 
Hector Figueredo 
Vern Jansen 
L. V. "Woody" Rice 
Terry Tolbert 
City Council 
____________ 
Randall H. Reid 
City Manager 
____________ 
Dwight W. Severs 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janet Camacho 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Karan J. Rounsavall 
Deputy City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code, Volumes I and II, constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1963 Code, as supplemented through May 8, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1963 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code, Volume I, have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. The land development regulations are printed in Volume II. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code, Volume I, is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Dwight Severs, City Attorney, Karan Rounsavall, CMC, Deputy City Clerk, and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 31-1992 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Charter and Code for the City of Titusville, Florida; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall become Effective: 
Be It Enacted by the City of Titusville, Florida as follows: 
Section 1. The Charter and the Code contained in the "Code of Ordinances, City of Titusville, Florida" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of the Charter and Chapters 1 through 63, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All Charter provisions and ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 9, 1992, and not included in the Charter and Code or recognized and continued in force by reference in the Charter and Code and in this section are repealed. 
The following sections appearing in the Code of Ordinances, 1963, and any ordinances amending such provisions, are hereby saved from repeal: 
*Chapter 13A, Marinas 
Section 22-4, New streets 
Section 25A-1, 25A-2, Titusville Environmental Commission established 
*Section 27-2(a), Location of mobile homes and parks … 
*Section 27-3, Mobile home parks, building permit requirement 
*Section 27-9, Travel trailers, camper trailers, cargo trailers, boat trailers 
Section 29-37, Off-site improvements 
*Section 29-59, Real estate sales offices 
*Section 29-62, Trailers, mobile homes—special exception 
Section 29-63, Outdoor recreation and entertainment 
Section 29-65, Flea markets 
*Section 29-68, Temporary auto sales or shows 
Section 29-95, Parking large trucks and heavy equipment 
*Section 29-107, Principal building on a lot 
*Section 29-108, Permitted building area 
Section 29-111, Subdivision of lots 
*The following sections had been saved from repeal. Subsequently, these sections have been recodified as follows: 
Sections 13A-2, 13A-4, 13A-5, 13A-7—13A-9 as sections 59-410—59-415 
Sections 13A-1, 13A-3, 13A-6 have been deleted. 
Section 27-2(a) as Section 59-209(j) 
Section 27-3 as Section 59-210 
Section 27-9 as Section 20-58 
Section 29-59 as Section 59-38(b) 
Section 29-62 as Section 59-10 
Section 29-68 as Section 11-500 
Section 29-107 as Section 59-40 
Section 29-108 has been deleted by Ord. No. 5-1998 
Section 29-116, Arthur Dunn Airport 
Section 29-125, Minimum setback from centerline of streets 
Section 29-198(a), (b), Business districts 
Section 29-260, Special uses—public 
Section 3. It is the intention of this Ordinance not to repeal all ordinances not presently codified and all zoning and rezoning ordinances and comprehensive plan adoption ordinances and each shall remain in force and effect. 
Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be constructed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or a term of imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after June 9, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. Effective date. This Ordinances shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
Passed and adopted this 15th day of December, 1992. 
	/s/ Thomas R. Mariani 
      Thomas R. Mariani, Mayor 
 	 
Attest: 
/s/ Janet R. Camacho 
      Janet R. Camacho, Clerk 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Titusville was originally incorporated on July 13, 1887 (Miscellaneous Record, Brevard County, Book A, pp. 229—318). This incorporation was validated by Ch. 3784, Act 1887. Laws of Fla., ch. 63-2001 is the present Charter of the city which became effective June 3, 1963. This Charter is printed herein as Part I, Subpart A of this Code volume as adopted, except the divisions of the several sections have been renumbered and relettered for the utility of the user and for purposes of simplifying the indexing thereof, so that the first divisions (or subsections) bear numbers and the next divisions (paragraphs) bear letters. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Abolish existing municipalities. 
That the existing municipal government of the Town of Whispering Hills Golf Estates, in the County of Brevard and State of Florida, and the existing municipal government of the City of Titusville, in the County of Brevard and State of Florida, be and the same are hereby abolished. All books and records of the Municipality of the Town of Whispering Hills Golf Estates hereby abolished shall be immediately delivered by the municipal officials to the clerk of the City of Titusville to be by him filed and preserved.  
Sec. 2. - Title to property reserved. 
That the title, rights and ownership of all property, both real and personal, uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, decrees, choses in action and all property and property rights held or owned by the municipality named "City of Titusville," abolished by this act, shall pass to and be vested in the municipal corporation organized under this charter to succeed the municipality abolished. 
That the title, rights, and ownership of all property, both real and personal, uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, decrees, choses in action and all property and property rights held or owned by the municipality named "Town of Whispering Hills Golf Estates," abolished by this act, shall pass to and be vested in the municipal corporation organized under this charter to succeed the municipality abolished.  
Sec. 3. - Obligations unimpaired. 
That no obligations or contracts of the said municipalities hereby abolished, including bonds and revenue certificates heretofore issued or any proceeding heretofore begun for any improvement, or for the borrowing of money, or issuing of bonds or revenue certificates, shall be impaired or avoided by this charter, but such debts, obligations, contracts, bonds and revenue certificates shall pass to and be binding upon the municipality hereby created and organized, and all such proceedings heretofore begun for the construction of any improvements or for the borrowing of money or issuing of bonds or revenue certificates may be continued and completed and binding upon the said new municipality and shall be valid against the new municipality created provided, however, that only that property which was subject to the ad valorem bonded indebtedness of the City of Titusville abolished shall be subject to the ad valorem bonded indebtedness in the City of Titusville established.  
Sec. 4. - Mayor and city council. 
The mayor and city councilmen of the said municipality hereby created with the expiration dates of their terms are as follows: 
1. 	Edwin H. Willis, Councilman 	September 15, 1964 
2. 	William H. Laing, Mayor 	September 10, 1963 
3. 	Ed Kittles, Councilman 	September 15, 1964 
4. 	Millard Finch, Councilman 	September 10, 1963 
5. 	James Pritchard, Councilman 	September 15, 1964 
 
The said mayor and councilmen shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified under the provisions of this charter. 
All officers and employees heretofore elected or appointed and holding office under the said municipality of the City of Titusville hereby abolished, other than the mayor and city councilmen of same, shall continue to hold their respective offices and discharge the respective duties thereof under the new municipality hereby created until their successors are appointed or elected and qualified under the provisions of this charter. 
Cross reference— Creation, composition, term, election of city council, § 11.  
Sec. 5. - Ordinances not impaired. 
All existing ordinances and resolutions of the said abolished municipality of the City of Titusville, Florida, including the "Revised Ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida of 1953," as since amended, not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in effect as the ordinances of the new municipality hereby created.  
Sec. 6. - Establishment of new municipality. 
The inhabitants of the City of Titusville, as its boundaries are hereinafter established and designated, or as may hereafter be established and designated, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate, to be known and designated as "City of Titusville," and as such shall have perpetual succession, may use a common seal, may contract and be contracted with, and may sue and be sued in all courts of this state and in all matters whatsoever.  
Sec. 7. - Boundaries; corporate limits. 
Editor's note— The current boundary description of the city is on file in the city clerk's office. Section 7 of the Charter, prior to 1973, had been amended by Sp. Act Chapters 65-2328, § 1(1); 67-2138, § 1; 72-706, § 1.  
Sec. 8. - Acts repealed. 
All the provisions of Chapter 26315, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1949; Chapter 29571, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1953; Chapter 31321, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1955; Chapter 31490, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1956; Chapters 57-1175 and 57-1916, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1957; Chapters 59-1928, 59-1929, 59-1930, 59-1931, 59-1932, 59-1934, 59-1935, and 59-1991, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1959; Chapters 61-2945, 61-2946, 61-2947, and 61-2997, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1961; all pertaining to the existing municipal governments of the City of Titusville and Whispering Hills Golf Estates, be and the same are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 9. - Change of name. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by the procedure for amending Charters in F.S. § 166.031.  
Sec. 10. - Form of government. 
The council government provided by this charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinances.  
Sec. 11. - General powers of the city. 
[The] City of Titusville hereby created, established and organized shall have full power and authority: 
(1)  Taxes and assessments. [Editorially deleted] 
(2)  Utility taxes. [Editorially deleted] 
(3)  Occupational licenses. [Editorially deleted] 
(4)  Liquor license. [Editorially deleted] 
(5)  Personal property taxes against private individuals upon public lands. [Editorially deleted] 
(6)  Acquisition of property. To acquire by purchase, gift, exchange, lease-purchase, devise, condemnation, lease or otherwise, real or personal property or any estate therein, or riparian rights or easements therein, within or without the city, to be used for any municipal purpose, including all municipal or public buildings, streets and highways; bridge and tunnel sites; plants, works and wells and other equipment necessary for supplying said city with water, gas for illuminating and heating purposes, and electric power for illuminating, heating or power purposes; the location of waterworks and sites for public utility works; the establishment of poor houses, houses of detention and correction; hospitals for the cure or detention of the sick; jails; market houses, public parks, playgrounds, airports, docks, sea walls, yacht harbors, wharves, warehouses, promenades; plants for cremating, neutralizing or otherwise destroying sewerage, garbage and refuse; for extension of sewer and drainage pipes and water mains; and to improve, sell, lease, pledge or otherwise dispose of same or any part thereof for the benefit of the city, to the same extent that natural persons might do, in the proper manner at any regular or special meeting of the council. 
(7)  Recreational facilities. 
(a)  Operate and maintain. [Editorially deleted] 
(b)  Acquire recreational facilities. To acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation, exchange, lease or otherwise real or personal property or any estate or interest therein, located within or without the corporate limits, and on same build, repair, improve, construct, own, operate and maintain any and all manner of recreational facilities and any and all necessary or convenient appurtenances or aids in connection therewith. 
(c)  Regulate uses. [Editorially deleted] 
(d)  Leases and concessions. [Editorially deleted] 
(e)  Pledge revenues. [Editorially deleted] 
(f)  Sale of recreational facilities. [Editorially deleted] 
(g)  Legislative findings. [Editorially deleted] 
(8)  Airports. To purchase, acquire, lease, take hold, establish, construct, equip, maintain and operate municipal airports, landing fields, hangars, aviation terminals and administration buildings, runways, depots, warehouses, garages, repair shops, oil and fuel tank or stations, or other necessary appurtenances for the use of airplane and other aircraft, and to acquire or lease any and all real property within or without the corporate limits, for such purposes; to set apart and use for such purpose any real property owned or leased by the city, whether or not originally acquired by condemnation, purchase or lease for another purpose; to adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations governing the use of such municipal airports; to employ airport directors, airport managers, employees or agents in connection with such operation; to impose fees or charges in connection with the use of such airport or airport facilities; to sell gasoline or other supplies necessary in connection with the operation of such airports; to provide lounges, eating places, refreshment parlors and other facilities in connection with such municipal airports; to let or lease to private persons or corporations portions of the said airports for building sites, hangar space, nonpublic uses, industrial development, concessions or other uses; to prescribe and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the operation of such airports, and to exercise supervision and control of such operation; to accept and receive grants from the state and federal governments and any body politic for the construction, maintenance, operation and management of such airport facilities. 
(9)  Hospitals. [Editorially deleted] 
(10)  Public libraries. [Editorially deleted] 
(11)  Golf courses. To acquire, construct, own and operate a golf course or golf courses and all such buildings and improvements as said city may deem necessary or desirable for use in connection therewith, within or outside the limits of said city, and to sell same when deemed unprofitable to operate, or expedient to do so; to use any lands now owned by said city for the purpose of golf course or golf courses, and to acquire by purchase, lease, condemnation or otherwise for such purposes and lands within or outside the limits of said city as it may deem necessary or desirable; to charge reasonable admissions, rentals or fees for the use of and enjoyment of such golf course or golf courses by the users thereof; to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for the use and operation thereof; to lease any portion or all of any municipal golf course upon terms deemed beneficial to the city. 
(12)  Cemeteries. The City of Titusville is hereby authorized and empowered to acquire, own, maintain and operate a cemetery or cemeteries within or without the corporate limits of the city for the burial and memorialization of the dead and activities incidental and convenient thereto; to issue bonds or revenue certificates for the purposes of obtaining money to establish or improve said facilities in the same manner as other bonds or revenue certificates are provided for in the Charter of the City of Titusville; to establish and administer an endowment or perpetual care fund for the maintenance of said cemetery or cemeteries to be made up by depositing a portion of the moneys received from the sale of lots or plots, and accept gifts to be deposited in said fund; to regulate the uniformity, class and kind of all markers and memorials within the cemetery or cemeteries; to erect, maintain and operate chapels, buildings, workshops, green houses, nurseries and other incidental buildings and equipment; to sell burial lots and burial rights and all things incidental thereto; and to do any and all things necessary or incidental to the accomplishment of any of such purposes. 
(13)  Municipal parking facilities. [Editorially deleted] 
(14)  Public improvements. [Editorially deleted] 
(15)  Docks, wharves, etc. To construct, build, improve, acquire, maintain or discontinue sea walls, docks, wharves, yacht basins, bridges, viaducts, subways and tunnels; to establish, construct, maintain, operate and control public landings, piers, wharves and docks within and without the city and to acquire lands, riparian rights or other rights and easements necessary for such purposes; to lay and collect reasonable duties, charges or fees on vessels or watercraft coming into or using such landings, wharves and docks; to regulate the manner of using any and all wharves and docks within the city and the rates of wharfage or charges to be paid by vessels or other watercraft using the same; to dredge or deepen the harbors, rivers, canals, waterways or any branch or portion thereof within the city. 
(16)  Public utilities. [Editorially deleted] 
(17)  Expend moneys. [Editorially deleted] 
(18)  Borrow money for operating expenses. [Editorially deleted] 
(19)  Franchises. [Editorially deleted] 
(20)  Authority to contract with the United States, state or county. To enter into contracts with the State of Florida or any of its subdivisions or agencies, and with the United States of America or any department or any agency thereof, in order to purchase, lease, exchange, jointly operate or acquire property, real and personal, within or without the limits of the territorial boundaries of the city, for any municipal purpose, and to sell, alienate, convey, lease or otherwise dispose of same for the benefit and advantage of said city, in the manner provided in this Charter. 
(21)  Authority to convey to United States, state or county. To acquire real estate or any interest therein, located within or without the territorial limits of said city, by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation or otherwise, for the purpose of giving granting, exchanging or conveying the same to the United States of America or the State of Florida, or any lawful agency or political subdivision thereof, in the manner provided in this Charter, whenever the city council of said city shall deem it advisable, beneficial and to the best interest of said city so to do, or in order to induce the construction of public institutions and public works of any and all kinds, or for the benefit of the public in general. 
(22)  Special assessments. [Editorially deleted] 
(23)  Streets and avenues, etc. [Editorially deleted] 
(24)  Sidewalks. [Editorially deleted] 
(25)  Use of streets and sidewalks. [Editorially deleted] 
(26)  Regulate transportation. [Editorially deleted] 
(27)  Railroads and locomotives. [Editorially deleted] 
(28)  Regulate use of public property. To regulate and control the use and occupancy of the waters, waterways, water bottoms, wharves, causeways, bridges, beaches, streets, thoroughfares, alleys, parks, public lots, and other public places in the city, and municipally owned or leased property within or without the city limits; to regulate the opening and closing of bridges; prevent the use of the streets and sidewalks by private persons for business purposes or conveniences; and prescribe or regulate the flying height and manner of flight over, above and within the area of the city; and to impose and enforce adequate penalties for violation of such rules and regulations. 
(29)  Draining and filling areas. [Editorially deleted] 
(30)  Cleaning lots. [Editorially deleted] 
(31)  Sewerage disposal. [Editorially deleted] 
(32)  Abatement of nuisances. To compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city, or upon the property owned by the city beyond its corporate limits, at the expense of the person or persons causing the same, or of the owner or occupant of the ground or premises whereon the same may be; to require all lands, lots or other premises within the city to be kept clean, sanitary and free from weeds, wild growth, dilapidated buildings and rubbish; to regulate or prevent slaughterhouses, and noisome or offensive business within the city; to prevent the carrying on of any dangerous or unwholesome business, trade or employment within the city; and generally to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, comfort, and convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(33)  Dairies and stock. [Editorially deleted] 
(34)  Removal of buildings and nuisances. [Editorially deleted] 
(35)  Subdivision plats. [Editorially deleted] 
(36)  Building regulations. [Editorially deleted] 
(37)  Weights and measures. [Editorially deleted] 
(38)  City map. [Editorially deleted] 
(39)  Zoning map. [Editorially deleted] 
(40)  Employees' pensions. To provide for life and/or disability and/or medical insurance for all or any of its employees and officers on a group insurance plan approved by the said city council, and to pay all or such portions of the premium or premiums thereon as said city council by ordinance may determine; and to establish and create by ordinance an employees' pension, annuity and retirement plan for any or all groups of officers or employees employed by said city and qualifying for such plan. 
(41)  Foreclosure of tax liens. [Editorially deleted] 
(42)  Codify ordinances. To codify its ordinances into a "Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville," and by a single ordinance to adopt such "Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville" as a complete revision of all existing and applicable ordinances on the date of such adoption; and to amend such Code, once adopted, by reference to any section or sections. The "Revised Ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida, of 1953," as amended from time to time, except as modified by this Charter, are declared to be the existing Codified Ordinances of the City of Titusville; and such Code of Ordinances may be amended from time to time by reference to any section or sections, and as many sections as desired may be amended by one ordinance. Such "Revised Ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida, of 1953," as amended from time to time, may be revised and codified or re-codified, and such revised Code may be adopted by a single ordinance, and upon such revision shall be in full force and effect. The city attorney of the City of Titusville shall have power and authority to codify any duly adopted ordinance of the City of Titusville and assign proper section numbers and headings to various parts of such ordinances, and thereafter such sections shall be cited in referring to such ordinances. [The] city may arrange with any corporation or agency for keeping said Code of ordinances up to date. 
(43)  Enforcing ordinances. [Editorially deleted] 
(44)  Powers of local self-government. To exercise all of the powers of local self-government and to do whatever may be deemed necessary or proper for the safety, health, convenience or general welfare of the inhabitants of said city, to exercise full police power; to expend moneys to advertise and publicize the city; to do and perform all acts and things permitted by the laws of the State of Florida, and comprehended as duties in the performance of any thing recognized as a "Municipal Purpose," whether now existing and recognized, or hereafter recognized as a municipal purpose by statute law or court decision. 
(45)  All powers customarily exercised by municipalities. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City of Titusville shall have and may exercise all other powers which under the constitution and laws of Florida it would be competent for this paragraph specifically to enumerate. 
(46)  Declared municipal purposes. All public improvements authorized in this Charter are hereby determined and declared to be public municipal functions, and all of the acts authorized to be done and performed in connection therewith are hereby designated and declared to be for a public, municipal purpose. In connection with providing funds for the payment of any or all of the cost of construction of any project or public improvement recognized or designated as a "Municipal Purpose," the city may use, appropriate or pledge any revenues of the city available for such purpose, including the power, rights and authority to use or pledge the proceeds of utilities service taxes, franchise taxes and cigarette taxes. 
(Ord. No. 6-1979, § 1, 1-23-79) 
Editor's note— Parts of this section have been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. § 166.021; authority for borrowing, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; authority to levy certain taxes, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; eminent domain authority, F.S. § 166.400; ad valorem taxes, F.S. ch. 192 et seq.; occupational license tax authority, F.S. ch. 205; regulating railroads, F.S. ch. 551; weight and measures standards, F.S. ch. 552; minimum building standards and regulations, F.S. ch. 553.  
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public records, F.S. ch. 119; public meetings, F.S. ch. 286. 
 
Sec. 12. - Establishment of governing body; term of office; determining the mayor's seat; and providing for effective date. 
The governing body of the city, which will exercise all the legislative and jurisdictional powers of the city, shall be composed of five (5) members of the city council, four (4) of whom shall be council members and one (1) shall be the mayor. The mayor shall be elected by the majority of the votes cast by the qualified electors of the City at large. Each of the four (4) council members shall be elected by the majority of the votes cast by the qualified electors casting ballots at the election of the entire municipality. The term of office of the mayor and city council members shall be for a period of four (4) years. There are hereby created five (5) election seats in the city, such seats being numbered one (1) to five (5) inclusive. 
Seats 1, 2, 3 and 5 shall be council seats. Seat 4 shall be the mayor's seat. Seats 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 shall consist of the entire municipality. 
Beginning with the regular or general election to be held in 1992 and future elections thereafter, the following shall apply: 
For the year 1992, the council member for seat 2 shall be elected and serve for a term of four (4) years. The mayor elected from seat 4 shall serve for a period of four (4) years. 
For the year 1994, the council member so elected from seats 1, 3 and 5 shall serve for a term of four (4) years. 
Beginning with the regular or general election in 1992 and future elections thereafter in the event more than two (2) candidates qualify for a particular council seat or mayoral seat, then in that event, the candidate's election shall be held on the Tuesday nine weeks prior to the general election or such other date as established by applicable general law of the state for primary elections. 
If no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, a runoff election shall be held between the two (2) candidates with the highest number of votes cast to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each applicable year. If a candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for council member or mayor said candidate shall be so elected. 
If only two (2) candidates qualify for a council seat or mayoral seat then in that event the election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each applicable year. 
If only one candidate qualifies for a council seat or mayoral seat, said candidate shall be deemed elected. 
Newly elected council members and mayor shall take office on the fourth Tuesday in the month of November following their election. 
(Ord. No. 24-1971, § 2, 9-9-71; Ord. No. 46-1972, § 1, 7-25-72; Ord. No. 6-1980, § 2, 1-22-80; Ord. No. 60-1981, § 1, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 68-1985, § 6, 9-17-85; Ord. No. 40-1991, § 1, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 3-1998, § 1, 1-27-98)  
Sec. 13. - Qualifications and disqualifications. 
Members of the city council shall be and shall have been residents of the city for one year, and shall have the qualifications of electors in the city. Members of the city council shall not hold any other elective public office. Any member of the city council or mayor who cease to possess the qualifications of being a resident of the city or qualifications of electors shall forfeit their office automatically. Members of the city council may be suspended or removed as provided for by state law. Absence from four (4) consecutive regular and/or special meetings of the city council shall operate to vacate the seat by the city council member, unless excused by the city council by motion. Any illness of a member of the city council or their immediate family member that interferes with a council member's ability to attend meetings, shall count as an excused absence unless the absence continues for more than three (3) months after which time the council may grant additional excused absences. 
(Sp. Acts, Ch. 67-2138, § 2; Ord. No. 60-1981, § 2, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 2, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 14. - Presiding officer; mayor. 
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council, shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, and shall when directed to do so by the city council execute all instruments to which the city is a party, unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall have a vote as a council member on any matters coming before the council. The city council shall elect a vice-mayor who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. If a vacancy occurs in the mayor or any city council seats, it shall be filled by the remaining council members for the completion of the unexpired term or until the next regularly scheduled city council election (provided the vacancy occurs prior to the time period for qualifying), whichever is the shortest period of time. The vice-mayor shall be elected from among the city council at its organizational meeting each year or such other date as established by the City Council and shall hold office for a term of one year or until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 24-1971, § 3, 9-9-71; Ord. No. 9-1998, §§ 1, 3, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 1, 12-10-13)  
Sec. 14-A. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 60-1981, adopted Sept. 22, 1981, repealed § 14-A, concerning recall elections. The deleted section derived from Ord. No. 24-1971, § 5, adopted Sept. 9, 1971, and Ord. No. 46-1972, § 2, adopted July 25, 1972.  
Sec. 15. - Powers. 
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council. The city council may by ordinance or resolution prescribe the manner in which any power of said city shall be exercised. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have the power to: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the city manager; 
(2)  Appoint and remove the city attorney; 
(3)  [Editorially deleted] 
(4)  Establish other administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions within the departments; 
(5)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(6)  Appoint city auditor. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 4, 2-10-98) 
Editor's note— The appointment of a municipal judge has been editorially deleted as municipal courts were abolished by Fla. Const., art. V, § 20.  
Sec. 16. - Appointment of city manager. 
The council shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the title of city manager and shall have the powers and perform the duties of this Charter. No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his term. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 1, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 17. - Removal of city manager. 
The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him by a majority vote of its members. If removed at any time after having served six (6) months, the city manager may demand written charges and a public hearing upon the same before the council, and his final removal shall not take effect until such hearing has been had, but the council may suspend him from office pending such hearing.  
Sec. 18. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately.  
Sec. 19. - Vacancies in the city council. 
If any vacancy occurs in the city council, the remaining members of the city council shall elect within 15 days by the affirmative votes of not less than three members, an eligible person to fill vacancy until the next general election, at which time the office shall be filled for the unexpired term.  
Sec. 20. - Annual organization meeting. 
On the fourth Tuesday of November, the existing city council shall meet at the usual place for holding the meetings of the legislative body of the city, for the purpose of transacting any and all necessary business before assumption of office by the newly elected council member if an election had occurred in that year. At 11:00 o'clock a.m. Eastern Standard Time the newly elected city council shall assume the duties of office. If there was no election, the City Council shall select the vice mayor during the regular City Council meeting held on the fourth Tuesday in November or such other date as established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 2, 12-10-13)  
Sec. 21. - Regular meetings. 
The city council shall meet regularly at such times as may be specified by ordinance, except that it shall meet regularly not less than once each month. 
State Law reference— Public meetings, F.S. ch. 286.  
Sec. 22. - Special meetings; how called. 
Special meetings of the city council will be scheduled by motion of any council member and passed by a majority of the members present at a regular or special council meeting. The mayor or city manager can schedule a special council meeting if in their judgment a meeting is necessary. Any council member may request the city manager to schedule a special meeting. In all cases a twenty-four (24) hour public notice must be posted and notice given to all council members verbally and in writing at their home or business and if unavailable by delivery of a notice to their home. All official meetings of the city council shall be public and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records thereof during the regularly scheduled hours that city hall is opened. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 4, 2-10-98) 
State Law reference— Public meetings, F.S. ch. 286.  
Sec. 23. - Legislative procedure. 
A quorum must exist as determined by the city attorney or in his absence, the city manager to convene an official city council meeting. A quorum will include at least three city council members present to convene an official city council meeting. All meetings of the city council will be either regular or special meetings. The affirmative vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution and the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "yes" and "no" and entered upon the minutes. 
(Sp. Acts, Ch. 63-2001, § 23; Ord. No. 24-1971, § 1, 9-9-71; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 5, 2-10-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-1971, § 1, amended § 23 to read as set out. Said amendment was approved at a referendum held Sept. 7, 1971, pursuant to Ord. No. 21-1971. 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 24. - Council to be judge of qualifications of its members. 
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members as established by the charter and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 6, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 25. - Rules of procedure; journal. 
The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall keep a minutes of its proceedings and the meetings shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 7, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 26. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
Every proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in typewritten, written or printed form at any regular or special meeting. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "Be it enacted by the City of Titusville, Florida." A proposed ordinance may be read by title, or in full, on at least two separate days and shall, at least ten days prior to adoption, be noticed once in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time and place of the meeting; the title or titles of proposed ordinances; and the place or places within the municipality where such proposed ordinances may be inspected by the public. The notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. All proposed ordinances shall be read by title only unless required by state statutes that the ordinance is required to be read in full. An emergency ordinance may be enacted as provided for by state law. 
(Sp. Acts, Ch. 65-2328, § 1(2); Sp. Acts, Ch. 67-2138, § 3; Ord. No. 73-1981, § 1, 12-8-81; Ord. No. 58-1986, § 1, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 8, 2-10-98) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 27. - Independent annual audit. 
Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the council shall designate qualified public accountants who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit their report to the city council. Such accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or of any of its officers. They shall not maintain any accounts or records of the city business, but within specifications approved by the council, shall post-audit the books and documents kept by the department of finance, and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
State Law reference— Annual audit required, F.S. §§ 166.212, 218.33.  
Sec. 28. - Contracts, materials and supplies with city. 
It shall be unlawful for any council member to directly or indirectly contract with any association, partnership, firm or corporation in which he is financially interested, for the doing of any work or the furnishing of any material or equipment to or for the City of Titusville, Florida, unless after public advertisement or competitive conditions, such association, partnership, firm or corporation shall be the lowest responsible and competent bidder. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 1, 2-10-98) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on doing business with agency, F.S. § 112.311(3), (12).  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION—CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 29. - Qualifications. 
The city manager shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or state, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city. The salary of the city manager shall be fixed by the city council.  
Sec. 30. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government, except as herein provided. He shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end, subject to provisions provided for in this Charter, he shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, remove all officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and except that he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office; 
(2)  Fix the salary of officers and employees except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(3)  Endorse on all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the municipality is interested his approval of the substance thereof; 
(4)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council, and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the city council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(6)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable; 
(7)  He shall be purchasing agent of the city, by whom all purchases of supplies shall be made subject to the rules and regulations to be prescribed by the council and he shall approve all vouchers for the payment of same. In the capacity of purchasing agent he shall also conduct all sales of personal property which the council may authorize to be sold as having become unnecessary or unfit for the city's use. All purchases and sales shall conform to such regulations as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by the city council, not inconsistent therewith.  
Sec. 31. - Absence of the city manager. 
To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability the city manager may designate by letter filed with the city clerk, a qualified administrative officer of the city. In the event of the failure of the city manager to make such designation, or in the event of the failure of such designation to meet the approval of the council, the city council may by resolution appoint an officer of the city to perform the duties of the city manager until he shall return, or his disability shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 9, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 32. - Administrative departments. 
There may be a police department, finance department, department of fire rescue and emergency services, department of public works, building department, and such other departments as may be established upon recommendation of the city manager. At the head of each department there shall be an officer of the city who shall have supervision and control of the department who shall be appointed by and shall be under supervision and control of the city manager. Except as herein provided, two or more departments may be headed by the same individual. The city manager may head one or more departments. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 10, 2-10-98) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 45; assessment of taxes, § 66 et seq.  
Sec. 33. - Active participation in political campaign. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the city. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on political activity while not working prohibited, F.S. §§ 104.31(3), 166.031(4).  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ATTORNEY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 49-1976, § 1, adopted Nov. 30, 1976, provided that the municipal court of the city be abolished. Accordingly, the editors have deleted any references to municipal court in article IV. 
 
Sec. 34. - City attorney—Appointment and qualifications. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney and such assistant attorneys as may be necessary who shall act as the legal advisor to, and attorney and counselor for, the municipality and all of its officers in matters relating to their official duties. The city attorney shall be a lawyer of at least two (2) years' experience and practice in the courts of the state. He shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing to which the municipality is concerned, and shall endorse on each his approval of the form and correctness thereof, but failure to do so shall not affect its validity. When required to do so by the city council, he shall prosecute and defend for and in behalf of the city all civil complaints, suits and controversies in which the city is a party. He shall furnish the city council, the city manager, the head of any department, or any officer, board, council, or agency not included in any department his opinion on any question of law relating to their respective powers and duties. In addition to the duties specifically imposed under other sections of this Charter, the city attorney shall perform such other professional duties as may be required of him by ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council, or as are prescribed for city attorneys under federal and state laws, which are not inconsistent with this Charter and with any ordinance, resolution or motion which may be passed by the city council. Assistant city attorneys shall work under the supervision of the city attorney, and perform such duties as he shall require of them. In such cases they shall have the same powers as the city attorney. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 65-2328, § 1(3); Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1688, § 1; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 11, 2-10-98)  
Secs. 35—39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 49-1976, § 1, enacted Nov. 30, 1976, provided that the municipal court as created and established pursuant to Laws of Fla., ch. 63-2001, § 35, be abolished as of 12:01 a.m., Dec. 1, 1976. The editors have deleted §§ 35—39 and 41—43, relative to the municipal court and the municipal court judge, and derived from Laws of Fla., ch. 63-2001 and Laws of Fla., ch. 65-2328, § 1(4)—(6).  
Sec. 40. - Salary of city attorney. 
The salary of the city attorney shall be fixed by the city council. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 49-1976, § 1, adopted Nov. 30, 1976, provided that the municipal court be abolished. Accordingly, the editors have deleted that portion of § 40 relative to the salary of the municipal judge.  
Secs. 41—43. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 35.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 44. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the title of city clerk. He or she shall serve at the pleasure of and shall be under the direction and control of the city manager. The city manager shall appoint a deputy city clerk to act for the city clerk in his or her absence. He or she shall give notice of the meetings of the city council; shall keep the minutes of its proceedings; shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions. He or she shall attest to and/or countersign by his or her signature all contracts, bonds and other instruments as required by law; shall perform the duties of registration officer and shall perform any other duties required by this Charter and as may be assigned by the city manager. The city manager may also serve as city clerk in addition to his other duties. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 4; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 12, 2-10-98)  
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE RESCUE 
 
Sec. 45. - Department of fire rescue. 
There shall be a department of fire rescue headed by a fire chief who shall be appointed by the city manager, and as many subordinate officers, firefighters and employees as may be necessary to carry on the functions of the department. The fire chief shall be responsible to the city manager for stationing and supervision of all firefighters within the department and have jurisdiction over all areas in the vicinity of a fire or conflagration. The city manager or his designated representative may make mutual-aid agreements with other fire emergency departments to supply and receive fire-fighting and medical assistance when circumstances require such action. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 65-2328, § 1(7); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 5; Ord. No. 64-1982, § 1, 10-12-82)  
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL 
 
Sec. 46. - Merit basis of appointment. 
Appointments and promotions in the service of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be made according to merit and fitness to be ascertained, so far as practicable, by competitive examination.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 47. - Public works. 
The city council shall have the power within and without its corporate limits to construct, condemn, purchase, acquire or lease any interest in any property, and to maintain, conduct, own and operate, within and without the corporate limits, wharves, warehouses, ship canals, breakwaters, reservoirs, sewerage systems, trunk sewers, intercepting sewers, pumping stations, wells, siphons, intakes, pipe lines, distribution systems, purification works, collection systems, treatment and disposal works, transportation systems, cemeteries, gas plants and distribution systems or other public utility, airports and necessary hangars and appurtenances, or facility deemed necessary for the public good, and any buildings or facilities as may be required in connection therewith, and to make a contract of whatever nature in connection therewith; and shall have the right and power to issue bonds or revenue certificates in the manner provided in this Charter, in an amount necessary to carry out any of said powers or purposes. All of the above works are considered as utilities within the meaning of all constitutional or statutory provision, and any existing utility may be combined with another existing utility and revenue bonds or certificates issued as otherwise provided by this Charter.  
Sec. 48. - Lights, heat and power. 
The city council shall have power to purchase or otherwise acquire, establish, maintain and provide facilities for lighting the streets, parks, public buildings and public places of the city; and to operate plants either within or without the corporate limits of the city for sources of power, lighting, heating by electricity, gas, atomic power or other unknown sources of energy or any other method; and to supply the inhabitants of said city with artificial light, heat and power, for domestic, business and other purposes, and to charge and collect reasonable rates, prices and compensation for furnishing and supplying the same.  
Sec. 49. - Waterworks plants. 
The city council shall have the power to construct, establish, maintain and operate waterworks, and to bore and dig wells, construct reservoirs, lay pipes, and do such other things as may be necessary, essential or convenient for procuring and distributing an abundant supply of good and wholesome water to the inhabitants of said city for domestic and other purposes and to protect the property of said city and its inhabitants against fire; and also the power to lay water mains and water distribution systems beyond the city limits for the purpose of supplying water to persons residing outside the city limits, and to collect reasonable rates, prices and compensations for furnishing and supplying same, except for fire protection, which may be provided for in the tax levy. 
State Law reference— Municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180.  
Sec. 50. - Service of utilities to consumers outside of city. 
The city shall have power to supply water, electricity and other sources of power, sewerage [sewage] disposal and gas for domestic and other purposes, to individuals, firms, corporations, and other municipalities outside of said city, and to charge and collect reasonable rates, prices and compensations therefor, but the city may charge rates to be fixed by ordinance higher to such consumers than is charged for a like class of service to a like class of consumers within the city limits.  
Sec. 51. - Sanitary sewerage districts. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; creation of special districts, F.S. ch. 189.  
Sec. 52. - Compulsory connection to sanitary sewers. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166; sewer connections, F.S. § 381.272.  
ARTICLE IX. - ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Florida election code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 
 
Sec. 53. - Elections. 
The city council shall, by ordinance, make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter, for the conduct of municipal elections, and for the prevention of fraud therein. Inspectors and clerks of elections shall be appointed by the Brevard County Supervisor of Elections. 
(Ord. No. 9-1998, § 13, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 54. - Electors. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 98.041.  
Sec. 55. - Registration of voters. 
[Editorially deleted] 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 65-2328, § 1(8); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 6) 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. §§ 98.041, 98.051(3)(c), 98.091.  
Sec. 56. - Elections; general; runoff. 
A regular or general election of candidates or nominees to the city council of the City of Titusville shall be held on the dates set forth in section 12 of article 2 of this Charter. Each candidate for council member shall qualify as a candidate from an election seat and no candidate may qualify from more than one election seat in a single election. A candidate to be elected as council member on the first ballot or elected as mayor on the first ballot must receive the majority of the votes cast in his election. In the event a candidate for council member or mayor does not receive a majority of the votes cast in his election, there shall be a "run off" election between the two candidates with the highest number of votes cast. The "run off" election shall be held on the dates specified in section 12 of article 2 of this Charter. In the event that there is a tie in the first election among the candidates receiving the most votes, these candidates shall be in the "run off" election. In the event there is a tie in the "run off" election, subsequent elections shall be held in the same manner as the original "run off" election. The candidates shall be elected in the "run off" election by receiving a plurality of the votes cast in the "run off" election. The exercise by the city council of the City of Titusville of its option to adopt the permanent single voter registration system is hereby ratified, confirmed and approved, and all elections of the City of Titusville shall be conducted by the supervisor of elections of Brevard County in accordance with general state laws governing elections and registration of electors and by such ordinances as the city council of Titusville may from time to time adopt, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in other sections of this Charter, which inconsistent provisions are hereby repealed. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 63-2001, § 56; Laws of Fla., ch. 65-2328, § 1(9); Ord. No. 20-1970, § 1, 9-10-70; Ord. No. 24-1971, § 4, 9-9-71; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 14, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 3, 12-10-13)  
Sec. 57. - Elections; canvass of returns. 
The polls shall open at seven o'clock a.m. and shall close at seven o'clock p.m. or such other time as established by applicable general law of the state. The result of the voting, when ascertained, shall be certified by the supervisor of elections and the county canvassing board to the city clerk, who shall transmit such returns to the city council at the first regular City Council meeting following the receipt of the official results for the primary election and at the organizational meeting held on the fourth Tuesday of November for the general election or such other date as established by the City Council. At such meeting the city council shall canvass the returns, and the results as shown by such returns shall be declared as the results of the election. 
(Ord. No. 61-1988, § 1, 9-27-88; Ord. No. 9-1998, § 15, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 4, 12-10-13) 
State Law reference— Hours of opening and closing of polls superseded by state law, F.S. § 100.011.  
Sec. 57-A. - Straw ballots. 
The city council of the City of Titusville, Florida, may, by ordinance passed by a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote, submit to the electors of the city on straw ballot or opinion poll any question of public interest at any regular or general election of candidates or nominees to the city council. The results of the straw ballot or opinion poll shall not be binding upon the city council, but shall serve as information to the council on matters of public interest. The straw ballot or opinion poll at the general or regular election of candidates or nominees to the city council shall conform to the following requirements: 
STRAW BALLOT 
Mark a cross mark (x) in the square at the right FOR or AGAINST the proposal. 
(Proposal to be placed upon the ballot.) 
FOR the proposal 	? 
AGAINST the proposal 	? 
 
(Ord. No. 46-1972, § 3, 7-25-72)  
Sec. 58. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September in each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year, and as used in the Charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year mandated by state law, F.S. §§ 166.241, 218.33.  
Sec. 59. - City manager's budget message and recommendations. 
The city manager shall submit to the city council his budget message, estimates and recommendations, together with a proposed budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1st thereafter. The budget message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the budget year, and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the proposed budget. He shall estimate receipts and disbursements for the remainder of the current fiscal year, based on information obtained from the various departments. He shall also make an estimate of the expenditures and revenues of the city for the ensuing year; such estimate to be compiled from detailed information, and its arrangement and classification of expenditures shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main functional divisions and departments of the city. Schedules attached to such budget message shall show the following information: 
(1)  The current budgeted amount for each fund, function, department, division, and for each utility or facility operated by the city and the estimated surplus or deficit of each with recommendations for transfers. 
(2)  The amount of monies which he estimates will be on hand on October 1st, specifying the fund or appropriation to which such monies have been appropriated, after inter-fund transfers. 
(3)  Detailed estimates of anticipated revenues to be derived from all sources other than ad valorem taxes for each fund or appropriation. 
(4)  Estimated amount necessary to be raised by ad valorem taxation. 
(5)  The actual expenditure of funds for the preceding year for each fund, appropriation and utility and in parallel columns, the estimated expenditure of funds for the current fiscal year, and the fiscal year beginning October 1st, to be shown by fund, or appropriation with each fund subdivided into its current classification of functions, departments and divisions. 
(6)  Supporting schedules showing special pledges or dedications of revenues to special funds or appropriations. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 7)  
Sec. 60. - Annual budget recommended by city manager. 
The city manager shall include in his budget message a recommended annual budget, prepared in proper form, for the next ensuing fiscal year beginning October 1st and ending September 30 following, which proposed budget shall provide a clear financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Sec. 61. - Publication of notice of public hearing. 
[Editorially deleted] 
(Ord. No. 6-1975, § 1, 1-28-75) 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 62. - Ordinance adopting budget; levy of taxes; certifying tax levy. 
[Editorially deleted] 
(Ord. No. 6-1975, § 1, 1-28-75) 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 63. - Effective date, execution and amendment of budget. 
(a)  [Editorially deleted] 
(b)  From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. It shall be unlawful for any officer to draw money from the treasury except pursuant to an appropriation. 
(c)  The city manager may, at any time and without formal action by the city council, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications and expenditures within a department or division and shall report said transfer at the next regular meeting. Failure to report said transfer shall not invalidate said expenditure made in reliance on said transfer. At the request of the city manager, by motion recorded in the minutes of the meeting, the city council may authorize at any time the transfer of any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one department or division to another. 
(d)  The city council, by motion recorded in the minutes of the meeting, at any time within a fiscal year may amend a budget for that year as follows: 
(1)  Appropriations for expenditures in any fund may be decreased and other appropriations in the same fund correspondingly increased provided that the total of the appropriations of the fund be not changed. 
(2)  Appropriations from any reserve or reserve for contingencies may be made to increase the appropriation for any particular expense in the same fund, or to create an appropriation in the fund for any lawful purpose. 
(3)  A receipt of a nature from a source not anticipated in the budget or received for a particular purpose, including grants, donations, gifts, or other revenues, may be appropriated and expended in addition to the appropriations and expenditures provided for in the budget. 
(4)  Transfers may be made between funds only for the following purposes. 
a.  To correct errors in handling receipts and disbursements. 
b.  Budgeted transfers. 
(5)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriation, the council may authorize an emergency note which may be renewed from time to time until funds are available. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 8; Ord. No. 6-1975, § 1, 1-28-75) 
Editor's note— Subsection (a) of this section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 64. - Property taxable. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. ch. 192 et seq.  
Sec. 65. - Authority of city to levy taxes. 
[Editorially deleted] 
(Ord. No. 6-1975, § 1, 1-28-75) 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 166.201 et seq.  
ARTICLE XI. - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES BY CITY OFFICIALS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— This article consisting of sections 66 through 83 has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 193.116. 
State Law reference— Assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes, F.S. ch. 192 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE XII. - TAX SALE CERTIFICATES, TAX DEEDS AND TAX FORECLOSURES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— This article consisting of sections 84 through 121 has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 166.211 and ch. 197. 
State Law reference— Collection of ad valorem taxes, F.S. § 166.211(2), ch. 197. 
 
ARTICLE XIII. - MUNICIPAL BONDS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— This article consisting of sections 122 through 143 has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 166.101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power of cities to borrow money and issue bonds, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; bonds, F.S. §§ 130.01 et seq., 132.01 et seq., 159.01 et seq., 163.385, 215.43, 215.431, 215.84, 218.37—218.385. 
 
ARTICLE XIV. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal revenue bond act of 1955, F.S. ch. 159; alternate procedure for making local improvements, F.S. ch. 170. 
 
Sec. 144. - Improvements authorized. 
[The] City of Titusville, in Brevard County, Florida, by its city council, shall have power and authority to cause local improvements to be constructed, wholly or in part, at the cost of the property owners benefited thereby, by levying and collecting special assessments, for the following improvements: 
(1)  Extending, enlarging or improving its sanitary sewer system, by constructing additional sanitary sewerage mains, pumping stations, laterals, storm sewers, and other drains and sewers, and necessary appurtenances thereto. 
(2)  Extending, its waterworks system into new territory, by the construction of additional water mains, pumps, etc., and the laying or relaying of same, together with the necessary appurtenances thereto, either inside or outside of the corporate limits or partly inside and partly outside. 
(3)  Paving or repaving, grading or regrading, macadamizing, hard surfacing, opening, widening, otherwise improving streets, alleys, boulevards, avenues, lanes, sidewalks, including any bridges, culverts, fills, grades or other appurtenances which may constitute or form a part of same, or any parks, promenades, piers, wharves, docks, sea walls, adjacent or contiguous thereto; building, demolishing, rebuilding or otherwise improving any bridges, grades, fills, culverts and appurtenances; and any one or more of such purposes may be combined in the same improvement. 
(4)  Draining, dredging, filling in or improving waterfront property, swamps, marshes, and overflowed lands for the purpose of protecting the health of the inhabitants of the city, rendering such lands usable, and constructing bulkheads, promenades, streets, parking places and other improvements in connection therewith. 
(5)  Providing for storm sewer and surface water drainage. 
(6)  Clearing and cleaning real property of weeds, undergrowth, rubbish, debris, brush, and unsightly and insanitary matters, and to fill insanitary excavations, and depressions; removing dilapidated and unsightly buildings which constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city.  
Sec. 145. - Resolution of necessity. 
Whenever the city council shall determine that it is wise and expedient to make any of the local improvements herein specified, the cost of which, or any part thereof, is to be assessed against property benefited, it shall adopt a resolution declaring a necessity for the proposed improvements, describing the nature and extent of the work, the general character of materials to be used, a general description of such improvements, the estimated cost of the improvements, and the location or area in which such improvements are to be made. Said resolution shall fix a date when the city council shall meet, which shall not be less than twelve (12) days after the adoption of the resolution, for the purpose of hearing any objections or remonstrances that may be made to said improvements. Notice of the time of hearing objections to such local improvement shall be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks (the first publication to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for hearing), which notice shall state substantially the matters required to be set forth in the resolution of necessity.  
Sec. 146. - Objections to improvements. 
At said meeting for hearing objections to the proposed improvement, or at a time and place to which the same may be adjourned, any person aggrieved may appear in person, by attorney or by petition, and may object to or protest against said improvement. The city council shall consider the objections and protests, if any, and may confirm, amend, modify or rescind the resolution of necessity, and shall determine whether the said improvement shall be made, and how the cost thereof shall be paid. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. If the city council determines to proceed with such improvement as originally proposed or in an amended or modified form, it shall adopt a resolution determining to proceed, as hereinafter set out.  
Sec. 147. - Claims arising out of improvements. 
The owner of any lot or land bounding and abutting upon a proposed special improvement, who claims that he will sustain damage by reason of the improvement shall present such claim to the city council at the time of its meeting on the question of whether it should proceed with the improvement as provided in the following section. Such claim shall be in writing, and shall set forth the amount of damages claimed, with a general description of the property with respect to which it is claimed the damage will accrue. Any owner who fails to do so shall be deemed to have waived such damage, and shall be barred from thereafter filing a claim or receiving damages therefor. This provision shall apply to all damage which will obviously result from the improvement, but shall not deprive the owner of his right to recover damages arising without his fault from acts of the city or its agents.  
Sec. 148. - Resolution determining to proceed. 
If, after hearing the objections and protests, if any, the city council believes that it is expedient to proceed with such improvement in the original or modified form, said city council shall adopt a resolution determining to proceed with such improvement, which resolution shall disclose what part of the total cost and expenses of the improvement shall be chargeable against and assessed against the property benefited by the improvement, and what part or proportion of the total costs shall be paid by City of Titusville from its general fund or any special fund on hand for such purpose. The resolution may direct that the whole or any part of the cost and expenses thereof be assessed against the property abutting upon the improvement; or may provide that all property benefited by the improvement may be assessed for such improvement in the manner set out therein.  
Sec. 149. - Bids of public improvements. 
As soon as the city council shall have adopted the said resolution determining to proceed with a specific improvement, and money to pay the estimated cost of such improvement is available, or at a later date if it so desires, in cases where the improvement is not to be made by regular city employees, it shall advertise for bids by publication in one (1) issue in a newspaper of general circulation in Titusville, requesting sealed bids to be submitted upon a specified date, but such publication must not be less than ten (10) days before the date for receiving bids. The city council shall let the contract for such improvement to the lowest, most responsive and responsible bidder, representing the best value to the City. 
(Ord. No. 10-2001, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 150. - Cost of the improvement. 
The city council shall have the power to pay out of its general fund, or out of any special fund that may be provided for the purpose, such portion of the cost of the proposed improvement as it may deem to be the proper portion to be borne by the city. Interest accrued while an improvement is under construction, and for six (6) months thereafter, shall be deemed part of the cost of the improvement. All engineering and inspection costs, legal and advertising costs, including a proper proportion of the compensation, salaries and expenses of the engineering staff, properly chargeable to any improvement, shall be deemed a part of the cost of the improvement. When bonds or certificates are issued in order to obtain money with which to make the improvement, all cost and estimated cost incurred in issuing such bonds or certificates and obtaining such funds shall be deemed a part of the cost of the improvement. When local improvements are made by city employees, all legal charges, advertising cost, engineering cost, payroll, materials, equipment rental at the prevailing rates, plus not more than fifteen per cent (15%) of the total payroll, material and equipment rental cost for general overhead expense, may be included in the cost of the improvement. When the improvement has been completed, the city council shall ascertain and determine the total cost of improvement.  
Sec. 151. - Method of making special assessments. 
Special assessments upon the property deemed to be benefited by a public improvement shall be by one or a combination of the following methods: 
(1)  Upon an area or square foot basis as to all property specially benefited; 
(2)  In proportion to the benefits which may result from the improvement; 
(3)  By the foot frontage of the property bounding or abutting upon the improvement; 
(4)  Upon a fair and equitable basis according to benefits received. 
When a majority of the recorded owners of the frontage of lands liable to be assessed for any special local improvement shall petition the city council for any such improvement, the council may order such improvement to be made. In other cases the public improvement shall be made in the discretion of the city council, whenever deemed necessary.  
Sec. 152. - Assessment roll and notice. 
Upon the completion of any improvement hereunder, the city council shall cause to be prepared a roll or list to be called the assessment list, showing the improvement number, the number of the assessment lien, a description of each lot or parcel of land proposed to be assessed for such improvement, the amount proposed to be assessed against each lot or parcel of land, and the name of each owner as shown on the city tax roll or records. Such list shall be a public record constituting notice to the public of the lien against the land so assessed, and no other record or notice thereof shall be necessary to any person or corporation for that purpose; but the council, in its discretion may send out notices of date of hearing upon confirmation of the roll to parties affected. No errors, omissions, or mistakes in regard to description of property shall be held to invalidate any assessment appearing upon such assessment list, where the description given is sufficient to identify the property. After the completion of said assessment list or assessment roll in final form, same shall be delivered to the city clerk of City of Titusville, who shall thereupon give notice by publication in two issues at least seven (7) days apart, in some newspaper published in said municipality that the assessment list has been delivered to him and is open for inspection at his office, and that at a time and place therein mentioned, not less than ten (10) days from the first publication, the city council will meet to hear and determine any objections or defenses that may be filed to such assessments or the amounts thereof. Said notice shall state the number of the improvement, the general character of the work which has been performed, the name by which such improvement is generally known, and the location in which such improvement has been constructed.  
Sec. 153. - Assessments against political subdivision. 
No special assessments shall be made under this Act against the property of the United States, nor against property owned by the State of Florida, in respect to any lands or real property held by them for public purposes. Any political subdivision or taxing district of the State of Florida owning real estate within the City of Titusville may be assessed for any benefits to such property and shall be chargeable with notice of the assessment herein provided in the same manner as other persons. The assessment shall be entered upon the assessment list, and it shall be the duty of the governing authority of the county, district, political subdivision or taxing district to pay the same out of any funds available for that purpose, or in the event that there be no funds available therefor, to levy and collect a sufficient amount in the next annual levy to pay the amount of the assessment, and such assessments shall not be a lien on such property nor shall the provisions of this Act authorizing the sale of property for unpaid special assessments be applicable thereto, but such lien may be enforced by appropriate action against the taxing division.  
Sec. 154. - Hearing, confirmation of assessment list. 
At the time fixed in such notice, or at an adjourned meeting, the assessment roll or assessment list in final form shall be produced before the city council, and the city council shall be produced [10] [sic] to the amount of such assessment which may be made by the owners of real property assessed for such improvement, or by parties having an interest therein, and the city council shall determine and hear all objections and protests to the proposed assessments under such rules and regulations as it may adopt. The city council has a right to change or adjust any assessment appearing upon such assessment list, at such meeting, or at any adjourned meeting thereof. When such assessment list has been finally corrected and adjusted, the city council shall adopt a resolution approving and confirming assessment roll and therein shall approve and confirm all assessments as finally fixed and adjusted at such hearing, and such assessments shall, from the date of confirmation by such resolution, constitute a lien on the respective lots or parcels of land, or other real property upon which they are levied, superior to all other liens, except those for city and county taxes. All persons who fail to object to the proposed assessments in the manner herein provided, shall be deemed to have consented to and approved the same. All persons who appeared at such hearing and whose objections were over-ruled or denied shall be deemed to be bound by the action of the city council after thirty (30) days from the adoption of such resolution approving and confirming assessment roll, unless suit challenging such assessment be filed. Substantial compliance with the procedure outlined shall be all that is necessary to render such assessment liens valid and incontestable, it being the expressed intention of the legislature that the requirements are directory rather than mandatory. 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— This is as it appears in the official copy on file in the office of the Secretary of State. 
 
Sec. 155. - Setting aside special assessments. 
If any special assessment made hereunder to defray the whole or part of the expense of any local improvement shall be either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court or if the city council shall be satisfied that any assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced and collected, or if the said city council shall have omitted to make such assessment when it might have done so, it is hereby authorized to take all steps to cause a new assessment for the whole or any part of any improvement or against any property benefited by any improvement, following as near as may be under the circumstances the provisions of this act; and in case such second assessment shall be annulled, the city council may obtain and make other assessments until a valid assessment shall be made. No omission, informality, or irregularity in the proceedings preliminary to the making of any special assessment shall affect the validity of the same, where the assessment list has been confirmed by the city council, and the assessment list and the record thereof kept by the city clerk shall be competent and sufficient evidence that the assessment was duly levied and the assessment list duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings necessary to the adoption of said assessment list were duly had, taken and performed as required by this statute, and no variance from the directions herein contained as to the form and manner of any of the proceedings shall be held material, unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. In case any special assessment shall, in any suit where its validity shall be questioned, be adjudged invalid, the city council may in its discretion notify the city treasurer to cease the collection of the same, if it shall have been transmitted to him for collection, and may proceed anew by proceedings either as in case of an original special assessment for the same purpose or by taking up the previous proceedings at any point, and may make and levy a new assessment in the place and stead of the assessment which shall have been adjudged invalid, and the city clerk, before delivering such new assessment roll to the city treasurer for collection, shall ascertain and note thereon payments which have been made on such invalid assessment for the same purpose, which notation shall cancel the assessments as to the parcels and lots on which such payments were made to the extent of the payments. Such new assessments shall be collected in the same manner as original special assessments.  
Sec. 156. - Suits, actions, writs or special proceedings. 
For the period of thirty (30) days after the date of the confirmation of any special assessments, any person aggrieved shall have the right to contest the legality thereof by suit, action, writ or special proceedings, after which time no suit, action, writ or special proceedings in any manner questioning the legality of the said special assessment shall lie for any cause whatsoever.  
Sec. 157. - Method of collection. 
The resolution approving and confirming the assessment list shall provide whether such special assessments shall be payable in cash within thirty (30) days from the adoption of such resolution, or whether such special assessments shall be payable in annual installments, the first of which shall be payable on or before the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of confirmation. If the city council desires that the assessment shall be payable in annual equal installments not to exceed ten (10) equal annual installments, it shall fix an interest rate, not to exceed eight per cent (8%) per annum upon such unpaid installments. All installments shall begin to draw interest thirty (30) days after the date of confirmation of the assessment roll. The owner of the property desiring to pay his assessment in installments, if same shall be permitted, shall, on or before thirty (30) days from the confirmation of such assessments, file with the city treasurer a written application to pay said assessments in installments, which application shall state the applicant and property owner waives all irregularities or defects, constitutional, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings for the improvements for which the assessments are levied, and in the apportionment of the cost thereof; and thereafter the validity of such assessments shall not be called in question. The payment of an assessment, in whole or in part, shall constitute a waiver of all defects, constitutional, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings. Said application shall also contain an agreement that the applicant and property owner will pay the said assessment in installments at the date fixed by said resolution, with interest at the rates specified in said resolution. Said application shall also make a reference to the number of the improvement, and shall contain a description of the lots or parcel of property to the applicant, assessed for such improvement.  
Sec. 158. - Lien docket. 
The city treasurer shall keep all applications in convenient forms for examination, and such applications shall show the date of filing, the name of the applicant, the amount of the assessment as shown in the application, and the number of installments in which same shall be payable. Such approved assessment roll or list and such applications shall constitute a docket and shall stand as a lien docket for the assessment in favor of City of Titusville against such lot or parcel of land until such assessment and interest and penalties are paid in the manner hereinafter provided. Such approved assessment list or roll shall be the official record to evidence the lien, and the form or manner of keeping and preserving the same shall not be material so long as said list or roll contains the necessary information and is prepared and approved in the manner herein specified. All unpaid assessments, penalties and interest shall be and shall constitute a lien on each lot or parcel of land, respectively, in favor of the municipality, and such liens shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances whatsoever, except liens for city and county taxes. The city may issue special assessment certificates to evidence this lien.  
Sec. 159. - Foreclosure by city. 
Should any assessment lien in the hands of the City of Titusville become in default, and remain in default for a period of ninety (90) days after becoming due and payable, the city council may order such list turned over to the city attorney for collection. It shall then be the duty of the city attorney to attempt to collect such special assessment liens or to institute foreclosure proceedings to foreclose said assessment liens against the property encumbered thereby as soon as such proceedings can be prepared and filed, and the owner of the property against which the lien exists shall be liable to the city for a reasonable attorney's fee with which to compensate its attorney for services in collecting the amounts due on said lien. The final decree to be entered shall decree the amount of said lien and reasonable attorney's fees and all costs occasioned or necessitated by such foreclosure, as a lien against the property described. The lien for attorney's fees and costs shall arise whenever the lien is placed in the hands of the city attorney for collection, and such lien for attorney's fees shall not exceed fifteen per cent (15%) of the amount due. In foreclosing such special assessment liens, the city may pursue and follow any recognized chancery proceeding to enforce liens, and upon such suit or suits being brought, a certified copy of the assessment list shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount and existence of the lien upon the property described. The decree rendered in said case for the enforcement and collection of the amount due thereunder shall provide for a reasonable attorney's fee for the institution of the suit and the collection of the amount due on said lien, together with all costs occasioned in bringing said suit and foreclosing said lien, and same shall be decreed to be a lien upon the lands described and shall be collected at the time and in the manner provided for the collection of the amount evidenced by said assessment lien. Any number of assessment liens may be foreclosed in one chancery action, and the final decree, to be entered, shall determine the principal, interest, costs, and attorney's fees to be chargeable against each property encumbered. The holders of special assessment certificates sold by the city shall have the same right to foreclose same against the real estate encumbered by such special assessment certificates. 
State Law reference— Foreclosure of city special tax assessment liens, F.S. ch. 173.  
Sec. 160. - Assessments validated. 
All assessments and liens for sidewalks, street improvements, sewer assessment or other public improvements, and all collection of same heretofore made by the City of Titusville, are hereby legalized and declared valid and of full force, virtue and effect, binding in law or equity; and the same shall not be set aside or invalidated on account of any error, defect, informality or omission which shall not amount to a want of due process of law under the Constitution of the State or the Constitution of the United States.  
ARTICLE XV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS GOVERNING DEVELOPMENT OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 161. - Plats and subdivisions. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166. 
State Law reference— Specifications required of maps and plats prior to recording by county, F.S. ch. 177.  
Sec. 162. - Opening of new streets. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 163. - Vacating or changing streets or alleys. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 164. - Zoning regulations—General powers of city. 
[Editorially deleted] 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 14) 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 165. - Same—Dividing the city into zoning districts. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 166. - Same—Purposes in view. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as the home rule powers of a municipality other than extraterritorial powers which shall be by general or special law are derived from the Constitution and F.S. ch. 166.  
Sec. 167. - Same—Amendments to zoning ordinances. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 168. - Board of adjustment. 
The city council may provide for the appointment of a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by the city council. The city council may act as a board of adjustment if they so desire. The said board of adjustment may, in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of the ordinances in harmony with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with its general and specific rules therein contained. The establishment by the city council of the City of Titusville by Ordinance No. 14-67 of the board of adjustments and appeals is hereby approved, ratified and validated in all respects. The city council of the City of Titusville may, at any time, by ordinance duly adopted by its city council, abolish said board of adjustments and appeals and upon such abolishment the city council shall act as the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 67-2138, § 15) 
Code reference— Board of adjustments and appeals, § 13.00 et seq., Land Development Code, volume II of this Code.  
Sec. 169. - Powers of board of adjustment. 
The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Charter or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so justice done.  
Sec. 170. - Decision of board. 
The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance.  
ARTICLE XVI. - EXTENDING TERRITORIAL LIMITS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— This article has been editorially deleted as preempted by F.S. ch. 171 procedure for annexation and contraction of municipal boundaries and specifically F.S. § 171.022 which repealed all special act or municipal charter provisions in effect on October 1, 1974. 
 
Sec. 171. - The City of Titusville may annex contiguous territory to the city by any of the following methods. 
[Editorially deleted]  
Sec. 172. - Pursuant to article. 
[Editorially deleted]  
ARTICLE XVII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 173. - Statute of limitations. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 768.28.  
Sec. 174. - Suits for damages against city. 
[Editorially deleted] 
Editor's note— This section has been editorially deleted as superseded by F.S. § 768.28.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - GENERAL CLAUSES 
 
Sec. 175. - General laws to apply. 
All general laws of the state applicable to municipal corporations, now existing or which may hereafter be enacted, and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this act or the ordinances or resolutions now in force or hereafter enacted by the city council, shall be applicable to this city; provided, however, nothing contained in this act shall be construed as limiting the power of the city council to enact any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with the Constitution of this State and of the United States, or with the express provisions of this act.  
Sec. 176. - Saving clause. 
The provisions of this act are severable, and if any section, part of section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this act shall be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other portion thereof, but shall be restricted and limited in its operation and effect to that specific portion hereof involved in the controversy in which such decision shall have been rendered.  
Sec. 177. - Conflicting laws. 
All laws and parts of laws, ordinances, or regulations, insofar as they are in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this act be and the same are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 178. - Effective date. 
This act shall become law [12] upon its passage and approval by the governor or upon its becoming a law without such approval. 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Act was filed in the office of the secretary of state June 3, 1963, unsigned by the governor. 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How ordinances designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, City of Titusville, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1963, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to codify ordinances, § 11(42).  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code and all ordinances, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Administrator. The word "administrator" shall mean the city manager or his designee. 
Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, departments, etc. Whenever reference is made to a board, committee, commission, officer, employee or department, etc., it shall mean the same as if it were followed by the words "of the City of Titusville, Florida." 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Titusville, Florida, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Titusville, Florida. 
City manager. The words "city manager" shall mean the chief administrative official as appointed by the city council from time to time. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.090(a). 
Council or city council. Whenever the words "council" or "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Titusville. 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Brevard, State of Florida. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Florida. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1963, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions of terms used in Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1963, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of Titusville, 1963, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments.  
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal or amendment of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed or amended took effect. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal or amendment took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1963, § 1-4) 
State Constitution reference— "No bill of attainer, ex post facto law, nor any law impairing the obligation of contracts, shall ever be passed." Declaration of Rights, § 17.  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or establishing fees. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map particularly Ordinance number 20-1990, as amended. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance regarding the federal old age and insurance benefits for officers and employees. 
(14)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(17)  Any provision of Laws of Fla., ch. 63-2001, as amended, or any special act provision which has been converted to ordinances by F.S. § 166.021 which has not been superseded or repealed or is not inconsistent with this Code. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein and are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: 
"Be it Enacted by the City of Titusville, Florida: 
That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Titusville is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: 
"Be it Enacted by the City of Titusville, Florida: 
That the Code of Ordinances, City of Titusville is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: …." 
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1963, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Charter reference— Codification authorized, § 11(42).  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1963, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 hereof. 
(Code 1963, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, the city may seek the revocation or suspension of a license or permit, the imposition of civil fines, or other administrative actions, including actions pursuant to F.S. ch. 162. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1963, § 1-8; Ord. No. 3-2012, § 1, 1-24-12)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and city councilmembers designated, § 4; form of government, § 10; city council established, § 12 et seq.; election of councilman as vice-mayor, § 14; appointment, powers and duties of city manager, §§ 16, 30; administrative powers vested in city manager, § 18; regular and special meetings of city council, §§ 21, 22; procedure for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, § 26; appointment and qualifications of city attorney, § 34; appointment, duties of city clerk, § 44; fiscal year, § 58; budget, § 59. 
Cross reference— Administration of the general employee's pension plan, § 15-66 et seq.; administration of the police officers, and firefighters pension plan, § 15-166 et seq.; administration of the traffic and motor vehicles, § 20-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule powers act, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Official seal of the city. 
(a)  Official seal defined. As used herein, the official seal of the city shall mean the city seal, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A", and by reference made a part hereof. 
(b)  Execution and acknowledgement of written instruments. Whenever it shall be necessary for the city, under the authority of its city council, its Charter or Code, and the general laws of the state, to execute contracts, deeds, or other official documents on behalf of the city, the official seal of the city shall be affixed to such contract, deed or other official document. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to print for the purpose of sale or distribution or circulate, publish, use or offer for sale any letters, papers, signs, cards and documents, whether by electronic medium or not, or items of merchandise which simulate the official seal of the city or the stationery of a real or fictitious agency, department or instrumentality of the city without the express written authority of the city council. Requests for use of the city seal will be channeled through the city manager to the city council for consideration. Anyone violating this provision shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor, per F.S. § 165.043. 
(Ord. No. 13-2000, § 1, 5-23-00) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" is not included herein but is available for public inspection in city offices.  
Secs. 2-2—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and city council, § 12 et seq.; mayor is presiding officer, § 14; meetings, § 21; rules of procedure, § 25. 
Cross reference— Standards of conduct, § 2-116 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq.; elections, Ch. 7; the mayor shall proclaim civil emergencies, § 8-2. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public records, F.S. ch. 119; public meetings, F.S. ch. 286. 
 
Sec. 2-26. - Rules of the city council. 
The following are the rules of procedure of the city council: 
(1)  Rule 1. The city council shall meet at the council chamber on the second and fourth Tuesday in each month at 6:30 p.m., provided that the city council by majority vote may reschedule a regular meeting date and/or place on seven (7) days' notice to the public. The city council shall also meet on the fourth Tuesday in each month at 5:30 p.m. for the purpose of conducting business pertaining to special recognitions and presentations. The time period for each presentation shall be limited to ten (10) minutes unless extended by a majority vote of the city council. The city manager, with due notice, may cancel this meeting due to a lack of business. 
(2)  Rule 2. The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, adjourned, or special meeting; shall immediately call members to order upon the determination that a quorum is present. 
(3)  Rule 3. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum and take appropriate action to carry out this duty. The council shall appoint all committees, unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, and the mayor shall appoint the chairman of each committee. 
(4)  Rule 4. In absence of the mayor at any regular, adjourned or special meeting, the vice-mayor shall perform the duties of the mayor. 
(5)  Rule 5. The following order shall be observed in the transaction of business on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month: 
a.  Call to order. 
b.  Invocation. 
c.  Pledge of allegiance. 
d.  Approval of minutes. 
e.  Special recognitions and presentations (authorized in advance by city council). 
f.  Boards and commissions. 
g.  Petitions and requests from the public present (non-agenda items). 
h.  Consent agenda. 
i.  Ordinances, second reading, public hearings and related action. 
j.  Ordinances, first reading. 
k.  Old business. 
l.  New business. 
m.  Petitions and requests from the public present (non-agenda items). 
n.  Mayor and council reports. 
o.  City manager's report. 
p.  City attorney's report. 
To the extent possible, the council will attempt to adjourn its meetings no later than 10:30 p.m. If the 10:30 p.m. deadline approaches before all agenda items are dealt with, then, in that event, the mayor shall call for a vote of the council to either extend the meeting past 10:30 p.m. or to adjourn and establish a continued meeting date and time to consider unfinished business. A majority vote of council shall be required to either extend or continue such meeting. In the absence of a majority vote (i.e., tie vote), the meeting will be continued to another date. 
Citizens desiring to be heard during the boards and commissions, consent agenda, first reading, old and new business, mayor and council report, city manager's report, and city attorney's report portions of the agenda may sign a request to be heard at the city council meeting on a form prepared by the city manager and present said form to the city clerk at the meeting prior to the item being heard on the agenda. Citizens desiring to be heard during those portions of the agenda shall be limited to three (3) minutes unless extended by a majority vote of the city council. Comments will be limited to the issue presently pending before the council. 
Any citizen desiring to comment under petitions and requests from the public present does not need to submit a sign-up card to the city clerk. The first and second petitions and requests from the public present will be an open forum. A citizen may speak at either the first or second petitions and requests portion of the agenda but not both. Citizens desiring to be heard under petitions and requests from the public present shall be limited to three (3) minutes unless extended by a majority vote of the city council. A citizen shall not comment on a particular issue more than one time during the council meeting. 
Any citizen desiring to speak under ordinances — second reading, public hearings and related items shall be limited to three (3) minutes and are limited to the issue at hand. An individual wishing to speak on a quasi-judicial matter must complete an oath card with their signature and submit it to the city clerk prior to the start of the public hearing. An individual desiring to speak on a non-quasi-judicial public hearing must complete and submit a sign-up card to the city clerk prior to the start of the public hearing. 
The city manager shall prepare the agenda for all meetings consistent with the policies of the city council. The city manager may prepare forms and rules for placement of the items on the agenda and determine the location of citizens on the agenda and shall have the right to defer placement of an item to a later meeting in the interest of meeting length or staff preparation; provided, however, that such decisions may be appealed to the city council at the next meeting. The city council may take up any item not on the agenda or change the order of business at any meeting with a majority vote of the council. 
(6)  Rule 6. Every appointed board or commission shall report to the council at the time set by the city council or show cause why not. 
(7)  Rule 7. Every ordinance except ordinances which rezone private real property initiated by the city, its departments, or boards and commissions, may be read by title, or in full, on at least two (2) separate days and shall, at least ten (10) days prior to adoption, be noticed once in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time and place of the meeting, the title or titles of proposed ordinances and the place or places within the municipality where such proposed ordinances may be inspected by the public. Such notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. 
a.  An emergency ordinance, without complying with the foregoing requirements, may be enacted by a two-thirds (?) vote of the members of the entire council. No emergency ordinance shall be enacted which rezones private real property. The procedure for enactment of ordinances which rezone private real property initiated by the city departments, boards and commissions, shall be in accordance with F.S. § 166.041(3)(c) and such procedure is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth herein in full. A copy of this procedure is on file with the city clerk. 
b.  All ordinances and resolutions passed by the council shall become effective ten (10) days after passage or as otherwise provided in such ordinances or resolutions. 
(8)  Rule 8. In all cases each member of the council shall vote unless a member abstains where he believes he may have a conflict of interest. That member shall state the reason for abstaining and follow the procedure in F.S. § 112.3143(3). In the event of a roll call vote, the order of voting shall begin with the councilmember on the far right of the chair and rotate to the left for the beginning of each succeeding vote. In all matters coming before council a majority vote shall govern except as provided in section 23 of the Charter. 
(9)  Rule 9. All resolutions shall be reduced to writing. 
(10)  Rule 10. Whenever the mayor shall desire to make a motion upon any matter he shall designate some member of the council to take the chair. 
(11)  Rule 11. No member, while the council is in session, shall offer any motion, or make any remark, or speak on any subject under discussion, without first addressing and being recognized by the chair. When more than one (1) member shall rise at or near the same time, the mayor shall decide in favor of that one who shall first attract his attention, and no member shall interrupt another while speaking, except to call him to order. 
(12)  Rule 12. The mayor shall decide all questions of order, but any member dissatisfied with any of his decisions shall have the right to appeal to the council. 
(13)  Rule 13. A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council will not be entertained, unless it is made by a member who previously voted in the majority, nor shall it be entertained at any other meeting than the one at which the proceedings were had or the meeting immediately following. 
(14)  Rule 14. Any additional rule or rules may from time to time be made by council, but no alteration of a rule or adoption of a new rule shall take place without the consent of three-fifths (?) of the members present and upon one month's notice. 
(15)  Rule 15. The clerk shall keep a separate book in which shall be entered these and all other rules and ordinances, which the council shall pass. 
(16)  Rule 16. No person other than a member of the council and city staff shall be allowed to address the council unless he is recognized by the mayor during a declared public hearing or unless agreed to by a majority vote of the city council except as provided in Rule 5. 
(17)  Rule 17. No communication to the council will be entertained unless the communication is in writing. 
(18)  Rule 18. The mayor, when the council is in session, shall enforce parliamentary rules for its government, so far as they are applicable to such a legislative body. Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the official guide for the mayor and the city council in the conduct of its business. Any rule provided for in this article in conflict with Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised edition, shall supersede the provisions contained in Robert's Rules of Order. 
(19)  Rule 19. Any of the foregoing rules may be suspended by a unanimous vote of the council for the meeting in session. 
(20)  Rule 20. No person shall be permitted on the platform where the city council is seated except members of the council and officers of the city, unless they are invited by the council. 
(21)  Rule 21. A roll call vote may be called for on any question whenever requested by a member of the city council. 
(22)  Rule 22. If any member of the city council wishes to withdraw or leave the council chamber or place of meeting while the council is in session, the member must notify the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 2-1; Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 17-1993, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 45-1993, § 1, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 24-1998, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 38-1998, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 23-1999, § 1, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 41-1999, § 1, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 14-2001, § 1, 6-12-01; Ord. No. 4-2004, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 43-2005, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 3-2010, § 1, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 31-2011, § 1, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 36-2015, § 1, 10-27-15) 
Charter reference— Organizational meeting, § 20; regular meeting, § 21. 
State Law reference— Voting conflicts, F.S. §§ 112.3143(3), 286.012; procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 2-27. - Standard of conduct. 
The members of city council shall conduct themselves with dignity and fairness for all concerned so as to reflect the high honor and responsibilities of their public office. A member who fails to observe this standard shall be subject to censure in the event that a member files a complaint in writing with the council and the majority vote to censure is taken. 
(Code 1963, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics and standards of conduct, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.  
Sec. 2-28. - Salary of councilmembers and mayor. 
The salary of councilmembers shall be three hundred ninety-one dollars forty cents ($391.40) per month, and the mayor's salary shall be five hundred thirty-eight dollars eighteen cents ($538.18) per month effective fiscal year 1998/1999. Annually thereafter, the salary for councilmembers and mayor shall be adjusted by the same percentage cost of living salary increase as received by non-union general employees. Expenses incurred for travel on official city business shall be paid according to adopted city policy. 
(Code 1963, § 2-3; Ord. No. 30-1993, § 1, 10-1-93; Ord. No. 44-1998, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 36-1999, § 1, 10-26-99)  
Sec. 2-29. - Execution of certain legal instruments. 
All deeds, contracts, leases, bills of sale, except as hereinafter provided, given by the city shall be executed in the name of the city, approved by the city manager, signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk with the city seal affixed thereto. Such instruments may be executed after approval of such contracts, sale or leasing by the city council at any meeting thereof. In the absence of the mayor or the city clerk, the vice mayor or city clerk pro tem may execute the contract in the name of the city. For contracts or purchase orders with a value or cost of less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), the city manager or his designee can execute on behalf of the city, unless otherwise provided for in section 2-181. In the event the contract allows for modifications to the agreement via task order or change order, the city manager or his designee can approve those changes if the value of the amendment is less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). The city council can delegate authority to the city manager by council action to exceed the amounts herein stated. 
(Code 1963, § 2-6(a); Ord. No. 11-2001, § 1, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 51-2004, § 1, 8-24-04) 
Charter reference— City manager to approve certain legal instruments, § 30(3). 
Cross reference— City manager, § 2-86; purchases and contracts less than a certain amount may be executed by the city manager, § 2-176.  
Secs. 2-30—2-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Board of adjustment, § 168. 
Cross reference— Standards of conduct, § 2-116 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq.; building trades board, § 11-141 et seq.; North Brevard Commission on Parks and Recreation, § 14-26 et seq.; board of trustees of the general employees pension plan, § 15-41 et seq.; board of trustees of the police officers and firefighters pension plan, § 15-141 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Appointments; removal. 
Persons wishing to be appointed to the various boards and commissions of the city shall be residents of the city and be registered to vote if of legal age, except that this requirement for ad hoc, temporary or special committee membership may be a business interest in the city as determined by the city council and as hereinafter may be provided, comply with other ordinance requirements, furnish information in writing as to the individual's background as the council may deem to be appropriate, and consent to verification of the information by the city council or its designated representative. It shall be the general policy of the city council in the appointment of persons to boards, commissions or committees to permit a person to serve on only one board, commission or committee except that said person may be appointed to temporary or special committees of short duration if other individuals are not available and there would be no conflict of interest with a person serving on more than one board or commission or unless the particular ordinance or resolution expressly authorizes dual membership. This provision shall not apply to any board appointments existing on August 25, 1989. 
(Code 1963, § 2-10(a); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 1, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 22-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 2-52. - Publication of appointments, application for consideration. 
The city clerk shall publish once a month a statement of board appointments to be made during the next six (6) months. Persons wishing to be considered for appointment shall file with the city clerk a statement of their interest and comply with section 2-51 no later than five (5) days prior to the meeting at which the appointment is scheduled. The time limit in this subsection may be waived when a position on a board or commission has been open or available for appointment for a period of fifteen (15) days and there is only one (1) applicant for the position. 
(Code 1963, § 2-10(b), (c))  
Sec. 2-53. - Removal of members. 
The city council may in its discretion remove any member appointed to a board, commission, committee, etc., by a majority vote upon first giving two (2) weeks' written notice by first class mail to the address on file with the city clerk. The member may request a hearing before the city council, provided that written notice is filed with the city clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of the meeting at which the matter is to be acted on. Any member of any board, commission, committee or entity created by the city or whose members are appointed by the city council or mayor who fails to attend three (3) or more consecutive regular meetings (not including special or workshop meetings) of any board, commission, committee or entity, shall automatically forfeit membership and appointment to the entity, and the chairperson shall so inform the city council. Any member of any entity created or appointed by the city council or mayor of the city, who fails to attend more than fifty (50) percent of the regular, special or workshop meetings of that entity within a six-month period, shall automatically forfeit membership and appointment to that entity, and the chairperson shall so inform the city council. Upon the approval of the city council, the council may authorize a member to miss more than three (3) consecutive meetings or more than fifty (50) percent of the regular, special or workshop meetings during a six-month period. This provision supersedes and amends any other sections of any ordinance or resolution which may be inconsistent with this section. 
(Code 1963, § 2-10(e)) 
State Law reference— Removal of certain board members, F.S. § 112.501.  
Sec. 2-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 34-2011, adopted Nov. 22, 2011, repealed § 2-54, which pertained to regulations requiring resignation to run and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Secs. 2-55—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, § 29 et seq.; city attorney, § 34 et seq.; city clerk, § 44; fire rescue department, § 45; personnel department, § 46. 
Cross reference— Standards of conduct, § 2-116 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq.; building official, § 6-31 et seq.; pensions and retirement, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Personnel policies. 
The city manager shall publish the personnel policies to govern employees with the exception of the city attorney. Such policies, depending upon employee status, may include the following provisions; equal employment opportunity, grievance procedures, fringe benefits, vacation leave, sick leave, etc., and other matters appropriate to a comprehensive, professional, personnel program. Such policies may not apply uniformly depending on employee status, such as union or nonunion, whether appointed or nonappointed, probationary, seasonal, etc. The personnel policies are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1963, § 2-4)  
Secs. 2-77—2-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, § 29 et seq. 
Cross reference— City manager shall approve all contracts, bills of sales, leases, etc., § 2-29; standards of conduct, § 2-116 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-86. - General supervision over city employees. 
The city manager shall have general supervision over all city officers and police force, and may examine into the condition of the offices, the books, the records and papers thereof and therein and the manner of conducting the office that may come to his knowledge. He shall file a monthly report with the city council on various operations of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-87. - Budget preparation and administration. 
The city manager shall file a monthly financial report with the city council and shall furnish an in-depth analysis of the budget and financial conditions of the city at the midpoint of each fiscal year. The city manager or his designee is authorized to spend the funds authorized by the budget provided that purchases in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be submitted to the city council for approval unless otherwise provided by contract, are as authorized by section 2-181, or waived or approved by a majority vote of council. The city manager shall publish purchasing policies to assure proper documentation, accountability, and a reasonable effort to secure competitive bidding. The city manager shall submit to the city council no later than two (2) months prior to the end of the fiscal year an annual budget to encompass operating maintenance and capital improvement expenditure and a proposed five-year plan for capital improvements. The city manager shall provide for professional financial administration consistent with proper accounting standards and practices. 
(Code 1963, § 2-7; Ord. No. 20-1992, § 1, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 2, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 51-2004, § 2, 8-24-04) 
Charter reference— Budget message and recommendations, § 59. 
Cross reference— Financial matters, § 2-161 et seq.  
Sec. 2-88. - Administrative policies and user fees. 
The city manager is authorized to enact such policies and regulations in order to implement user fees or such other fees to recoup the full cost of delivery of service to the users of municipal services. The fees may include, but are not limited to, use of its building and facilities; police, fire, engineering, finance, purchasing, utilities, clerk, human resources, planning, building, code enforcement service or user fees. 
The city manager may impose said user fees based upon the actual cost of providing said services. The fees may be imposed by administrative policies authorized or approved by the city manager. Alternatively, the city council may from time to time, by resolution, impose said fees. 
(Ord. No. 63-2004, § 2, 9-28-04)  
Secs. 2-89—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - POLICE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Creation of police department, § 32. 
Cross reference— Standards of conduct, § 2-116 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq.; miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Law enforcement, F.S. ch. 943. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Appointment of chief and police officers. 
The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint a chief of police and as many additional police officers as may be authorized by the council which shall constitute the police force of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 18-1)  
Sec. 2-102. - Duty of chief to enforce ordinances, keep records and to report to city manager. 
The chief of police shall, under the direction of the city manager, see that all ordinances are strictly enforced. He shall keep a record of all arrests made and such other records as the city manager or the city council shall prescribe. 
(Code 1963, § 18-3)  
Sec. 2-103. - Authority to suspend policemen; execution of distress warrants. 
The chief of police shall execute the commands of the city council. The chief of police shall perform such duties appropriate to his office as may be imposed upon him by law, the ordinances of the city and by direction of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(Code 1963, § 18-4)  
Sec. 2-104. - Assessment of court costs to be expended for education of law enforcement officers. 
When any person is convicted by a judge, the court shall assess an additional two dollars ($2.00) pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 943.25 for law enforcement education expenditures for the respective law enforcement officers of the city. Such additional court costs shall be assessed when any person is convicted of a violation of a state, penal or criminal statute or convicted for violating any municipal ordinance within the city to the extent authorized by F.S. § 943.25. 
(Code 1963, § 18-10) 
Cross reference— Financial matters, § 2-161.  
Secs. 2-105—2-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-26 et seq.; boards, committees, commissions, § 2-51 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-76 et seq.; city manager, § 2-86 et seq.; police, § 2-101 et seq.; building official, § 6-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-116. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The people have the right to expect that every public official and employee will conduct themselves in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government they represent. 
(b)  Such confidence and respect in local government can best be promoted if every public official and employee, whether paid or unpaid and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: 
(1)  Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law. 
(2)  Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. 
(c)  To help public officials and employees achieve these goals is one of the objectives of this division. 
(Code 1963, § 2-50)  
Sec. 2-117. - Adoption of state standards of conduct. 
The city hereby adopts, by reference, the Standards of Conduct for Public Officials and Employees, as contained in F.S. §§ 112.311 through 112.326, and requests all public officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, to abide by the terms and provisions of such standards of conduct. 
(Code 1963, § 2-51)  
Sec. 2-118. - Former city officers and employees. 
City officers (excluding boards and commissions) and city employees whose employment is terminated either voluntarily or involuntarily, shall not, for a period of two (2) years after leaving the employment of the city, represent another person or entity in any formal or informal manner for compensation before any board, city council or commission of the city. Former city officers (excluding boards and commissions) and city employees, for a period of two (2) years after leaving appointment or employment of the city, shall not utilize his former position directly or indirectly to influence a decision of any city official for or on behalf of a person or entity for compensation. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Code 1963, § 2-53; Ord. No. 15-1992, § 1, 8-25-92) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt, F.S. § 112.313(13).  
Sec. 2-119. - Housing authority members of the City of Titusville. 
Each member of the housing authority of the City of Titusville shall be required to file financial disclosures as required by F.S. § 112.3145, as amended from time to time, and otherwise comply with the provisions of said statute. 
(Ord. No. 71-2007, § 1, 12-11-07)  
Secs. 2-120—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TRAVEL EXPENSES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-26 et seq.; boards, committees, commissions, § 2-51 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-76 et seq.; city manager, § 2-86 et seq.; police, § 2-101 et seq.; building official, § 6-31 et seq.; building trades board, § 11-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Travel expenses, F.S. § 112.061. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-131, which pertained to definitions and derived from the 1963 Code; and Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000.  
Sec. 2-132. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to cover travel expenses which are applicable to the city council, members of boards and commissions appointed by the city council, which are solely responsible to the city council, city officials appointed by the city council and employees appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Adopted. The city council of the City of Titusville hereby adopts an administrative travel expense policy to govern payment for authorized travel expense incurred by city officials, employees, and authorized persons as set forth in the city's administrative travel reimbursement policy. 
(c)  Amendment. The administrative travel reimbursement policy 1-1 may be amended from time to time by resolution approved by city council. 
(Code 1963, § 2-11(1); Ord. No. 47-2000, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 11-2016, § 1, 8-9-16) 
Editor's note— The administrative travel reimbursement policy referred to above has not been set out herein, but can be found on file for inspection by the public in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 2-133. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-133, which pertained to travel authorization and derived from the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000; and Ord. No. 76-2004, adopted Nov. 23, 2004.  
Sec. 2-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-134, which pertained to reservations, tickets generally and derived from the 1963 Code; and Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000.  
Sec. 2-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-135, which pertained to travel advances and reimbursement, and derived from the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000; and Ord. No. 76-2004, adopted Nov. 23, 2004.  
Sec. 2-136. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-136, which pertained to computation of travel reimbursement and derived from the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 4-1997, adopted Feb. 25, 1997; Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000; Ord. No. 76-2004, adopted Nov. 23, 2004; Ord. No. 84-2005, adopted Dec. 13, 2005; and Ord. No. 34-2006, adopted july 11, 2006.  
Sec. 2-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-137, which pertained to reimbursement of expense for others and derived from the 1963 Code; and Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000.  
Sec. 2-138. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 11-2016, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, repealed § 2-138, which pertained to employee recognition program or overtime work and derived from Ord. No. 47-2000, adopted Dec. 12, 2000.  
Sec. 2-139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFIT TRUST FUND 
 
Sec. 2-140. - Creation, purpose and intent. 
(a)  There is hereby [created] a special fiduciary fund to be known as the City of Titusville Post-Employment Benefit Trust Fund ("trust"). This fund is to be used exclusively for the purposes provided for in this division and shall be collected, administered, and disbursed according to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The participation in and any coverage under the trust shall not constitute nor be construed to constitute a specific, accrued or vested benefit for any specific employee or retiree unless otherwise specifically provided within this division. 
(c)  It is intended that the income of the trust shall not be taxable income of the trust, as such trust income shall accrue to the City of Titusville, and such income shall be derived from the exercises of an essential governmental function as provided for under § 115(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, Revenue Rulings 77-261 and 90-74, and other relevant guidance. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-141. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms within this division shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Custodian shall mean a bank, mutual fund, savings and loan association, insurance company or other qualified entity selected by the trustees, to hold and administer the assets of the trust fund. 
(2)  Dependent shall mean a dependent, as defined in § 105(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, of a retiree. 
(3)  Health and welfare benefit shall mean any benefit considered a post-retirement benefit other than pension under Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 45 ("GASB 45"), including, but not limited to, health and dental insurance benefits. 
(4)  Internal Revenue Code shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(5)  Investment committee shall mean the investment committee created pursuant to this division. 
(6)  Investment consultant shall mean an investment advisor selected in accordance with the city's procurement policy. 
(7)  Investment fund shall mean an investment fund that forms part of the trust fund as established by the trustee. 
(8)  Investment manager shall mean an investment manager selected by the investment consultant and approved by the investment committee. 
(9)  OPEB obligation shall mean the City of Titusville net OPEB obligation pursuant to GASB 45, i.e., the cumulative difference between the annual OPEB cost (normal cost plus unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities) and contributions to date for health and welfare benefits. 
(10)  Retiree shall mean a person employed by the City of Titusville who is eligible on the benefit commencement date to receive retiree health insurance or dental insurance contributions from the City of Titusville as a member or retiree of any retirement plan offered by the City of Titusville, and as defined in the City of Titusville Personnel Policies. 
(11)  Program administrator shall mean the City of Titusville Finance Director or his or her designee. 
(12)  Property shall include any property, real or personal, or partial interests therein, wherever situated, including, but without being limited to, mutual funds, preferred and common stocks, shares of investment companies, bonds, notes, debentures and mortgages, certificates of deposits, equipment trust certificates, investment trust certificates, interests in limited liability companies, in partnerships whether limited or general or in any insurance contract, policy, annuity, or other investment vehicles offered by an insurance company, in which trust assets may be invested pursuant to Florida law and the investment policy established by this trust. 
(13)  Regulation shall mean a policy, procedure, rule or regulation adopted by the trustees, establishing administrative procedures or interpretations affecting the trust. 
(14)  Trust shall mean the trust created and established by this division. 
(15)  Trust fund shall mean such money, property, and all investments made therewith and proceeds thereof and all earnings and profits thereon, less payments made by the trustees as authorized within this division. 
(16)  Trust year shall mean the twelve-month period beginning each October 1 and ending the following September 30 on which the books and records of the trust are maintained. 
(17)  Trustees shall mean the trustees of the trust serving from time to time in accordance with the terms of this division. References to a trustee in this division shall refer to such person or persons in its or their capacity as trustee(s) pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Rules of construction. Accounting terms and principles used herein or applicable hereto shall be as defined and described from time to time by pronouncements and other guidance of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board, or any successor organization. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-142. - Trust and trust administration. 
(a)  Appointment of trustees. The trustees of the trust shall be the city manager or his designee, the city internal auditor, a representative appointed by the city manager from the finance department, a representative appointed by the city manager from the general employees' pension plan or from the police and fire pension plan, and the city human resources director. In the event a vacancy should occur in one (1) of the positions enumerated above or the position is currently vacant or an individual is not available to serve, the city manager is hereby authorized to designate such other person or persons to fill that position. The trustees shall serve without compensation from the trust fund, but they may be reimbursed from the trust fund for all necessary, reasonable, and proper expenses, such as travel, which they may actually expend in the performance of their duties as a trustee. Expenditures are not to exceed the limits imposed by law, including, but not limited to F.S. § 112.061, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Trust fund. 
(1)  The trustees shall receive and accept for the purposes hereof all contributions described herein and shall hold, invest, reinvest, manage, administer, and distribute the property and the increments, proceeds, earnings and income solely to provide health and welfare benefits as described herein. 
(2)  The trustees have the authority to invest and manage the assets of the trust fund. 
(3)  The trustees shall have the exclusive right to manage the business affairs of the trust, and shall have all powers and rights necessary, appropriate or advisable to effectuate and carry out the purposes and business of the trust and, in general, all powers permitted to be exercised by a trustee pursuant to Florida law. The trustees may appoint, employ, or otherwise contract with any persons (who may be designated as officers of the trust) or entities for the transaction of the business of the trust or the performance of services for or on behalf of the trust, and the trustees may delegate to any such person or entity such authority to act on behalf of the trust as the trustees may from time to time deem appropriate. 
(4)  No trustee shall be required to post any bond, secured or unsecured, in connection with or as a consequence of serving as a trustee of the trust. Upon any trustee ceasing to be such, such trustee's interests in the trust and any and all trust property shall automatically vest, without requirement of further action, in the remaining (and any successor) trustees. 
(5)  No beneficiary of the trust, by reason of its status as such, shall have any right to take part in or direct the management or control of the business of the trust or to act for or bind the trust or any trustee or otherwise to transact any business on behalf of the trust. 
(6)  This trust is created for the sole purpose of providing health and welfare benefits as described herein. No portion of the principal or income of this trust shall revert to the City of Titusville or shall be used or diverted to any purpose other than to provide health and welfare benefits and to pay the reasonable expenses of the trust. 
(7)  The contributions made by the City of Titusville and all investments, receipts, disbursements, and other transactions thereunder may be maintained in a custodial account, which contributions shall be used solely for the payment of benefits, expenses and other charges properly allocable to the trust. 
(8)  The trust fund shall continue to be held by the trustees in trust and dealt with in accordance with the provision of this division. At no time shall any part of the trust fund be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than providing benefits to participants. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 38-2009, § 1, 10-13-09)  
Sec. 2-143. - Deposits and disbursements from the trust fund. 
(a)  Trust deposits. 
(1)  The trustees hereby delegate to the program administrator or his/her designee, the responsibility for accepting contributions to the trust and remitting said contributions to the custodian. In all cases, deposits of contributions shall be treated as actually made only as of the date the funds are accepted as in good order by the program administrator. 
(2)  The trustees shall invest and reinvest the trust fund and pay benefits as described herein from the trust fund on the order of the program administrator or his or her duly authorized representative. The trustees shall account for contributions, income and payments made to or from the trust. The trustees, custodian and program administrator shall not be responsible for the adequacy of the trust fund to meet and discharge any liabilities of the City of Titusville. 
(3)  Contributions to the trust shall solely consist of: 
(A)  Appropriations; and 
(B)  Other employer contributions; 
(C)  Any other required retiree, dependent or spouse contributions. 
(b)  Trust payments. 
(1)  The trustees shall disburse amounts from the trust fund for the sole purpose of assisting in the payment of the City of Titusville's premiums for post-retirement health insurance and dental insurance for retirees and for reasonable expenses, fees and allocated administrative fees and expenses. 
(2)  Any amounts remaining in the trust fund after all premiums, fees and expenses have been paid shall be retained for payment of future premium payments until all City of Titusville liabilities for post-retirement health or dental benefits have been satisfied. 
(c)  Trust expenses. The trustees may pay fees and expenses from the assets of the trust fund, as well as a reasonable allocation of all administrative fees and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-143. - Accounts and investments. 
(a)  Accounts. All amounts held by the trust shall be held in a custodial account. The trustees and custodian shall be under no duty to determine whether the amount of any contribution is adequate to meet the City of Titusville's OPEB obligation, or to collect or enforcement payment of any contribution. 
(b)  Investment of trust fund. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by regulation or as delegated to the custodian or an investment manager, the trustees shall have complete control of the management and investment of the trust fund and shall have all powers necessary or convenient to enable it to exercise such control. 
(2)  The trustees may investment and reinvest funds held by the trust fund in any investments which are legal investments under Florida law and shall have the discretion to decide the allocation of funds among such investments. The trustees are further authorized to develop and adopt an investment policy for the investment of the trust funds. In accordance with such policy, the trustees may purchase, acquire, hold, lease, sell and convey real and personal property, and place the trust fund with banks or trust companies which have corporate trust powers, with insurance companies authorized to do business within the City of Titusville and do all such other acts permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-144. - Powers and duties of the trustees. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The trustees, in administering the trust, shall have such power and authority, including discretion with respect to the exercise of that power and authority, as may be necessary, advisable, desirable, or convenient to the trustees, in their sole discretion as trustees and investment fiduciaries subject to the provisions of this division. 
(1)  To make regulations with respect to the trust not inconsistent with the trust, GASB 45, the Internal Revenue Code or applicable law, and to amend or rescind such regulations; 
(2)  To determine, consistent with the applicable laws, rules or regulations, all questions of law or fact that may arise as to any person or entity claiming rights under the trust; 
(3)  Subject to and consistent with GASB 43 and 45 and applicable law, to construe and interpret the trust and to correct any defect, supply any omission or reconcile any inconsistency in the trust; 
(4)  To adopt and amend rules governing its operations and procedures; 
(5)  To make and enter into contracts with any agency of the City of Titusville or any outside agency or company for the purpose of assisting in the general administration of the trust or the investing or advising as to the investment of the trust funds; 
(6)  To provide for changes in trustees and transfer of assets to successor custodians as permitted by law; 
(7)  To provide investment management and administration of the trust fund, which has been established to provide funding for health and welfare benefits. 
(8)  To employ legal counsel; 
(9)  To employ and contract with actuaries, auditors, accountants, consultants, medical personnel and other agents and employees; 
(10)  To collect and disburse all funds due to and payable from the trust; 
(11)  To maintain proper records and accountings consistent with GASB Statement 43 and 45 and IRS standards; 
(12)  To bring and defend actions, sue and be sued and plead and be impleaded; 
(13)  To expend funds for the reasonable expenses of the trustees while engaged in the performance of their duties; 
(14)  To employ insurance companies, banks, trust companies, and investment brokers as agents for the keeping of records and the receipt and disbursement of funds held by or due the trustees; 
(15)  To exercise generally any of the powers of an owner with respect to all or any part of the trust fund; and 
(16)  To take all actions consistent with this division necessary or appropriate to administer or carry out the purposes of the trust; provided, however, the trustees need not take any action unless in their opinion there are sufficient trust assets available for the expenses thereof. 
(b)  Delegation by trustees. In addition to the powers stated in this section, the trustees may from time to time delegate to an individual, committee or organization certain of its fiduciary responsibilities under the trust. Any such individual, committee or organization shall remain a fiduciary until such delegation is revoked by the trustees, which revocation may be without cause and without advance notice. Such individual, committee or organization shall have such power and authority with respect to such delegated fiduciary responsibilities as the trustees have under the trust. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-145. - Limitations of responsibility and indemnification. 
(a)  Limitations of responsibility. The trustees' responsibilities and liabilities shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The trustees shall have no duties other than those expressly set forth in this division and those imposed on the trustees by applicable laws. 
(2)  The trustees and the program administrator shall not be responsible for any particular federal, state or local income, payroll or other tax consequence to the City of Titusville or a retiree, spouse or dependent. 
(3)  The trustees shall be responsible only for money and property actually received by the trust, and then only to the extent described in this division. 
(4)  The trustees shall not be responsible for the correctness of any determination of payments or disbursements from the trust fund. 
(5)  No trustee shall have any liability for the acts or omissions of any predecessor or successor in office. 
(6)  The trustees shall have no liability for the acts or omissions of any investment manager or managers, the acts or omissions of any investment consultant, the acts or omissions of any insurance company, the acts or omissions of any investment fund, the acts or omissions of any custodian, the acts or omissions of the program administrator, or the acts or omissions of any contractor. 
(b)  Indemnification. The trust shall, and hereby does, to the extent permitted by law, indemnify the trustees, including persons who have served as such in the past or who are heirs, executors, or administrators thereof, against expenses (including attorney's fees), judgments, fines, settlements and other amounts actually and reasonably incurred in connection with any actual or threatened proceeding of any kind, arising by reason of the fact that any such person is or was a trustee, and shall advance to such person expenses reasonably incurred in defending any such proceedings as permitted by law. Such indemnity shall apply, however, only if, in connection with the matter at issue, the person claiming indemnity hereunder acted in good faith and in a manner he or she reasonably believed was in the best interests of the trust. This indemnity does not extend to any acts of the person seeking indemnity which involve gross negligence or willful misconduct, or are materially in breach of this division, or any rule, procedure or regulation of the trust. The trustees may obtain and may rely upon a written opinion of independent legal counsel on any issues of good faith, reasonable belief, or breach, or on any and all issues that may bear on the application of this indemnity. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-146. - Accounts and recordkeeping. 
(a)  Maintenance of records. 
(1)  The trustees shall maintain or cause to be maintained suitable records, data and information relating to its responsibilities hereunder. The trust's books and records relating thereto shall be open to inspection and audit at reasonable times, subject to applicable law. 
(2)  The city clerk or his or her designee shall serve as the secretary to the trust. 
(b)  Independent audit. An independent audit of the trust fund shall be performed annually as part of the city's audit. The results shall be reported to the trustees, the program administrator and the city council. 
(c)  Annual report. Each year, the financial statements of the trust shall be included in the comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-147. - Reliance on communications. 
Certification of providers. The trustees shall be protected in relying upon a written certification that purports to be from any custodian, investment manager, insurance company, or mutual fund as to the person or persons authorized to give instructions or directions on behalf of such custodian, investment manager or insurance company, and continue to rely upon such certification until a subsequent certification is filed with the trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-148. - Amendment and termination. 
(a)  Amendment. This trust may be amended by the city council of the City of Titusville at any time in any manner permitted by applicable law and not inconsistent with GASB 43 and 45 or Internal Revenue Code § 115. Notice of such amendment shall be promptly provided to the investment advisor, custodian or other contractor as may be appropriate. 
(b)  Irrevocability. This trust is hereby irrevocable. 
(c)  Dissolution/termination. The trust shall have perpetual existence, except if dissolved by the City of Titusville. Following any such dissolution, the trustees shall proceed to wind up the affairs of the trust in an orderly manner and within a reasonable period of time considering relevant circumstances. All of the powers of the trustees under this division shall continue until the affairs of the trust have been completely wound up, including the power to fulfill or discharge the contracts of the trust, collect its assets, sell, convey, exchange or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the remaining property of the trust to one (1) or more persons at public or private sale (for consideration of any kind), discharge or pay its liabilities, defend or prosecute suits or administrative proceedings and do all other acts appropriate to the winding up and liquidation of the property and affairs of the trust. After paying or making reasonable provision for the payment of all liabilities of the trust, and upon receipt of such releases, indemnities or like documentation as the trustees may reasonably deem necessary for the protection of the trustees and the trust, the trustees shall distribute the remaining property of the trust, in cash or in kind or partly each, to the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 2-149. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Amendment. The trust shall be construed, enforced and administered and the validity thereof determined in accordance with the Charter and Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville. If any provision is held to violate the city's Code of Ordinances, Florida or federal law, or otherwise to be illegal or invalid for any other reason, that provision shall be deemed to be null and void, but the invalidation of that provision shall not otherwise affect the trust. 
(b)  In resolving any conflict among provisions of this trust and in resolving any other uncertainty as to the meaning or intention of any provisions hereof, the interpretation that (i) causes the trust to be exempt from tax as a governmental instrumentality under Internal Revenue Code §115, and (ii) causes the trust to comply with all applicable requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, shall prevail over any different interpretation. 
(c)  If the trustees or the program administrator make any payments that according to the terms of this trust and the benefits provided hereunder should not have been made, the trustees or program administrator may recover that incorrect payment by whatever means necessary, whether or not it was made due to the error of the trustees or program administrator, from the person to whom it was made or from any other appropriate party. This authority shall include the authorization of the trustees or program administrator to deduct the amount of the incorrect payment when making any future payments to the recipient of the incorrect payment. 
(d)  Any payment to any insurance company, or its designee, shall to the extent thereof, be in full satisfaction of the claim of such entity being paid thereby and the trustees or program administrator may condition payment thereof on the delivery by the insurance company, or its designee, of the duly executed receipt and release in such forms as may be determined by the trustees or program administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1-2009, § 1, 1-27-09)  
Secs. 2-150—2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL MATTERS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— City manager to file a monthly financial report with the city council and in depth analysis of the budget, § 2-87; assessment of two dollars ($2.00) as court costs to be expended for police officers education, § 2-104; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; budgets, F.S. § 200.065; financial matters, F.S. ch. 218. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Service fee for dishonored checks. 
A service fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) or an amount of up to five (5) percent of the face value of the check (whichever is greater) shall be imposed by the city for the collection of a dishonored check, draft or other order for the payment of money on any and all dishonored checks, drafts, or orders for payment of money presented to the city. Any bank fees incurred by the city for a returned check, draft or order for the payment of money shall be charged to the maker or drawer. Said fee shall be in addition to any and all other fees and penalties imposed by law. 
(Code 1963, § 2-12; Ord. No. 30-1992, § 1, 11-24-92) 
State Law reference— Fee for dishonored check, F.S. § 166.251.  
Sec. 2-162. - Self-insurance and modified self-insurance. 
(a)  Special checking accounts. The city is hereby authorized to establish and maintain special checking accounts as it deems necessary to provide for payment of claims against the city under any self-insurance or modified self-insurance program adopted by the city. Any such special checking account shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 280.01 et seq. 
(b)  Group health, accident, dental and hospitalization coverage. Funds allocated to any self-insurance or modified self-insurance program for group health, accident, dental and hospitalization coverage shall only be used for establishing and maintaining reserve funds, investing the monies deposited in such funds, payment of claims, and administration and servicing of the program. If excess funds are present at the end of the budget year, such excess shall not be returned to the city's general fund, but shall only be used to increase reserves for future claims, increase benefits under the program, or to reduce the monthly premium or contribution to the program. 
(c)  Termination of program. Upon termination of a self-insurance or modified self-insurance program, excess funds shall be either retained in a special account until a new program is adopted, or returned to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-13) 
State Law reference— Group insurance, F.S. § 112.08; security for public deposits, F.S. § 280.01 et seq.  
Secs. 2-163—2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL PREFERENCE PURCHASING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6-1994, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1994, changed the name of this division from "purchasing" to "local preference purchasing." 
Charter reference— City manager is purchasing agent, § 30(7). 
Cross reference— Execution of contracts by the mayor, § 2-29. 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Intent. 
The city annually spends significant amounts in purchasing personal property, materials, and contractual services and in constructing improvements to real property or to existing structures. The dollars used in making those purchases are derived, in large part, from taxes and fees imposed on local businesses; and the city council has determined that funds generated in the community should, to the extent possible, be placed back into the local economy. Therefore, the city council has determined that it is in the best interest of the city to give a preference to local businesses in making such purchases whenever the application of such a preference is reasonable in light of the dollar value of proposals received in relation to such expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, § 1, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-177. - Definition. 
(a)  The term "local business" shall mean a person, firm, corporation or other business entity which is duly licensed and authorized to engage in the particular business for which a bid is submitted, and which has maintained a permanent place of business with full-time employees within the City of Titusville, Florida, and has maintained an occupational license for more than one (1) year prior to the date that a bid has been submitted to the city. 
(b)  The term "local business" shall mean a person, firm, corporation or other business entity which is duly licensed and authorized to engage in the particular business for which a bid is submitted, and which has maintained a permanent place of business with full-time employees within the Brevard County, Florida, and has maintained an occupational license for more than one (1) year prior to the date that a bid has been submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, § 2, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-178. - Local preference. 
(a)  In the purchase of, or letting of contracts for procurement, personal property, materials, supplies, merchandise, equipment, commodities, or other personal property or contractual services and the construction of improvements to real property, the city council or the purchasing agent may give a preference to a local business in awarding such purchase or contract in the amount not to exceed the following: 
(1)  Five (5) percent of the low bid amount for project awards up to and including five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), 
(2)  Three (3) percent of the low bid amount for project awards greater than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) up to and including one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and 
(3)  Two (2) percent of the low bid amount for project awards greater than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) up to and including one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00). 
(b)  In the purchase of, or letting of contracts for procurement, personal property, materials, supplies, merchandise, equipment, commodities, or other personal property or contractual services and the construction of improvements to real property, the city council or the purchasing agent may give a preference to a local Brevard County business in awarding such purchase or contract in the amount not to exceed the following: 
(1)  Two (2) percent of the low bid amount for project awards up to and including five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), 
(2)  One (1) percent of the low bid amount for project awards greater than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) up to and including one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and 
(3)  Sixty-six hundredths (0.66) of one (1) percent of the low bid amount for project awards greater than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) up to and including one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00). 
(c)  In the event that two (2) or more firms are eligible for award under this policy, the award will be decided as follows: 
(1)  If both firms are located in the City of Titusville, the firm that submitted the lowest price is awarded the contract or procurement. 
(2)  If one (1) firm is located in the City of Titusville and the other firm is not, but it is located within Brevard County, the City of Titusville firm is awarded the contract or procurement. 
(3)  If both firms are located within Brevard County (none within the City of Titusville), the firm that submitted the lowest price is awarded the contract or procurement. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, § 3, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 46-2009, § 1, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 44-2018, § 1, 9-25-18)  
Sec. 2-179. - Exceptions to local preference policy. 
The local preference policy shall not apply to the following purchases or contracts: 
(1)  Contracts or purchases in excess of one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,00.00). 
(2)  Contracts for professional services which are subject to the Consultant's Competitive Negotiation Act or other professional services contracts. 
(3)  Purchases or contracts which are funded in whole or in part by a governmental entity under the laws, rules, regulations or policies which prohibit local preference purchasing. 
(4)  Purchases let under emergency procedure situations as set forth in the purchasing policies. 
(5)  Purchases or contracts which would violate state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, § 4, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 10-1995, § 1, 3-28-95; Ord. No. 46-2009, § 1, 11-10-09)  
Sec. 2-180. - Criteria for the award of purchases. 
Awards of contracts and/or purchases shall be to the lowest, most responsive and most responsible bidder of goods or services, representing the best value of the city. In determining the lowest, most responsive and responsible bidder and that purchase or contract tat will best serve the interests of the city, the council, the city manager, and purchasing agent, as appropriate, shall consider, but shall not be limited to, in addition to price, the following: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform under the terms of the bid documents including past performance, if available. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the materials or service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder as reflected in credit reports, better business reports or other records or reports. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts and the providing materials and/or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract, or the providing of materials or services. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the materials or services. 
(7)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies, equipment, or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability and location of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the purchase and the financial impact upon the city to receive such future maintenance or service. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(10)  Whether the bidder is in arrears to the city on a debt or is a defaulter on surety to the city; or, whether the bidders' taxes or assessments are delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, § 5, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 3, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 51-2004, § 3, 8-24-04)  
Sec. 2-181. - Purchases restricted. 
Purchase orders and contracts involving an amount less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) that are budgeted items, and which do not exceed the current fiscal year's budget, may be executed by the city manager or his designee for and on behalf of the city. In addition, purchase orders and contracts for capital outlay items, in an amount greater than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) but less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in value, which are budgeted items and which do not exceed the current fiscal year's budget, may be executed by the city manager or his designee on behalf of the city, if approved during the budget process. The finance department will submit a detailed list of capital outlay items and equipment to be reviewed and approved by the council during annual public hearings on the budget. Council approval of the budget shall also serve as approval for city agencies to advertise and award to the lowest, most responsive and responsible bidder; or to purchase from state contract, sole source, or cooperative agreement; or in accordance with standardization, as outlined in the budget document or as previously approved, for tangible items, projects, and equipment, with an estimated value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or below when funding is available. No further approvals will be needed. Reporting of expenditures will take place monthly via the city manager's report. 
(Ord. No. 6-1994, § 6, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 11-2001, § 4, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 51-2004, § 4, 8-24-04)  
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Community redevelopment, F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Findings. 
(a)  It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the city a slum and blighted area which constitutes a serious and growing menace, and is injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the residents of the city; that the existence of such area contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease and crime, constitutes an economic and social liability imposing onerous burdens which decrease the tax base and reduce tax revenues, substantially impairs or arrests sound growth, retards the provision of housing accommodations, aggravates traffic problems and substantially hampers the elimination of traffic hazards and the improvement of traffic facilities; and that the prevention and elimination of slums and blight is a matter of city policy and city concern in order that the city shall not continue to be endangered by areas which are local centers of disease, promote juvenile delinquency, and consume an excessive proportion of its revenues because of the extra services required for police, fire, accident, hospitalization and other forms of public protection, services and facilities. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that certain slum or blighted areas, or portions thereof, may require acquisition, clearance and disposition subject to use restrictions, as provided in this chapter, since the prevailing condition of decay may make impracticable the reclamation of the area by conservation or rehabilitation; that other areas or portions thereof may, through the means provided in this chapter, be susceptible of conservation or rehabilitation in such a manner that the conditions and evils enumerated may be eliminated, remedied or prevented; and that salvageable slum and blighted areas can be conserved and rehabilitated through appropriate public action as authorized in this chapter and the cooperation and voluntary action of the owners and tenants of property in such areas. 
(c)  It is further found and declared that the powers conferred by this part are for public uses and purposes for which public money may be expended and the power of eminent domain and police power exercised, and the necessity in the public interest for the provisions herein enacted is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination. 
(Code 1963, § 6C-2)  
Sec. 2-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency or community redevelopment agency shall mean a public agency created by F.S. §§ 163.356 or 163.357. 
Blighted area shall mean either: 
(1)  An area in which there are a substantial number of slum, deteriorated, or deteriorating structures and conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes or one (1) or more of the following factors which substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of a county or municipality and is a menace to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare in its present condition and use: 
a.  Predominance of defective or inadequate street layout; 
b.  Faulty lot layout in relation to size, adequacy, accessibility, or usefulness; 
c.  Unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
d.  Deterioration of site or other improvements; 
e.  Tax or special assessment delinquency exceeding the fair value of the land; and 
f.  Diversity of ownership or defective or unusual conditions of title which prevent the free alienability of land within the deteriorated or hazardous area; or 
(2)  An area in which there exists faulty or inadequate street layout; inadequate parking facilities; or roadways, bridges, or public transportation facilities incapable of handling the volume of traffic flow into or through the area, either at present or following proposed construction. 
Bonds shall mean any bonds, including refundable bonds, notes, interim certificates, certificates of indebtedness, debentures or other obligations. 
Community redevelopment area shall mean a slum area or a blighted area or a combination thereof which the city council designates as appropriate for a community redevelopment project. 
Community redevelopment board shall mean a board appointed by the city council to assist the city council as the community redevelopment agency. 
Community redevelopment plan shall mean a plan, as it exists from time to time, for a community redevelopment project. 
Community redevelopment project shall mean undertakings and activities of a community redevelopment agency in a community redevelopment area for the elimination and prevention of the development or spread of slums and blight and may include slum clearance and redevelopment in a community redevelopment area, rehabilitation or conservation in a community redevelopment area, or any combination or part thereof in accordance with a community redevelopment plan. 
Slum area shall mean an area in which there is a predominance of buildings or improvements, whether residential or nonresidential, which by reason of dilapidation, deterioration, age, or obsolescence; inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; high density of population and overcrowding; the existence of conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes; or any combination of such factors is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency, or crime and is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
(Code 1963, § 6C-3)  
Sec. 2-203. - Community redevelopment area. 
The area described in this section is hereby designated as the community redevelopment area which shall be the area considered for the community redevelopment project and the community redevelopment agency shall have jurisdiction within this area: 
(1)  North. The northwest property line of Parcel 28, Section 33, running southwest-northeast and extending from FEC railroad on the west to the center of the navigable portion of the Indian River on the east. 
(2)  West. A line running generally north and south and parallel to the FEC railroad and extending from the intersection of the north boundary to the centerline of Grace Street on the south. 
(3)  South. An east-west line running parallel with the centerline of Grace Street and extending from the FEC railroad on the west to the center of the navigable portion of the Indian River on the east. 
(4)  East. A line running generally north and south but contiguous to the center of the navigable portion of the Indian River and extending from the intersection with the south boundary as described above to the intersection with the north boundary as described above. 
(Code 1963, § 6C-4)  
Sec. 2-204. - Community redevelopment agency—Generally. 
Pursuant to F.S. § 163.357, the city council is hereby designated as the community redevelopment agency for the city. That pursuant to said statute, in addition to the five (5) members of city council, the city council shall appoint two (2) additional persons to act as members of the community redevelopment agency for a total membership of seven (7) members. The term of office of the additional members shall be for a period of four (4) years except that the first person appointed shall initially serve a term of two (2) years. The additional two (2) members shall receive no compensation for their service but are entitled to necessary travel expenses and related expenses incurred in discharging their duties. Said additional two (2) members shall be required to reside or engage in business which means owning a business, practicing a profession, or performing a service for compensation, or serving as an officer or director of a corporation or other business entity so engaged, within the area of operation of the agency, which shall be coterminous with the area of operation of the city. Said members may be removed as provided for in F.S. § 163.356(4). 
(Code 1963, § 6C-5; Ord. No. 26-1993, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 34-1994, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 2-205. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The community redevelopment agency shall have all powers and duties as authorized by F.S. §§ 163.358, 163.370, and any and all powers and duties as applicable authorized by F.S. §§ 163.330—163.450. 
(Code 1963, § 6C-6)  
Secs. 2-206, 2-207. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26-1993, § 2, adopted Aug. 24, 1993, repealed former §§ 2-206, 2-207, which pertained to the community redevelopment board, in their entirety.  
Secs. 2-208—2-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Program created; coverages provided. 
There is hereby authorized and created a risk management program for the city. The purpose of this risk management program is to provide uniform and centralized self-insurance for automobile liability, general liability and workers' compensation, and for such other risks as may from time to time be added by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-227. - Scope of coverage. 
This risk management program, within the risks covered by section 2-226, shall cover all council members, officers, employees, and agents of the city. All departments, divisions, offices, and other organizational units of the city are included in this coverage, unless specifically excluded by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-228. - Department to implement. 
The city manager hereby designates the human resources department (hereinafter called department) to be responsible for implementation and administration of this chapter and the risk management program established hereby. The city manager or designee is authorized to promulgate administrative policies for the proper management and maintenance of the program. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-229. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Administrative costs include all expenses of the program, which are not directly attributable to the investigation, settlement, and disposition of particular claims, occurrences, or incidents. 
Claim expense means a cost that is clearly identifiable as having arisen out of or in connection with a particular claim, occurrence, or incident, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, court costs, private investigation fees, expert witness fees, autopsies, medical examinations and adjusters. 
Department means the human resources department, as designated by the city manager, or such other departments as designated by the city manager from time to time. 
Excess loss means that portion of loss, including claim expense, which this covered the city's excess loss coverage for any one (1) claim, occurrence, or incident. 
Incurred loss means the estimated future cost or settlement value of each claim or cause of action arising from any incident, accident, or occurrence, and for which coverage is provided for under this program, together with all reasonably foreseeable costs of investigation, adjustment, settlement, or liquidation. 
Loss means a monetary liability resulting from the occurrence of a contingency insured against under the coverages provided by this chapter or added by the city, and includes a claim, a settlement, a final judgment, and an authorization by the legislature to pay a claim. 
Program means the risk management program established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-230. - Self-insurance loss fund. 
There is hereby reconfirmed a self-insurance loss fund, a permanent fund which shall be a continuing appropriation, notwithstanding fiscal years, to be used to fund the costs and expenses of the city as provided in this chapter. There shall be paid into or retained in this fund: 1) The annual (and additional) service premiums required to be contributed by the city in the program; 2) Earnings on cash and investments of the fund; and 3) Such other sums as may be authorized or required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-231. - Expenses and costs to be approved and paid from fund. 
The following costs and expenses, and no others, shall be paid from the self-insurance fund, in the manner hereafter provided. All costs and expenses shall be paid through a third party administrator (TPA). 
(1)  The city manager or designee shall approve for payment the fees of the firm or firms, including legal counsel, hired to handle claims and related matters arising out of the coverages provided by this chapter. 
(2)  The city manager or designee shall approve for payment claims for damages or other liability arising out of the coverages provided by this chapter settled pursuant to section 2-228 but not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for workers' compensation claims and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for other liability claims for each judgment creditor and/or each occurrence, and claims for damages or other liability authorized by law or by the city council to be approved and paid arising out of the coverages provided by this chapter. In the event that the city receives a refund, reduction, or reimbursement of such claim from or on behalf of any person, the amount so refunded, reduced, or reimbursed shall be paid into or credited to this fund. 
(3)  The city manager or designee may approve for payment the costs involved in or related to the hiring and use by the city of insurance consultants and risk management consultants in connection with self-insurance activities. 
(4)  The city manager or designee may approve for payment from the loss fund the costs related to safety training programs. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-232. - Deposit and investment of funds; earnings on investments to remain in fund. 
Deposit of funds in the self-insurance loss fund shall be in separate bank accounts of the city in the name of the fund. Investment of the funds is authorized in accordance [with] the general city investment policies and may be aggregated with other city funds for purposes of the overnight sweep investment only. Investment of excess funds may not be commingled other city funds for this purpose. The city manager or designee shall make provision for the prompt payment of liquidated claims, settlements, and final judgments and the finance department shall invest the funds therein accordingly. All earnings on investment of the self-insurance loss fund shall remain in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-233. - Accounts and records. 
Within the self-insurance loss fund the finance department shall maintain such accounts and records as will provide a reasonable segregation and determination of the assets and liabilities by each claim year together with other information necessary for the accurate and proper development of such operating statements as the city manager or designee deems necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-234. - Service premiums. 
At the beginning of each fiscal year the city manager or designee will create a matrix to show the equitable distribution of insurance costs among city funds. Typically, this matrix will calculate the insurance cost to the city in three (3) areas: Total auto liability, property and liability, and workers' compensation liability. 
• Total auto liability cost is the sum of the cost of auto property damage plus auto liability for each of the city's vehicles assigned to various departments. The insurance cost per vehicle is totaled for all vehicles within each fund and the cost is distributed as a percentage of total auto liability coverage for the city. 
• Property and liability cost distribution is based on a list of property (building and vehicle) value and liability expenditures (based on claims history). The calculation is shown as a percentage of budgeted insurance as compared to expenditures. 
• Workers' compensation liability cost is distributed to the funds based on a calculation of annualized employee wages modified by a state-prescribed risk factor. These modified wages are tallied by fund as a percentage of total payroll. 
At end of each fiscal year, and otherwise when determined by the city manager or designee to be necessary, the loss experience of the city shall be ascertained and the necessity for additional service premiums determined. Additional service premiums shall be made in order to maintain the integrity and the risk retention and risk-sharing scheme of the program, so that the city is required to bear the risks apportionable to its operations. If the human resources director or designee determines that additional service premiums are necessary, they shall notify the city manager or designee, and they shall make all decisions relative to the additional service premium with approval of city council. 
Additional service premiums shall be due and payable as soon as the city receives the notice of the additional service premium. In the event of losses of such magnitude as to be totally beyond the capacity of the self-insurance loss fund to defer and spread such losses to succeeding fiscal years, the city shall be assessed an amount recommended by the city manager or designee, and confirmed by the city manager and city council, that will maintain this fund in a financially sound condition. Under extraordinary conditions, the finance director is empowered to research other sources of financing, such as notes and bonds, and to recommend to city council an alternative method of payment that will ensure the integrity of the self-insurance loss fund. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-235. - Claims/settlement authority. 
The city manager or designee upon deeming it to be in the best interest of the program to settle the claim shall have the authority to do so when the claim does not exceed the sum of the self-insured retention (SIR) amount(s), and to accept or give proper releases on behalf of the city. The city council, upon the written recommendation of the city manager or designee that he deems it to be in the best interest of the program to settle the claim, shall have the authority to do so when the claim does not exceed the self-insured retention amount. 
The authority granted by this section shall be applicable only to claims arising out of the risks covered by this program. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the city manager or designee, with the advice of the third party administrator and the city attorney, is authorized to employ special counsel, from time to time, to perform legal services in connection with claims asserted against the self-insurance fund. The employment of special counsel, and the compensation to be paid thereto, shall be subject to the prior written concurrence of the city manager. Special counsel employed under the provisions of this section shall be paid from the self-insurance loss fund. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-236. - Purchases of reinsurance and services. 
The department is authorized to purchase specific excess insurance and aggregate excess insurance as part of the city's all lines aggregate program. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-237. - Certain transfers prohibited. 
No moneys shall be transferred into or out of the self-insurance loss fund except as recommended by the city manager and his designee and approved by city council except as otherwise provided in section 2-230. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-238. - Certain appropriations and expenditures prohibited. 
No city department or agency shall request or include in any budget proposal any amounts for premiums to purchase insurance for the risks covered by this chapter or added by the city, nor expend any amounts from any funds appropriated to it to purchase such insurance; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to the human resources department for the purchase of excess insurance. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-239. - Additional risks. 
Not oftener than annually, the city manager or designee shall review the program and the safety and loss prevention activities and histories of the city and may determine that risks can be assumed by the self-insurance loss fund in addition to the risks covered by section 2-227 and previously added by the city. The city manager or designee may declare that the self-insurance loss fund will assume an additional designated risk as of a designated date and participation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 2-240. - Reports on program. 
The city manager shall submit to the city council annually a formal report on his/her analysis of the program, which shall include: 1) Underwriting information as to the nature of the risks accepted for self-insurance and those risks that are transferred to the insurance market; 2) Funds appropriated or contributed to the self-insurance fund and premiums paid for insurance through the market; and 3) Costs of administration and operation of the risk management program. 
The finance department shall publish a monthly accounting of the self-insurance loss fund to reflect all transactions together with beginning and ending balances. 
(Ord. No. 16-2001, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Secs. 2-241—2-249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESTRICTIONS ON EMINENT DOMAIN 
 
Sec. 2-250. - Generally. 
(a)  Prior to the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city council for the taking of private property pursuant to F.S. chs. 163.375 and 163.380 in a community redevelopment area without the consent of the property owner in connection with a community redevelopment plan and the transfer of said private property to a private third party or entity, the city council as a condition precedent to exercising said power shall conduct two (2) public hearings with due notice to the public at least ten (10) days in advance of each public hearing of its intention to exercise that power. Notice shall be to the general public and to the private party whose property may be taken by the exercise of eminent domain. 
(b)  That any vote or decision of the city council to exercise the power of eminent domain for purposes of taking private property without the consent of the owner for redevelopment or economic development reasons with a community redevelopment area and to transfer said property to a private entity or party may only be authorized by five (5) affirmative votes of the city council. 
(c)  The city council acknowledges and recognizes that the taking of private property by eminent domain for the transfer to a private third party for redevelopment or economic development purposes can only be utilized within a community redevelopment area. 
(d)  Before the city authorizes the use of eminent domain, for the transfer to a private third party for redevelopment or economic development purposes, the city during the public hearing shall make the following findings: 
(1)  The property sought to be acquired through eminent domain is determined to be essential to the achievement of the goals and objectives of the community redevelopment plan; and 
(2)  Good faith negotiations to acquire the property have been unsuccessful and all other means have been exhausted; and 
(3)  The city, or community redevelopment agency has submitted a written offer to the owner of the property to acquire it for at least one hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the appraised value and at least thirty (30) days have elapsed since the offer was submitted to the owner. 
(4)  The owner of the property has been given written notice at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the meeting at which the governing body of the city or community redevelopment agency will consider approving the filing of a action to acquire the property through eminent domain. 
(5)  If the property to be acquired is used as a residence, then the city or community redevelopment agency acquiring the property must pay the full expense incurred by the resident relocating to a comparable residence, but none of any such relocation payment or reimbursement shall be used to pay any attorney or appraiser fees. 
(6)  If the property to be acquired is homestead property and will be sold or leased to a private party for redevelopment after it is acquired, then the good faith offer by the city, county or community redevelopment agency acquiring the property shall be no less than one hundred and fifty (150) percent of the appraised value. 
(e)  Before the initiation of eminent domain for the transfer to a private third party for redevelopment or economic development purposes, the city shall insure that the guiding principles have been followed (see Exhibit "A" of Ordinance No. 72-2005). 
(Ord. No. 72-2005, 11-8-05)  
Chapter 3 - ALARMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-2011, adopted Nov. 22, 2011, amended ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 3 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 3-1—3-6, and derived from the 1963 Code. 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARMS 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city by preventing the misuse of police resources caused by false alarms and telephone alarm devices, thereby allowing these resources to be accessible and available in the event these resources are truly needed by members of the community. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the city allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single devices or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing, or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Titusville Police Department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Titusville Police Department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
City means the City of Titusville or its agent. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Titusville Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-3. - Alarm permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the city. The permit shall be valid for one (1) permit year and must be renewed on an annual basis for the life of the alarm. A permit fee may be required for the initial registration and annual renewals of alarm permits. The city council shall establish such permit fee by resolution and the city may delegate the collection of said fee to an independent contractor. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. 
(b)  Application. The alarm permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the city. An alarm user has the duty to furnish all information requested in the application. No permit will be issued when a fine is outstanding, the application is incomplete, or if the applicant provides false information. 
(c)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within thirty (30) days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the city within fifteen (15) days of the change. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has more than one (1) alarm system protecting two (2) or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-4. - Duties of the alarm user. 
[The duties of the alarm user are to:] 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; and 
(b)  Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when notified by the Titusville Police Department. Failure to provide such response shall result in a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each occurrence. 
(c)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider. 
(d)  An alarm user must obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or residence. The alarm user must provide the permit number and current contact information to the alarm company monitoring said alarm. 
(e)  All alarm systems having an audible or visual signal at the premises shall be so equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible or visual signal after fifteen (15) minutes, except those systems required by law to have a longer operating period in which case such system shall be so equipped as to automatically shut off the audible or visual signal at the conclusion of such longer required operating time. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-5. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(c)  The operator of every place of business which utilizes an alarm system shall provide, visible from the exterior of such business and adjacent to the main entrance, current working telephone numbers of the alarm company monitoring said alarm. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Titusville Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-6. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and determined that three (3) or more false alarms within a year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. A civil penalty for false alarms occurring within a year may be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
First response (within one (1) year): Verbal warning. 
Second response (within one (1) year): Written warning. 
Third response and up (within one year): One hundred thirty dollars ($130.00). 
Failure to obtain permit: One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Additional penalty (if payment is thirty (30) days late): Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Notice of violation. All notices of violation and penalties as referenced herein shall be sent to the alarm user in writing. 
(c)  Payment of charges. All penalties assessed against an alarm user shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice. Should any penalties assessed pursuant to this article remain unpaid in excess of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, a collection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed and shall be payable by the alarm user in addition to the original penalties. The alarm user shall be responsible for any legal fees and costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of this article. The city may delegate the registration process and collection of the amounts due to an independent contractor. 
(d)  Disconnection of alarm system. Upon failure of an owner or lessee of a premises to pay a fee specified within sixty (60) days, the chief of police shall be authorized to order the disconnection of the alarm system, and it shall be unlawful to reconnect or fail to disconnect such alarm system unless and until appropriate corrective action has been taken and such connection of an alarm system is authorized by the chief of police. No disconnection or deactivation shall be ordered or made as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. The written notice to disconnect or deactivate shall be mailed to the alarm user and shall specify the date on which the alarm user shall be required to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system, which date shall be at least fifteen (15) days following the date of the notice. 
(e)  Failure to disconnect or unauthorized reconnection of alarm system. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to fail to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected. It shall be a violation of this article to reconnect an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected unless the reconnection is authorized by the chief of police or as the result of an appeal. 
(f)  Discontinuance of law enforcement response. The failure of an alarm user to make payment under this article within ninety (90) days from the date of the invoice may result in discontinuance of law enforcement response to alarm signals that may occur at the premises described in the alarm user's permit until payment is received. The decision to discontinue service shall require the approval of the chief of police and the concurrence of the city manager. 
(g)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a permit, the imposition of civil fines or other administrative actions, including enforcement through the Titusville Code Enforcement Board or as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-7. - No public duty. 
The permitting of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it create, a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering the alarm system, the alarm operator acknowledges that law enforcement response may be based on factors such as: availability of law enforcement units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and staffing levels. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this chapter, other than the decisions of the code enforcement board, may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Titusville Police Department within ten (10) days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessments or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the city. Appeals to the chief of police or designee shall be reviewed using a preponderance of the evidence standard and the police chief or designee shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil fees where warranted. 
(b)  [Appeal of decision.] The decision of the chief of police, or designee, may be appealed to the board of adjustments and appeals in accordance with section 31-51 of the Land Development Regulations upon paying the applicable filing fee. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-9. - Government immunity. 
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Titusville Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 3-10. - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city by preventing the misuse of fire protection resources caused by false alarms and telephone alarm devices, thereby allowing these resources to be accessible and available in the event these resources are truly needed by members of the community. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-11. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing, or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the department of fire rescue that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring fire rescue response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to fire personnel arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
City means the City of Titusville. 
False fire alarm means a fire alarm dispatch or other response by the fire department, when the responding unit(s) finds no evidence of a fire or attempted fire offense after having completed an investigation of the site. Excluded from this definition are: 
(1)  Fire alarms occurring as a result of lightning, wind, or other meteorological event, where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the fire alarm system verified by an alarm technician; or 
(2)  Disruption of the telephone circuit beyond the control of the fire alarm operator or its agents, verified by written communication from the telephone company. 
Fire alarm system means any single devices or assembly of equipment that emits, transmits or relays a signal designed to indicate the presence of fire and/or smoke and intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, fire department services to the fire alarm site. Such alarm is either: 
(1)  Via a private alarm service company relayed to the department of fire rescue telephone. 
(2)  Via an audible or visual signal heard or observed by, or related to, the department of fire rescue. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-12. - Duty of owner or lessee of premises. 
(a)  Prior to the installation or substantial modification or use of a fire alarm system, the owner or lessee of the premises shall furnish the department of fire rescue with such information as the department deems necessary to provide adequate response to the alarm including but not limited to: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
2.  The address of the fire alarm site; 
3.  The classification of the fire alarm site as residential, commercial, governmental; 
4.  The type of system(s), such as addressable; monitored; etc; 
5.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of two (2) persons who have access to the premises, the ability to reset the alarm, and who, upon request of the fire department, will respond to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes of notification; 
6.  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the fire alarm monitoring company, if any; 
7.  The name, address, and telephone number of the installer and date of installation, if known; 
8.  The name, address and telephone number of the commercial entity that last performed maintenance on the fire alarm system, if known; 
9.  Any dangerous conditions present at the fire alarm site. 
The owner or lessee shall provide updated information within fifteen (15) days of when the information on file has changed. 
(b)  Owners or lessees of any alarm system shall provide response to the alarm location, when requested, in order to reset or disable the alarm system within one (1) hour of notification. Failure to provide such response shall result in a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such occurrence. 
(c)  The operator of every place of business which utilizes an alarm system shall provide, visible from the exterior of such business and adjacent to the main entrance, a minimum of three (3) current working telephone numbers of persons to be notified in case of emergency or in lieu thereof have on file with the police and department of fire rescue three (3) current working telephone numbers of persons to be notified in case of emergency. 
(d)  All alarm systems having an audible or visual signal at the premises shall be so equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible or visual signal after fifteen (15) minutes, except those systems required by law to have a longer operating period in which case such system shall be so equipped as to automatically shut off the audible or visual signal at the conclusion of such longer required operating time. 
(e)  All alarm systems shall be properly maintained. System malfunctions due to faulty maintenance shall not be grounds for an excused false alarm under section 3-15(d). False alarms attributable to power outages and/or power surges shall not be excusable under section 3-15(d). 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-13. - Response to alarms, corrective actions, reports required, fees. 
(a)  [Classification of alarm.] For each response by the department of fire rescue to an alarm, the department will cause a report to be filed, classifying the alarm as one (1) of the following: 
(1)  False alarm or system test with no notification. 
(2)  Valid alarm for cause designated. 
(b)  [Written warning notice.] Upon the reception of a second false alarm within nine (9) months, the department of fire rescue shall issue a written warning notice to the owner or lessee of the premises involved. The owner or lessee shall file a written report with the department of fire rescue within five (5) working days indicating any and all measures taken to reduce false alarms. 
(c)  [Service fee for false alarms.] There shall be a service fee charged for false alarms according to the following schedule: 
(1)  First response (none in last nine (9) months): Verbal warning. 
(2)  Second response (within nine (9) months): Written warning. 
(3)  Third response (within nine (9) months): Two hundred ninety dollars ($290.00). 
(4)  Newly installed or substantially modified systems shall be allowed to operate for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of installation or modification without penalty for false alarms, provided the department of fire rescue is notified of the installation or modification in advance of same. 
(d)  Notice of violation. All notices of violation and penalties as referenced herein shall be sent to the alarm user in writing. 
(e)  Payment of charges. All penalties assessed against an alarm user shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice. Should any penalties assessed pursuant to this article remain unpaid in excess of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, a collection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed and shall be payable by the alarm user in addition to the original penalties. The alarm user shall be responsible for any legal fees and costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of this article. The city may delegate the registration process and collection of the amounts due to an independent contractor. 
(f)  [Order of disconnect.] Upon failure of an owner or lessee of a premises to pay a fee specified within sixty (60) days, the fire chief shall be authorized to order the disconnection of the alarm system, and it shall be unlawful to reconnect or fail to disconnect such alarm system unless and until appropriate corrective action has been taken and such connection of an alarm system is authorized by the fire chief. No disconnection or deactivation shall be ordered or made as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. The written notice to disconnect or deactivate shall be mailed to the alarm user and shall specify the date on which the alarm user shall be required to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system, which date shall be at least fifteen (15) days following the date of the notice. The owner or lessee shall be responsible for all costs incurred in collecting the service fee including attorney's fees. 
(g)  Failure to disconnect or unauthorized reconnection of alarm system. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to fail to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected. It shall be a violation of this article to reconnect an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected unless the reconnection is authorized by the fire chief or as the result of an appeal. 
(h)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this chapter, other than the decisions of the code enforcement board, may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Titusville Fire Department within ten (10) days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessments or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the city. Appeals to the fire chief or designee shall be reviewed using a preponderance of the evidence standard and the fire chief or designee shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil fees where warranted. The decision of the fire chief, or designee, may be appealed to the board of adjustments and appeals in accordance with section 31-51 of the Land Development Regulations upon paying the applicable filing fee. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-14. - Telephone alarm devices. 
Telephone alarm devices will be so constructed or installed so as to not seize or otherwise hold or preempt the telephone lines of the department of fire rescue. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 3-15. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter and any violator shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter including fees for false alarms, disconnection of alarms, costs and attorney's fees to enforce this section. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a permit, the imposition of civil fines or other administrative actions, including enforcement through the Titusville Code Enforcement Board or as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Failure to correct malfunctions or pay such fines as applicable by this chapter within ninety (90) days may result in the fire department not being required to respond to the alarm location. The decision to discontinue service shall require the approval of the fire chief and the concurrence of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 30-2011, § 2, 11-22-11)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The mayor may declare certain businesses closed during an emergency, § 8-4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11; alcoholic beverages restricted in motion picture theaters, § 11-277. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, F.S. ch. 561 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definition of alcoholic beverage. 
All liquors and beverages whether spirituous, vinous or malt, containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume shall be deemed and held to be alcoholic beverages, within the meaning of any and all ordinances of this city relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions under the state beverage law, F.S. § 561.01.  
Sec. 4-2. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided by section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 3-19)  
Sec. 4-3. - Distance restrictions. 
(a)  Schools: Except as provided herein, per F.S. § 562.45(2)(a), no license or conditional use permit authorizing the on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be granted where the proposed premises is within five hundred (500) feet of the real property that comprises a public or private elementary school or middle school or secondary school. This restriction shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any real property authorized for the off premises sale of beer and malt beverages as provided for in F.S. § 563.02(1)(a); 
(2)  Any real property within the downtown community redevelopment area; 
(3)  Any real property that is licensed as a restaurant which derives at least fifty-one (51) percent of its gross revenue from sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages pursuant to F.S. ch. 509; and/or; 
(4)  Temporary permits to certain not-for-profit organizations as provided for in F.S. § 561.422. 
(b)  Churches: No license or conditional use permit authorizing the on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be granted where the proposed premises is within three hundred (300) feet of the real property from an established church, and no church shall be authorized to locate, by conditional use permit or otherwise, within three hundred (300) feet from a licensed establishment having on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. This restriction shall not be applicable to the following: 
(1)  Any church that executes a waiver in writing that the restriction against on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages within three hundred (300) feet shall not apply or be asserted by the church; 
(2)  Any real property authorized for off the premises sale of beer and malt beverages as provided in F.S. § 563.02(1)(a); 
(3)  Any real property within the downtown community redevelopment area; 
(4)  Any real property that is licensed for a restaurant of which derives at least fifty-one (51) percent of its gross revenue from sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages pursuant to F.S. ch. 509. 
(5)  Temporary permits to certain not-for-profit organizations as provided for in F.S. § 561.422; and/or 
(6)  Any church or alcoholic beverage establishment authorized to locate within a shopping center by conditional use permit and/or receipt of an occupational license (business tax license), as applicable, shall be exempt from the above stated distance restriction, as applied within the boundaries of the shopping center. In addition, any church or alcoholic beverage establishment that locates within three hundred (300) feet of a shopping center where an existing church or alcoholic beverage establishment is situated shall also be exempt from the above stated distance requirement. 
(Code 1963, § 3-2; Ord. No. 30-2008, § 1, 10-14-08) 
Cross reference— Commercial district regulations, § 63.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt, F.S. § 562.45; restrictions for off-premises sale of malt beverages, F.S. § 563.02(1)(a).  
Sec. 4-4. - Hours of sale for the consumption and service of alcohol. 
(a)  Any commercial establishment which serves, dispenses, stores or sells liquor, or permits liquor to be consumed on or off its premises, or any person holding a license from the division of beverage, state department of business regulation, or any commercial establishment, bottle club or membership association in which a fee, cover charge or admission fee is collected, shall have hours of operation for the purposes of dispensing, selling, consuming or serving alcoholic beverages as follows: 
(1)  Monday through Saturday: Beginning at 7:00 a.m. and ending at 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  Sunday: Beginning at 1:00 p.m. and ending at 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  Permits required for premises to remain open past 11:00 p.m.; suspension of permits. 
(1)  Permits required. All vendors licensed under the state beverage laws desiring to remain open for business for the purposes of selling, offering for sale, delivering, serving or permitting consumption of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on any weekday or Saturday, and between 11:00 p.m. and midnight on Sunday, shall make application with the business tax department for an extended hours of operation permit. An extended hours of operation permit is also available for alcohol sales between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sunday for commercial establishments that are also licensed to prepare and serve food. When December 31 falls on a Saturday, Sunday or other weekday the hours shall be extended until 5:00 a.m. 
For the remainder of the city's fiscal year 2008/2009, vendors shall not be required to obtain an extended hours of operation permit. Commencing with October 1, 2009, and following fiscal years, vendors shall be required to obtain and possess an extended hours of operation permit. 
(2)  The application form shall be provided by the city. The vendor shall complete the application by providing the information requested about the vendor, including, but not limited to, the name and address where notices related to this section are to be mailed. 
(3)  [Review of application.] The city manager or designee shall review the application and, if the application is complete and the vendor is in compliance with the code, a permit shall be issued to the vendor to remain open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturday or between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. and midnight on Sunday. 
(4)  [Annual renewal of permit.] Such permit must be renewed annually on or before the thirtieth day of September of each year, unless the permit has been suspended by the City of Titusville or the vendor's state beverage license has been revoked or suspended. In the event that there has been a change in ownership or a change in location of the establishment, the city must be notified immediately and a new application must be processed. Failure to renew the extended hours of operation permit shall be cause for the immediate suspension of extended hours privileges pursuant to subsection (7) below. 
(5)  [After-hours sales prohibited.] No vendor may sell alcoholic beverages after 11:00 p.m. or before 1:00 p.m. on Sunday, unless it has received an extended hours of operation permit from the city. 
(6)  [Open hours not impaired.] The provisions of this section shall not impair or impact an establishment's right to remain open prior to 11:00 p.m. 
(7)  Permit suspension. The ability to sell, offer for sale, deliver or permit to be consumed upon the premises any alcoholic beverage beyond the hour of 11:00 p.m. on any day of the week, or before 1:00 p.m. on Sunday, is hereby declared to be and is a privilege subject to suspension by the city council, and no person may reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. As a condition of the continuation of the privilege, vendors are required to take all necessary steps to minimize the negative impacts that their establishment may cause in nearby residential or commercial neighborhoods. The city council shall consider the following in deciding whether to suspend, revoke or condition the privilege: 
a.  Whether there is adequate off-street parking in relation to the demands created during the extra hours of operation, with special regard to any adverse impact on adjacent residential areas of any illegal or hazardous parking that can be traced directly to a particular vendor. For the purposes of this section, sufficient evidence of an adverse impact on adjacent residential areas will exist upon verification by police or code enforcement officials that more than ten (10) patrons of the vendor have parked illegally on public rights-of-way or property, or on private property upon receipt of a complaint by the property owner which has been communicated to the vendor. This provision will only apply if the parking provided by the vendor is at maximum capacity at the time the illegal parking takes place, or is otherwise determined to be inadequate given the size of the crowds that the vendor draws; illegal parking by an individual patron shall not constitute a violation of this subsection; 
b.  Law enforcement activities on the vendor's property during the extra hours of operation, both outside and inside the permitted location, with particular emphasis on illegal activity of the owner, employees, or others associated with the establishment, including use, sale or delivery of controlled substances, allowing underage drinking, violation of open container laws and loitering by intoxicated individuals. The city council shall also consider whether the need for law enforcement involvement was the result of the establishment's failure or inability to maintain proper order and control during the extended business hours; 
c.  Complaints verified by the police, arising from adverse effects extra hours of operation have upon neighboring properties, including the effects of noise, parking, vandalism, generation of trash or garbage, loitering by intoxicated persons or exterior lighting on neighboring residential properties. It shall be a defense to the applicability of this section that the vendor has adequate security personnel and has implemented a policy requiring that security personnel patrol the premises as well as all known parking lots that patrons use, to assure the orderly conduct of patrons as they arrive at the establishment or as they depart. Complaints involving neighboring properties must be traceable to the actions of the owner and/or his employees. Noise complaints shall be traceable to the actions of the vendor or his employees by entertainment provided by the vendor or noise generated from the seating areas or entertainment areas of the vendor and not individual discussions, conversations by patrons within parking areas. Upon a showing of such security precautions, the vendor shall only be held accountable if the conduct complained of constitutes a violation by the vendor of any provision of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances; 
d.  Violations of any provisions of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances; specially including, but not limited to, sections 13-101 through 13-105 relating to noise and sound limitations; 
e.  Failure to obtain an extended hours of operation permit, or failure to renew the permit as required by subsections (4) and (5) above; 
f.  Violations of laws relating to the maximum permissible occupancy of vendor; 
g.  Violation of any provisions of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances, state or federal law. 
In order to invoke the enforcement provisions of this section, the activities described hereinabove must be traceable to the particular vendor against whom action is being taken, and also must be verified by a police report, police officers or code enforcement officers on the scene. Although not required, police officers and code enforcement officers may, at their discretion, issue warnings that shall not be considered a notice of violation, to put the vendor on notice that a particular problem or problems must be addressed and could result in a notice of violation if not corrected. 
In addition, the first violation by a vendor of a city code violation (not state law violation), shall be a written warning and not a notice of violation as provided for in subsection (8). Any subsequent violation of any section of the city code may result in a notice of violation. 
A vendor is encouraged to initiate calls for service to the police department if law violations are occurring on vendor's property. A notice of violation shall not be initiated for vendor initiated calls. 
It is recognized that an incident that may occur during an extended hour period, i.e., between 11:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m., could involve more than one (1) section of the code or violation of law. Any notice of violation that is issued that may involve multiple code or law violations on one (1) incident shall constitute one (1) notice of violation. 
(8)  [Notice of violation.] Notice of violation may be issued by a police officer or code enforcement officer of a violation of this section and shall be issued to any vendor that meets or, where applicable, fails to meet the criteria established in subsection (7)a., b., c., d., e., f., and g. above. The notice of violation shall be left with the owner, proprietor, or highest ranking employee then on the premises. An additional copy of the notice will also be mailed via U.S. mail, certified, return receipt requested, to the vendor at the street address provided in the application. Proof of delivery by either of these two (2) methods (hand delivery or mail) shall be sufficient to establish receipt by the permit holder. Notices sent by mail that are returned or not accepted for any reason shall be deemed proper notice of the violation, provided that the notice is sent to the person and address named on the application. 
(9)  [Consideration by city council.] Should three (3) notices of violation be issued to any vendor within any three (3) consecutive month period, the matter shall be placed on the city council agenda to consider the suspension of the vendor's extended hours permit. 
a.  Such agenda item shall be publicly advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least fourteen (14) days prior to any hearing of the agenda item, and written notice of the charges against the vendor shall be provided at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing. The notice shall also contain the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall also advise the vendor of the right to be heard, of the right to be represented by counsel, of the right to present sworn testimony on the vendor's behalf, and the right to appeal to circuit court. 
b.  After consideration of the matter and allowing the vendor to be heard, the city council may take no action, suspend or condition the extended hours privilege, as they deem appropriate. Suspensions shall range from one (1) day in length to a maximum of ninety (90) days. The maximum penalty for a first appearance by a vendor before the city council shall be thirty (30) days, sixty (60) days for a second appearance and ninety (90) days for all appearances thereafter. The city council shall base its decision on whether there is substantial, competent evidence presented that supports a finding of noncompliance with the criteria in subsection (7)a., b., c., d., e., f., or g. as stated herein above. 
c.  The city council may require, as a condition of the continuation of the privilege of extra hours of operation, compliance with any reasonable conditions. 
d.  The city council may delegate the responsibility for conducting hearings pursuant to this section to a special magistrate. Any such delegation shall be by resolution. 
(10)  [Vendor name change.] Any vendor that has had an extended hours of operation permit suspended or otherwise conditioned cannot avoid the consequences of the city council's action by changing its name or corporate status. Upon a showing to the city council that there has been a legitimate change in ownership at the location affected by the city council's action(s), the city council may consider allowing an extended hours of operation permit to issue at the site, subject to applicable conditions, if any, to prevent a recurrence of the harms that caused the earlier action. 
(11)  Vendors who were allowed to serve alcohol under previous ordinance. Those vendors in the city who are, as of the effective date of this section, allowed to serve alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption later than that provided in this section ("preexisting late night vendors") shall be treated as having an extended hours of operation permit through and including September 30, 2009, subject to the same conditions and possibility of suspension as set forth above. As of October 1, 2009, such preexisting late night vendors shall be required to apply for an extended hours of operation permit in order to continue to serve alcoholic beverages at hours later than those provided in subsection (a), above, and otherwise are subject to the terms of this section. 
(c)  Liquors, beers and wines hours of sale. No vendors licensed under the state beverage law to sell liquor, beer or wine by the package, bottle or original container for consumption off premises, shall sell or offer for sale or deliver any liquor, beer or wine in the original package, bottle or container for consumption off the premises during any hour prohibited by subsection (a) above. Businesses covered by this section are also required to obtain an extended hours of operation permit, and are subject to all of the requirements of subsection (b). 
(d)  Taking container off premises after hours. It is the intention of this section to prohibit such vendors from permitting anyone purchasing packing goods in the original container to leave the vendor's premises during the prohibited hours, taking with him in any container any beers, wines, liquors, or alcoholic beverages originally purchased by package, bottle or container, so that the same may be consumed off the premises. 
(e)  Sales by employees during prohibited hours. Any employee of a vendor licensed under the state beverage law shall not sell, or offer for sale, any beers, wines, liquors, or alcoholic beverages of any kind during the prohibited hours. 
(f)  Gifts. It shall be deemed a violation of this section for any person, or any agent, servant or employee of any person licensed under the state beverage law, during the hours prohibited under subsection (c) above, to gratuitously give any kind of alcoholic beverage, whether conditioned upon the purchase of any kind of alcoholic beverage or product of any nature, at any inflated price or otherwise, or in the form of a so-called bonus predicated upon another purchase, or as a gift. 
(g)  [Enforcement procedures.] The enforcement procedures contained herein are alternative procedures and the city reserves the right to arrest, prosecute, take action through the code enforcement board or such alternative procedures as the law may authorize. 
(Code 1963, § 3-4; Ord. No. 25-2009, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 12-2011, § 1, 7-26-11) 
State Law reference— Municipality to prescribe hours of sale within corporate limits, F.S. §§ 561.342, 562.14(3).  
Sec. 4-5. - Certain states of undress prohibited on premises under this chapter. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Areola shall mean the circular colored area which surrounds the nipple of a female breast. 
(2)  Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall mean any business or commercial establishment, whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement, including those licensed by the state for sale or service of alcoholic beverages, and any bottle club; hotel; motel; restaurant; nightclub; country club; cabaret; meeting facility utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organization; business or commercial establishment where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served or provided with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the product or article will be or is intended to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or combination with an alcoholic beverage on the premises of the business or commercial establishment; or business or commercial establishment where the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. A private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, is not an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Premises shall mean a building that is under one roof or has common entrances and the area immediately surrounding the building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, operating or managing an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Suffer or permit any female person to expose to the public view that area of the human breast below the top of the areola; 
(2)  Suffer or permit any female person to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or to simulate that area of a human female breast below the top of the areola; 
(3)  Suffer or permit any person to expose to the public view his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus; or 
(4)  Suffer or permit any person to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or to simulate human genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus; or 
(2)  Employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate human genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any female, while on the premises of an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Expose to public view that area of her breast below the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Expose any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate that area of a human female breast below the top of the areola. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages to suffer or permit the exposition of any graphic representation, including pictures or the projection of film, which depicts human genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, buttocks, female breasts below the top of the areola, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or any simulation thereof within any establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Code 1963, § 3-5; Ord. No. 47-1990, § 1, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 26-1991, § 1, 8-13-91) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate conduct, F.S. § 561.342(3).  
Sec. 4-6. - Certain types of conduct prohibited on premises. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Commercial establishment shall mean any establishment which operates for pecuniary gain. 
Lap shall mean the area between a person's knee and waist. 
Patron shall mean any person who is physically present on the premises of a commercial establishment and who is not an owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or an entertainer or performer at the establishment. 
Premises shall mean a building that is under one (1) roof or has common entrances and the area immediately surrounding the building. 
Touching shall include any form of intentional, interpersonal, physical, bodily contact, whether or not exposed or unclothed parts of the body are involved. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, while on the premises of a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages are possessed, consumed, purchased, sold, dispensed or given away on the premises, for any owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or for any entertainer or performer at such establishment: 
(1)  To touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female patron. 
(2)  To touch the clothed or unclothed body of any patron in the region of his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus. 
(3)  To suffer or permit herself to be touched on the breast by any patron if the owner, employee, agent, subcontractor, entertainer or performer so touched is a female. 
(4)  To sit on or in otherwise occupy the lap of any patron of such establishment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful, while on the premises of a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages are possessed, consumed, purchased, sold, dispensed or given away on the premises for any patron of said establishment. 
(1)  To touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or of any female entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(2)  To touch the clothed or unclothed body of any owner, employee, agent, subcontractor, entertainer or performer in the region of his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus. 
(3)  To suffer or permit herself to be touched on the breast by any owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or by any entertainer or performer at such establishment if the patron is a female. 
(4)  To sit on or in or otherwise occupy the lap of any owner, employee, agent of or subcontractor of such establishment or of any entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, a commercial establishment licensed by the state to dispense alcoholic beverages on the premises shall be rebuttably presumed to be a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages are possessed, consumed, purchased, sold, dispensed or given away on the premises. Any establishment which has received an occupational license to operate commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(e)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, operating or managing a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages are possessed, consumed, purchased, sold, dispensed or given away on the premises of that establishment to: 
(1)  Suffer or permit any employee of or entertainer at such establishment to sit on or in or otherwise occupy the lap of any patron of such establishment. 
(2)  Suffer or permit any employee of or entertainer at such establishment to touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female patron. 
(3)  Suffer or permit any employee of or entertainer at such establishment to touch the clothed or unclothed body of any patron at the point below the waist and above the knee of such patron. 
(4)  Suffer or permit any employee of or entertainer at such establishment to suffer or permit himself or herself to be touched by any patron in either of the following clothed or unclothed areas of the body: 
a.  At any point below the waist and above the knee. 
b.  On the breast, if the employee, entertainer, or performer so touched is a female. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, operating or managing a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages are possessed, consumed, purchased, sold, dispensed or given away on the premises of that establishment to: 
(1)  Suffer or permit any patron of or entertainer at such establishment to sit on or in or otherwise occupy the lap of any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(2)  Suffer or permit any patron of such establishment to touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(3)  Suffer or permit any patron of such establishment to permit himself or herself to be touched by any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment in either of the following clothed or unclothed areas of the body: 
a.  At any point below the waist and above the knee. 
b.  On the breast, if the patron is a female. 
(Code 1963, § 3-6; Ord. No. 47-1990, §§ 2—5, 11-13-90) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate conduct, F.S. § 561.342(3).  
Sec. 4-7. - Possession, consumption, purchase, sale, dispensing or giving away of beverages prohibited on certain premises. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Areola shall mean the circular colored area which surrounds the nipple of a human breast. 
At or below the areola shall mean the areola, the nipple of a human female breast, or that area of a human female breast below the areola. 
Commercial establishment shall mean any establishment which operates for pecuniary gain. 
Lap shall mean the area between a person's knees and waist. 
Premises shall mean a building that is under one roof or has common entrances, and the area immediately surrounding the building. 
Touching shall include any form of intentional, interpersonal, physical, bodily contact, whether or not exposed or unclothed parts of the body are involved. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, purchase, sell, dispense or give away alcoholic beverages on the premises of any commercial establishment where such person knows or has reason to believe that: 
(1)  Any person is engaging in the actual or simulated display of his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus. 
(2)  Any female is engaging in the actual or simulated display of the area of the human breast at or below the areola. 
(3)  Within the past two (2) hours, any person has engaged in the actual or simulated display of his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, vulva, buttocks or anus. 
(4)  Within the past two (2) hours, any female has engaged in the actual or simulated display of the area of the human breast at or below the areola. 
(5)  Any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment is sitting on or in or otherwise occupying the lap of any patron of such establishment. 
(6)  Any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment is touching the clothed or unclothed breast of any female patron. 
(7)  Any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment is touching the clothed or unclothed body of any patron at any point below the waist and above the knee of such patron. 
(8)  Within the past two (2) hours, any employee of or entertainer or performer has sat on or in or otherwise occupied the lap of any patron of such establishment. 
(9)  Within the past two (2) hours, any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment has touched the clothed or unclothed breast of any female patron. 
(10)  Within the past two (2) hours, any employee of or entertainer or performer at such establishment has touched the clothed or unclothed body of any patron at any point below the waist and above the knee of such person. 
(11)  Any patron of such establishment is sitting on or in or otherwise occupying the lap of any owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or of any entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(12)  Any patron of such establishment is touching the clothed or unclothed breast of any female owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or of any female entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(13)  Any patron of such establishment is touching the clothed or unclothed body of any owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or of any performer below the waist and above the knee of such owner, employee, agent, subcontractor, entertainer or performer. 
(14)  Within the past two (2) hours, any patron of such establishment has sat on or in or otherwise occupied the lap of any owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or of any entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(15)  Within the past two (2) hours, any patron of such establishment has touched the clothed or unclothed breast of any female owner, employee, agent or subcontractor of such establishment or of any female entertainer or performer at such establishment. 
(16)  Within the past two (2) hours, any patron of such establishment has touched the clothed or unclothed body of any owner, employee, agent or subcontractor, entertainer or performer below the waist and above the knee of such owner, employee, agent or subcontractor, entertainer or performer. 
(c)  The following presumptions shall apply to this section: 
(1)  Any establishment which has received an occupational license to operate commercially is presumed to be a commercial establishment. 
(2)  Any person who enters a commercial establishment which displays on the premises, by sign or otherwise, any advertisement that reasonably indicates that nude or seminude activity takes place at the establishment is presumed to be aware that the activity defined in subsection (b) above is taking place in the establishment. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Code 1963, § 3-7; Ord. No. 47-1990, §§ 6, 7, 11-13-90) 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment regulations, § 11-81 et seq.  
Sec. 4-8. - Possession of open containers. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, alcoholic beverage is defined as set forth in section 4-1 of the Code. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to consume or possess open containers of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors off the premises of an establishment dealing in or licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or bottle clubs and within three hundred (300) feet of the premises, except within enclosed buildings or on premises occupied solely by residential structures, or by an owner or tenant of a premises which is within three hundred (300) feet. The distance set forth herein shall be measured from the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along public thoroughfares from the principal entrance of the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages or bottle club to the location of the violation of this section. 
(d)  Each establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages and each bottle club shall, at all times when such establishment is open to the public or is dispensing or selling alcoholic beverages, have located in the interior as well as the exterior portions of the building licensed for sale of such beverages at a location which can be readily seen and read by customers of the establishment, a sign prominently displayed of a size at least one (1) foot by two (2) feet containing the following information: 
"IT IS UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME OR POSSESS AN OPEN CONTAINER OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WITHIN 300 FEET OF THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND OFF OF THESE LICENSED PREMISES. 
CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES 4-8" 
(e)  The city manager or his designee shall prescribe by rule the location of the signs and the size of the lettering, following as his guidelines the criteria set forth above. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages or any bottle club to fail to comply with this section or for any person to sell, dispense or serve alcoholic beverages in any establishment which is not in compliance with this section. The requirements of this section shall then apply to all establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages or bottle clubs whether or not then licensed or licensed in the future. 
(f)  Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-1993, § 1, 3-9-93)  
Sec. 4-9. - Purchase, sale, possession, etc., in parks, playgrounds, recreational areas or public parking lots, exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell or offer for sale, have in his possession or consume any alcoholic beverage, in or on any playground or recreational area or public park or public parking lot within the corporate limits of the city except as follows: 
(1)  The purchase, sale, possession and consumption of beer and wine shall be permitted at Titusville Memorial Pier and the Titusville Municipal Marina. 
(2)  The sale of alcoholic beverages at golf courses located within the city by a licensed vendor. The purchase, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages by patrons of such golf courses shall be permitted during the hours of operation of such golf courses and/or clubhouse located at such golf courses and club pools, only if such alcoholic beverages being purchased, possessed and/or consumed have been purchased as such course from a licensed vendor. 
(3)  The sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted at other locations when specifically authorized by the city council or authorized by a representative of the county pursuant to an agreement between the city and county in the administration of city parks. 
(4)  Prohibition against the sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages at other locations in the city may be temporarily permitted by the city council upon a finding that such permit would be in the best interests of the citizens of the city and upon a consideration by the city council of such factors as the time, date, location and length of the permit requested, the number and average age of the persons expected at the event for which the permit is requested and such other factors as the city council may deem relevant. 
(Ord. No. 10-1993, § 2, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 8-2019, § 1, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 4-10. - Possession or consumption on streets, sidewalks, alleys or other city property prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks or alleys within the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks or alleys within the city while such person, as operator or passenger, is in/on any vehicle, whether moving or stopped, and such consumption is open to public view. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid commercial driver's license with a passenger endorsement or a class D driver's license issued in accordance with the requirements of F.S. ch. 322; 
(2)  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid commercial driver's license with a passenger endorsement or a Class D driver's license issued in accordance with the requirements of F.S. ch. 322; or 
(3)  A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of twenty-one (21) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 10-1993, § 3, 3-9-93)  
Sec. 4-11. - Sale and consumption restricted to licensed building; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed vendor or for any agent, servant or employee of any such vendor, to permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverages in or upon any parking or other areas outside of the building or room mentioned in his license certificate as the address thereof. The foregoing prohibition shall not include areas around swimming pools of hotels or motels. When any part of such parking or other area is adjacent to the building or premises in which the business licensed under such section is operated, and such parking or other area is owned, rented, leased, regulated, controlled or provided, directly or indirectly, by such licensed vendor or by any agent, servant or employee of such licensed vendor, and if such licensed vendor has posted and maintained a legible, painted or printed sign in at least two (2) prominent places on such parking or other area, with sufficient light directed thereon to be visible during the hours of darkness while such place of business is open, in letters of not less than three inches in height, stating: 
"WARNING— 
DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON THIS LOT PROHIBITED—UP TO $500.00 FINE OR 60 DAYS IN JAIL 
CITY ORDINANCE" 
Then in that event, said posting shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vendor is not operating in violation of this subsection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any parking or other area outside of and adjacent to a vendor's licensed premises when such parking or other area is owned, rented, leased, regulated, controlled or provided, either directly or indirectly, by such vendor. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to areas around swimming pools of hotels or motels. 
(c)  If any licensed vendor mentioned herein be a corporate, then the officers of the corporation shall be regarded as the owners thereof, for the purpose of enforcement of this section. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-1993, § 4, 3-9-93)  
Sec. 4-12. - Removal of alcoholic beverages in open or unsealed container from licensed premises. 
It is unlawful for any vendor or his agents or employees, licensed to sell beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverages within the city, to knowingly allow any person to take from the licensed premises any opened beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverage container, or to knowingly allow any person to take from the premises any glass or other open or unsealed container of an alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 10-1993, § 5, 3-9-93)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, § 60.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; animal cruelty and control of animals, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shall mean any dumb, living creature. 
Animal control officer shall mean any person employed or appointed by the county who is authorized to investigate, on public or private property, violations relating to animal control or cruelty to animals and to issue citations as provided in this chapter, and in accordance with F.S. § 828.27. 
Animal control supervisor shall mean the supervisor of the county animal control. 
At large shall mean off the premises of the owner, and not under the physical control of the owner or keeper by means of a leash, cord, or chain. A police dog or police horse, as defined in F.S. § 843.19, while in use by a law enforcement agency, shall not be deemed at large. 
Board shall mean the board of county commissioners of the county. 
Citation shall mean a written notice issued to a person by an officer who has probable cause to believe that the person to whom the citation has been issued has committed a violation of a duly enacted ordinance or code and that the county court shall hear the charge. The citation shall contain the following: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation has been issued. 
(3)  The date and time the violation was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting probable cause. 
(5)  The number of the ordinance or code section violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the police officer issuing the citation. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty, or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty, if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable penalty, if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that substantially states that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation or fails to provide reasonable cause for nonappearance, the person shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation, and, in such case, judgment may be entered by the court against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
Control shall mean the regulation of the possession, ownership, keeping, care, or custody of animals. 
Cruelty shall mean any act of neglect, torture, or torment that causes unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal. 
Dangerous animal shall mean any animal that, according to the records of the county animal control: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked, or endangered a human being, or has inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting; or 
(4)  Has, without provocation, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one (1) or more persons, and dutifully investigated by the appropriate authority. 
Domestic animal shall mean any equine, bovine, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat, poultry, or other domesticated beast or bird. 
Hazardous animal shall mean any animal which, without provocation, has inflicted any minor injury to a human being or domestic animal. 
Insecurely fenced property shall mean real property that an animal can readily enter upon or leave by going over, under, or through an existing fence. 
Keeper shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, estate, or legal or business entity having possession, custody, or control of an animal. 
Kennel shall mean any enclosure in which an animal is confined and secured. 
License certificate shall mean a county animal license certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. 
License tag shall mean a county animal license tag issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Licensed veterinarian shall mean any person who is licensed to engage in the practice of veterinary medicine in the state, under the authority of F.S. ch. 474. 
Nuisance shall mean disturbing the peace and quiet of any person by habitually or continuously barking, howling, crying, screaming, or making other bothersome noises. 
Officer shall mean any law enforcement officer, as defined in F.S. § 943.10; any veterinarian, as defined in F.S. § 474.02; and any animal control officer, as defined in this section. 
Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, business unit, or organization possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control or custody of an animal, or, if the animal is owned by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, that person's parent or legal guardian. 
Secure enclosure shall mean: 
(1)  A building in which an animal is confined, such as the owner's dwelling; or 
(2)  A kennel with secure top and secure sides, consisting of at least 11-gauge chainlink wire, which does not share fencing with the perimeter of the premises, and which is secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping, and which provides protection from the elements. 
Severe injury shall mean any physical injury that results in a broken bone or multiple punctures or disfiguring lacerations requiring sutures or cosmetic surgery. 
Unprovoked shall mean that the victim has been conducting himself peacefully and lawfully and has been bitten or chased in a menacing fashion or attacked by an animal. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-3), 4-9-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-2. - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter is hereby enacted, pursuant to the provisions of F.S. §§ 125.01 and 828.27 and Laws of Fla., ch. 90-180, with the purpose of regulating the possession, ownership, keeping, care and custody of animals, in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-1), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-3. - Wildlife sanctuary. 
All property within the limits of the city is hereby declared to be a bird and wildlife sanctuary. The Indian River Audubon Society, an organization organized and promoted by the citizens, is hereby given permission to erect appropriate signs approved by the city manager, on public property designated by the city, stating that the city has been declared to be a bird and wildlife sanctuary and that hunting is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot or kill birds or wildlife within the city unless written permission is expressly granted to an individual or group by the city manager. 
(Code 1963, § 4-85)  
Sec. 5-4. - Animals creating nuisance prohibited. 
Any person that owns, keeps or harbors any animal which is found to have done any of the following acts shall be deemed in violation of this section, and shall be punished as provided in section 5-7 et seq. The following are the offenses that are deemed to create a nuisance: 
(1)  Any animal or bird which: 
a.  Frequently and for continued duration howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds; 
b.  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans; 
c.  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities across residential real property boundaries; 
d.  By its own condition or the condition of its confinement creates obnoxious odors. 
(2)  Any animal that chases or runs after persons or vehicles. 
(Code 1963, § 4-28)  
Sec. 5-5. - Disposal of domestic dead animals. 
(a)  By resolution, the board of county commissioners shall establish fees to be charged for disposal by the county of domestic dead animals from private property. 
(b)  The owner of any real property may bury or dispose of any dead animal on such property after notice to the animal control supervisor, unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-7), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-6. - Quarantine of animals. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 10D-3.061 through 10D-3.087, Florida Administrative Code, and sections 10D-3.090 through 10D-3.093, Florida Administrative Code, are hereby adopted by reference in this chapter. A copy of chapter 10-3, Florida Administrative Code, has been attached to the ordinance enacting this chapter, and is available for inspection in the office of the clerk to the board of county commissioners. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to commit an act, or cause an act to be committed, which is in violation of any provision of sections 10D-3.061 through 10D-3.093, Florida Administrative Code. 
(c)  If quarantine of a dog or cat cannot be maintained at the owner's home, or at another location permitted under section 10D-3.091(2), Florida Administrative Code, the dog or cat shall be quarantined at a county shelter or other shelter facility or veterinary clinic. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner of a dog or cat to refuse or fail to maintain the dog or cat under rabies quarantine, as required by section 10D-3.091(2), Florida Administrative Code. 
(d)  By resolution, the board shall establish fees to be charged for the quarantine of animals pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  A police dog, as defined in F.S. § 843.19, with a current rabies vaccination, who bites in the line of duty, shall be exempt from confinement under this section, and allowed to continue in a working capacity. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-8), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-7. - Proceedings for violations. 
(a)  An officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of this chapter, may issue a citation to such person. 
(b)  Any citation issued pursuant to this chapter may be contested in the county court. 
(c)  If the person issued a citation elects not to contest the citation, that person shall pay the applicable civil penalty to the clerk of the county court within ten (10) days after issuance of the citation. 
(d)  If a person issued a citation elects to contest the citation, that person shall request a hearing before the county court, within ten (10) days after issuance of the citation. The clerk shall schedule a hearing in the county court and shall provide written notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the person issued the citation and the applicable officer. 
(e)  If the person issued a citation fails to pay the applicable civil penalty within the time period allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, that person shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty provided for such a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-16), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-8. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction. 
(b)  The maximum civil penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(c)  If a person who has committed a violation does not contest the citation, the civil penalty shall be less than the maximum civil penalty. 
(d)  By resolution, the board of county commissioners shall establish the amount of any civil penalty for a violation. 
(e)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by an officer pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable as provided by F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083, or 775.084. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-17), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-9. - Alternative remedies. 
In addition to the penalties otherwise provided in this chapter, the city or board of county commissioners shall have the right to enforce, by injunction or any other appropriate legal means, compliance with the regulations and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-18), 4-9-91)  
Secs. 5-10—5-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Penalties and enforcement of provisions regarding care and control of animals, F.S. § 828.27. 
 
Sec. 5-27. - Contract with county. 
(a)  The city is empowered and authorized to contract with the board of county commissioners for the enforcement of this chapter. Any reference to the county animal control officer shall be deemed to be an animal control officer who is acting pursuant to an agreement between the city and county and such county animal control officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city has entered into an agreement with the county and the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the county animal control officer. 
(c)  Any police officer of the city may arrest without warrant any person found violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-2, 4-83, 4-84)  
Sec. 5-28. - Jurisdiction. 
The county is empowered and authorized to enforce this chapter. Any reference to an animal control officer shall be deemed to be an animal control officer who is acting on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-2), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-29. - Animal control officers. 
(a)  The county animal control director is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of county commissioners may employ animal control officers to assist in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Such animal control officers shall successfully complete a training program as provided by county policies and in accordance with F.S. § 828.27. 
(c)  Animal control officers are not authorized to bear arms or make arrests. 
(d)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to resist, obstruct, hinder, or interfere with the animal control supervisor or an animal control officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(e)  The animal control supervisor and animal control officers may enter upon public property, and unfenced or insecurely fenced private property, except residential dwellings, to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The animal control supervisor and animal control officers shall be immune from prosecution for reasonable, good faith trespass upon such private property, as provided in F.S. § 810.12. 
(f)  The animal control supervisor and animal control officers shall investigate complaints of alleged violations of this chapter. 
(g)  The animal control supervisor and animal control officers are hereby authorized to catch, seize, or pick up: 
(1)  Any sick or injured animal, including any animal subjected to cruelty or in need of immediate medical attention; 
(2)  Any animal infected with, or suspected of carrying, rabies or any other infectious disease; 
(3)  Any dangerous animal not properly confined or restrained; 
(4)  Any hazardous animal not properly confined or restrained; 
(5)  Any animal not properly quarantined; 
(6)  Any animal at large; 
(7)  Any animal causing injury, or threat of injury, to any person by being at large, or chasing persons, or by causing property damage to a person other than the owner of the animal; 
(8)  Any female dog or cat in heat not properly confined; 
(9)  Any dog or cat not vaccinated against rabies; and 
(10)  Any animal deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(h)  The animal control supervisor and animal control officers shall impound any animal caught, seized, or picked up pursuant to this chapter. 
(i)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to remove, or attempt to remove, an animal from the custody of the animal control supervisor or an animal control officer. 
(j)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to fail to surrender an animal, or the carcass of a dead animal, upon lawful demand by the animal control supervisor or any animal control officer. 
(k)  The animal control supervisor may declare an animal to be a hazardous animal, or dangerous animal, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and shall order the owner or keeper of such animal to confine or restrain such animal as required by this chapter. Animal control officers may inspect the premises of the owner or keeper of such animal to determine compliance with any order of the animal control supervisor under this section, and all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-4), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-30. - Impoundment of animals. 
(a)  The board of county commissioners may purchase, construct, lease, operate and maintain county shelters, or contract for other shelter facilities, to maintain any animal authorized to be caught, seized, or picked up by the animal control supervisor or animal control officer. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to remove, or attempt to remove, any animal from a county shelter or other shelter facility. 
(c)  The animal control supervisor may engage the services of a licensed veterinarian to treat any sick or injured animal, including any animal subjected to cruelty, or any animal infected with, or suspected of carrying, rabies, which animal has been impounded pursuant to this chapter. The owner or keeper of such animal shall be liable for payment of all veterinary and shelter expenses, and reimbursement of the county's expenses for treating such animal. 
(d)  By resolution, the board shall establish fees to be charged for impounding, boarding, and feeding animals, pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  No animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be released until: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of an impounded dog or cat which is not vaccinated against rabies or which does not have a valid license certificate or license tag arranges for rabies vaccination and obtains a license certificate and license tag for the dog or cat; 
(2)  The owner or keeper of an impounded animal pays the fees for impoundment, board, and feed, and any additional fees for rabies vaccination, veterinary expenses, and license certificate and license tag; 
(3)  The owner or keeper of an impounded animal provides proof of ownership or custody, such as a license certificate, sales receipt, affidavits of neighbors, photographs or other documentary evidence; 
(4)  If a hazardous or dangerous animal is impounded, the owner or keeper of such animal must comply with all provisions of this chapter applicable to such hazardous or dangerous animal; 
(5)  If an animal which has been subjected to cruelty is impounded, the county court issues a release order, as provided by F.S. § 828.073. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-5), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-31. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  An animal control officer shall attempt to identify and locate the owner or keeper of an animal impounded pursuant to this chapter. If the owner or keeper is identified and located, the animal control officer shall provide notice to the owner or keeper that the animal has been impounded and may be redeemed within five (5) days of such notice. The five-day period for redemption shall not include the day of impoundment. The last day of such five-day period shall only occur on a day that the county shelter or other shelter facility, at which the subject animal has been impounded, is open for business. 
(b)  An animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall become the property of the county when: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of such animal is not identified or located within five (5) days after impoundment; 
(2)  The owner or keeper of such animal is notified, but does not redeem the animal within five (5) days after notice; 
(3)  Confinement of a wild or feral animal creates unusual risks to such animal or an animal control officer; or 
(4)  Any animal is examined by a licensed veterinarian who determines that the medical condition of the animal warrants humane destruction. 
(c)  When an animal becomes the property of the county, the animal control supervisor may, without further notice to the former owner or keeper: 
(1)  Transfer ownership of such animal to a humane society, humane agency, law enforcement agency, zoo, or other person, institution, or agency, provided that such person, institution, or agency agrees to record the name and address of the new owner upon subsequent transfer of ownership of the animal; or 
(2)  Destroy such animal in a humane manner. 
(d)  Any animal subjected to cruelty impounded under this chapter shall be disposed of as provided by F.S. ch. 828. 
(e)  Any livestock, as defined in F.S. § 588.13, impounded pursuant to this chapter, shall be disposed of as provided by F.S. ch. 588. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-6), 4-9-91)  
Secs. 5-32—5-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767. 
 
Sec. 5-46. - Limitation on keeping of dogs and cats in residential zones and vacant property. 
No person shall keep or maintain in connection with any building erected in any land use classification in which residential uses are permitted or in any residential unit of a multiple-family or travel trailer, mobile home and modular home land use classification, five (5) or more cats or dogs or combination thereof, six (6) months or older. No person shall keep or maintain on vacant property or in connection with any building used for business, commercial or industrial purposes, more than four (4) dogs. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit the use of land or a building as a dog kennel if the land or building is located in a land use classification in which a dog kennel is a permitted use. 
(Code 1963, § 4-35) 
Cross reference— Residential zoning district regulations, § 62.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 5-47. - Rabies vaccination of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of a dog or cat in the city shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated against rabies each year by a licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to refuse or fail to have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies as required by this section; provided, however, that rabies vaccination is not required if: 
(1)  A dog or cat is less than four (4) months of age; 
(2)  A dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies in another state during a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of the rabies vaccination, provided that the owner of such dog or cat presents a certificate of rabies vaccination to the animal control supervisor; or 
(3)  A licensed veterinarian examines the dog or cat and certifies in writing that rabies vaccination would endanger the health of such dog or cat due to age, infirmity, disability, illness, or other medical condition; provided, however, the licensed veterinarian presents such certificate to the animal control supervisor within five (5) days after the examination, and that dog or cat is confined in a secure enclosure until a licensed veterinarian properly vaccinates the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-14), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-48. - License certificates and license tags. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of a dog or cat in the city which is vaccinated against rabies shall obtain a license certificate and license tag for such dog or cat each year. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to refuse or fail to obtain a license tag for the dog or cat as provided by this section. 
(c)  A license certificate and license tag are not required if the owner or keeper of the dog or cat has not resided in the city for more than the previous twenty-eight (28) days. 
(d)  The animal control supervisor shall approve the form, content and design of the license certificate and license tag. No other license certificate or license tag shall be valid in the city. 
(e)  By resolution, the board of county commissioners shall establish fees to be charged for the issuance of license certificates and license tags. 
(f)  Any resident of the city who owns or keeps a dog guide, especially trained for such purpose, and is being used to assist a deaf person or totally or partially blind person or physically disabled person, as defined in F.S. § 413.08, may obtain a license certificate and license tag for such dog guide at no charge. 
(g)  A license certificate and license tag shall be issued by: 
(1)  The animal control supervisor or designee; or 
(2)  Any licensed veterinarian who administers the rabies vaccination, and has been authorized by the county to collect the fee for such license certificate and license tag. 
(h)  The license certificate shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the rabies vaccination and shall list the date of rabies vaccination, the type of vaccine, information identifying the owner or keeper, and describing the dog or cat. An identification number shall be printed on the license certificate and shall correspond to the same number on the license tag. 
(i)  If a license tag is lost or destroyed, the owner or keeper of the dog or cat shall obtain a replacement license tag. A replacement license tag may be issued to the owner or keeper of a dog or cat upon presentation of a corresponding license certificate and payment of the applicable fee. 
(j)  The license tag shall be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and shall be worn at all times, except when such dog or cat is confined for treatment in a veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian or while competing in an organized animal show, trial, or doing training therefor. 
(k)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to permit or allow the dog or cat to be without a physically attached license tag as required by this section. 
(l)  Each license certificate and license tag shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of the rabies vaccination. 
(m)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to permit or allow the dog or cat to wear a license tag which has expired. 
(n)  A license certificate or license tag issued for one (1) dog or cat is not valid for any other dog or cat, and it is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to allow the dog or cat to wear a license tag which has not been issued for such dog or cat. 
(o)  A police dog, as defined in F.S. § 843.19, shall be exempt from wearing a license tag while being used by a law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-15), 4-9-91)  
Secs. 5-49—5-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CARE AND CONTROL OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 5-66. - Hazardous animals. 
When the animal control supervisor declares that an animal is a hazardous animal, the animal control supervisor shall provide written notice to the owner or keeper of such animal. The written notice shall include the basis for declaring the animal hazardous, a description of the animal, and describe the responsibility of the owner or keeper for maintenance of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-9), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-67. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  When the animal control supervisor declares that an animal is a dangerous animal, the animal control supervisor shall provide written notice to the owner or keeper of such animal by registered mail or certified mail or hand delivery. The written notice shall include the basis for declaring the animal dangerous, a description of the animal, and describe the responsibility of the owner or keeper for maintenance of the animal. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the animal has been declared dangerous, the owner of the dangerous animal must obtain a certificate of registration for the dangerous animal from the county animal control, and a certificate shall be renewed annually. The county is authorized to issue such certificates of registration and the renewals thereof only to persons who are at least eighteen (18) years of age and who present to the county animal control evidence of: 
(1)  A current certificate of rabies vaccination for the animal; 
(2)  A secure enclosure to confine a dangerous animal, and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign at all entry points that informs both children and adults of the presence of a dangerous animal on the property; 
(3)  Permanent identification of the dangerous animal, such as a tattoo on the inside thigh, or an electronic implantation, as specified by the animal control supervisor; and 
(4)  Payment of the applicable annual fee for the issuance of the certificate of registration required by this section. The annual fee shall be established by the board of county commissioners, by resolution. 
(c)  The owner shall immediately notify the appropriate animal control authority when an animal that has been classified as dangerous: 
(1)  Is loose, at large, or unconfined; 
(2)  Is sold, given away, or dies; or 
(3)  Is moved to an address other than that stated in the certificate of registration. 
(d)  Any animal declared to be dangerous shall be confined in a secure enclosure on the premises of the owner or keeper of such animal. No dangerous animal shall be permitted or allowed off the premises of the owner or keeper, unless such animal receives approval by the animal control supervisor or requires veterinary treatment and remains: 
(1)  Inside a locked animal carrier; or 
(2)  Under the physical control of the owner or keeper, and is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or lead, with a minimal tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and which does not exceed three (3) feet in length; and 
(3)  Subject to such further conditions as established by the animal control supervisor. 
(e)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a dangerous animal to refuse or fail to confine or restrain such dangerous animal as required by this section. 
(f)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to release or remove a dangerous animal from a secure enclosure, contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(g)  No dangerous animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be released until: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of such dangerous animal presents proof to the animal control supervisor that the animal will be confined as required by this section; and 
(2)  The owner or keeper of such dangerous animal executes a sworn affidavit acknowledging that the animal has been declared dangerous, and agreeing to confine and restrain the animal, and recognizing the county's right to ownership and custody of the animal if the animal bites or injures a human being or another animal after being declared dangerous. 
(h)  The owner or keeper of a dangerous animal shall report, in writing, the name and address of any new owner or keeper of the dangerous animal to the animal control supervisor prior to transfer of ownership or custody of such dangerous animal. 
(i)  The owner or keeper of a dangerous animal shall report, in writing or by telephone, the death of such animal to the animal control supervisor immediately. The death of such animal shall be verified by a licensed veterinarian or an animal control officer. 
(j)  This section does not apply to police dogs, as defined in F.S. § 843.19. 
(k)  Any violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a civil infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), per violation. 
(l)  If an animal that previously has been declared dangerous under this chapter attacks or bites a person or domestic animal without provocation, the owner of the animal, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided under F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. In addition, the animal shall be immediately confiscated by the county animal control, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or impounded and held ten (10) business days, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. This ten-day time period shall allow the owner or keeper to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available. The owner or keeper shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the animal during any appeal procedure. 
(m)  If an animal that has not been previously declared dangerous under this chapter aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or death of any human, the owner of the dangerous animal, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. In addition, the animal shall be immediately confiscated by the county animal control, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or impounded and held ten (10) business days, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. This ten-day time period shall allow the owner or keeper to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available. The owner or keeper shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the animal during any appeal procedure. 
(n)  If an animal that previously has been declared dangerous under this chapter attacks or bites a person or domestic animal without provocation, the owner of the animal, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided under F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083, or 775.084. In addition, the animal shall be immediately confiscated by the county animal control, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or impounded and held ten (10) business days, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. This ten-day time period shall allow the owner or keeper to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available. The owner or keeper shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the animal during any appeal procedure. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-10), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-68. - Responsibility for animals. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of any animal shall exercise reasonable care to protect humans, other animals, or property from injury or damage caused by the behavior of such animal. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of any animal shall exercise reasonable care to prevent such animal, while unattended, from leaving the premises of such owner or keeper by: 
(1)  Confinement in a secure enclosure, fence, or pen from which the animal cannot dig, climb, jump, or escape, and which is locked when the animal remains unattended; 
(2)  Restraint by chain, cable and trolley, or other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape; or 
(3)  Leash and physical control of a person capable of preventing such animal from escaping. 
(c)  The owner or keeper of an animal shall exercise reasonable care to maintain such animal while off the premises of such owner or keeper by: 
(1)  Confinement in a secure enclosure, fence, or pen from which the animal cannot dig, climb, jump, or escape; 
(2)  Confinement in a vehicle from which the animal cannot climb, jump, or escape; or 
(3)  Leash and physical control of a person capable of preventing such animal from escaping. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-11), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-69. - Animals at large; confinement of animals. 
(a)  No animal shall be permitted or allowed to be at large. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of an animal to permit or allow the animal to be at large. 
(c)  No animal shall be permitted or allowed to cause injury, or threat of injury, to any person, or cause any property damage to a person other than the owner, as a result of the animal being at large. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of an animal to permit or allow the animal to violate this subsection. 
(d)  No animal shall be permitted or allowed to defecate or urinate upon any public property, or any private property, without permission of the property owner. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of an animal to permit or allow the animal to defecate or urinate upon any public property, or any private property, without permission of the property owner. 
(e)  No animal shall be permitted or allowed into or on any public park or beach; provided, however, that an area in public parks may be designated for animals by resolution of the board of county commissioners or by the city. In that event, the area provided for animals must be properly identified and posted by the county or the city. 
(f)  It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of an animal to permit or allow the animal into or on any public beach or any public park not designated for animals and not properly identified and posted. However, a deaf person or totally or partially blind person or physically disabled person, as defined in F.S. § 413.08 shall have the right to be accompanied into or on any public park or beach by a guide dog, which is especially trained for such purpose, and while being used to assist such person, without violating this section. 
(g)  Any animal being transported in the open bed of a pickup truck or other similar vehicle from which the animal can easily escape shall be confined inside a locked animal carrier or restrained by a minimum of two (2) tethers, with one (1) tether being affixed to the opposite side of the truck or other similar vehicle, and both tethers being attached to the collar or harness of such animal. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of an animal, as well as the driver of the pickup truck or other similar vehicle being used to transport an animal, to refuse or fail to confine or restrain the animal being transported as required by this section. 
(h)  Any female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a secure enclosure, veterinary hospital, or boarding facility so as to prevent such dog or cat from coming into contact with another dog or cat, except for intentional breeding purposes. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or keeper of a female dog or cat in heat to refuse or fail to confine the dog or cat as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-12), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 5-70. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  The provisions of F.S. §§ 828.12 and 828.13 are hereby adopted by reference in this chapter and shall be enforced as if fully set forth in this chapter. A copy of F.S. ch. 828 is attached to the ordinance enacting this chapter, and is available for inspection in the office of the clerk to the board of county commissioners. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to commit an act or omission or cause an act to be committed in violation of F.S. §§ 828.12 or 828.13. 
(Ord. No. 4-1991, § 1(4-13), 4-9-91)  
Secs. 5-71—5-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LIVESTOCK AND FOWL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-86. - Certain animals restricted; permits for certain animals required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept within the city any horses, hogs, sheep, goats, cattle, chickens or other farm animals, and any domestic animal from the wild, except: 
(1)  The aforementioned animals shall be allowed in any GU-zoned district, provided the regulations as provided in section 65.11 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Volume II, are complied with. 
(2)  Animals as aforedescribed shall be permitted in other districts, provided they are an incidental or necessary part of a licensed business, i.e., veterinarian, pet shop, etc. 
(3)  Horses or ponies may be allowed in any district in the city provided a permit as provided for in section 5-101 has been secured. 
(4)  Seamless banded homing pigeons for sporting and/or exhibition purposes shall be permitted as accessory uses in any residential use district. 
(5)  Backyard chickens shall be permitted on a single-family properties subject to all regulations described below: 
a.  For the purposes of this section, the terms "backyard chicken" or "chicken" refers to hens, or female chickens, only. It shall be unlawful to keep ducks, geese, turkeys, peafowl, roosters or male chickens, or any other fowl. 
b.  No more than four (4) chickens shall be permitted on any lot or parcel. 
c.  Chickens may only be kept for personal use. Selling chickens, eggs, feathers or chicken manure, or the breeding of chickens for commercial purposes shall be prohibited. 
d.  Chickens shall not be slaughtered on site. 
e.  All stored feed must be kept in a pest-proof container or be kept inside a secured structure. 
f.  Chicken coops and enclosures must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times including dry bedding material. Activities permitted by this section must be conducted in a manner that does not create a public nuisance such as odor, noise, or the attraction of pests. 
g.  Chickens must be kept within a coop or enclosure and may not be released or set free to roam unless such roaming is confined to the fenced rear yard of the subject property. 
h.  Chicken coops and enclosures must be screened from neighboring properties with either an opaque fence and/or landscaping. 
i.  Chicken coops and enclosures shall be located in the rear yard only. No chicken coop or enclosure shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any rear or side property line. Side corner setbacks shall meet the principal structure setbacks. 
j.  A permit is required. Applications shall be filed with the city clerk's office together with a filing fee to be set by resolution of council. The applications must include a site sketch that demonstrates compliance with the regulations in the subsections above. The applicant must also provide proof of successful completion of a University of Florida/IFAS Backyard Chicken Training class or an equivalent class approved by the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee is authorized to revoke an issued permit if the property is no longer in compliance or is creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 21-2017, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Cross reference— General use (GU) district, § 65.11 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 5-87. - Nuisances. 
Any horse, hog, sheep, goat, cow, chicken or other farm animal which causes frequent or long-continued noise that can be heard at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the fence enclosing the animal, or which causes serious annoyance to neighboring residents, or shall interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the property of a reasonable man, is hereby declared a nuisance and considered in violation of this chapter and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided for in section 1-15 and section 5-7 et seq. 
(Code 1963, § 4-86(3))  
Secs. 5-88—5-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HORSES 
 
Sec. 5-101. - Permit required. 
Any person may apply for a permit for the keeping of horses or ponies in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1963, § 4-86(2)(a); Ord. No. 65-2003, § 1, 10-28-03)  
Sec. 5-102. - Application. 
An application for a permit shall be filed with the city clerk together with a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which fee shall accompany the application. The application form must be fully completed and the applicant shall include as a part of his application a map or sketch showing the location, size and dimensions of the parcel, the relationship of the site to surrounding property and buildings, and the location of fences as required in this article. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of the application by the clerk, the city manager, or his designee, shall approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the request. 
(Code 1963, § 4-86(2)(a); Ord. No. 65-2003, § 1, 10-28-03)  
Sec. 5-103. - Considerations in issuance of permit. 
The factors considered in determining whether a permit shall be issued are as follows: 
(1)  Will public safety and health and welfare be assured? 
(2)  Will there be any detrimental effect to surrounding property owners? 
(3)  Will all design requirements be met? 
(4)  Will any nuisances be created? 
(Code 1963, § 4-86(2)(b); Ord. No. 65-2003, § 1, 10-28-03)  
Sec. 5-104. - Design requirements for permit. 
Prior to the issuance of the permit for horses or ponies, the city manager, or his designee, shall inspect the property to determine whether or not the applicant complies with the following design requirements: 
(1)  Size of parcel. The minimum size of the parcel and number of horses or ponies permitted shall comply with the following schedule: 
a.  One (1) acre, one (1) horse or pony. 
b.  Two (2) acres, two (2) horses or ponies. 
c.  Three (3) acres, three (3) horses or ponies. 
d.  Not more than three (3) horses or ponies shall be permitted on any parcel, other than a GU district. 
e.  The average depth to average width shall not be in excess of 4:1. 
(2)  Fencing. The parcel on which the horses or ponies are to be kept shall be enclosed by a fence at least four (4) feet in height, capable of securing the animal. 
(3)  Relationship to surrounding property. No horse or pony shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any residence, except the residence of the applicant. 
(Code 1963, § 4-86(2)(c); Ord. No. 65-2003, § 1, 10-28-03)  
Sec. 5-105. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  If a permit for horses and ponies has been issued and it is found that the applicant has violated any of the aforementioned design requirements or a condition imposed by the permit, the city manager shall be authorized to revoke the permit. 
(b)  The applicant shall have the right to appeal the revocation of the permit to the board of adjustments and appeal as provided for in Chapter 47, Division 2 of the Land Development Regulations. 
(Code 1963, § 4-86(2)(d); Ord. No. 65-2003, § 1, 10-28-03)  
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL DISPLAYS OR EXHIBITS 
 
Sec. 5-106. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and animals by establishing a process and regulations pertaining to the display and exhibition of animals exposed to the public for entertainment or amusement on property within the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 20-2014, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 5-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Display or exhibit shall mean any exhibition, act, show, photographic opportunity, ride, performance or similar undertaking whether or not a fee is charged. Display or exhibit shall not include the use or exhibition of animals solely for animal-related educational purposes by groups, institutions or individuals. 
Educational purposes means teaching and instructing with the intent and effect of imparting knowledge to others. 
(Ord. No. 20-2014, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 5-108. - Animal displays or exhibits. 
(a)  No person or entity shall exhibit or display to the public for entertainment, amusement or promotion any live animal on property within the city unless they have first secured all federal and state licenses and permits authorizing such exhibit or display and shall obtain all applicable city permits and business tax receipts. 
(b)  In addition to complying with all federal and state regulations regarding the proper treatment of animals on exhibit or display, any person or entity that exhibits or displays to the public for entertainment, amusement or promotion any live animal on property within the city must comply with the following: 
(1)  There shall be no exhibition or display of any sick, injured or crippled animal. 
(2)  The use of techniques and devices that cause physical injury, torment or pain and suffering to animals are prohibited. 
(3)  The animals shall not be kept on hard surfaces such as concrete, asphalt, or gravel. Animals shall only be permitted on unimproved, natural surfaces and shall not be kept or displayed in an environment that endangers the health or safety of the animal. 
(4)  The animals must be kept in appropriate housing and husbandry conditions including regular access to food, water, shade from direct sunlight, shelter from inclement weather, nest boxes or dens, relief from human interaction, and veterinary care. 
(5)  The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl whereby frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall annoy or disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivities across real property boundaries is prohibited. 
(6)  Solid fecal matter of any such animal deposited on any street, alley or other public or private property is prohibited and such must be immediately removed by the owner or person in charge. 
(c)  The city, through officers of its code enforcement department, police department, or the Brevard County Animal Control Officers, (officer) may terminate any exhibition or display of live animals if, in their discretion, said display or exhibition poses a danger to an animal(s) or to humans, or is cruel and inhumane. 
(d)  Prior to termination of the exhibition or display, the animal exhibitor or his representative or employee, if available at the site of display, shall be informed of the danger posed by or objection to said exhibition or display, and shall permit a period of time to correct or remedy same. Failure to take immediate action by the exhibitor to correct the condition or danger as required, shall result in the termination of the exhibition or display by the officer. 
(e)  Any party aggrieved by termination of an exhibition and display under this subdivision may request an appeal in writing to the city manager within three (3) calendar days of said decision. The city manager or his designee shall schedule a meeting within two (2) business days of receipt of the written request and may overrule, affirm or modify the decision of the officer. 
(Ord. No. 20-2014, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 5-109. - Penalties. 
In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, offenses under this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 20-2014, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; housing code, § 10-26 et seq.; building contractors licenses required, § 11-126 et seq.; swimming pool regulations, Ch. 18; utility requirements and connections, § 39-91 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; sign regulations, § 39-151 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; subdivision regulations, Ch. 51, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; zoning district regulations, Ch. 59, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Building standards, F.S. § 553.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Alteration, etc., to conform to chapter. 
(a)  No building or structure shall be constructed, altered, repaired or removed, nor shall the equipment of a building, structure or premises be constructed, installed, altered, repaired or removed, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No building or structure shall be altered in any manner that would be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any authorized rule or approval of the building official made and issued thereunder. 
(Code 1963, § 5-2)  
Sec. 6-2. - Use of building erected or altered in violation of chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy or use a building or structure, or part thereof, that has been erected or altered in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, § 5-3) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-3. - Authority to stop work contrary to public welfare. 
Whenever in the opinion of the building official, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, the continuance of a building operation is contrary to public welfare, he may order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of work until the condition in violation has been remedied. 
(Code 1963, § 5-4)  
Secs. 6-4—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING OFFICIAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Building inspection department, § 32. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-76 et seq.; standards of conduct, § 2-116 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq.; pensions and retirement, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Office created; appointment; term; appointment of substitute during absence. 
The office of building official is hereby created. The building official shall be appointed by and under the general control of the city manager. During temporary absence or disability of the building official, the city manager shall designate a substitute to act in matters that require prompt official attention. 
(Code 1963, § 5-35)  
Sec. 6-32. - Qualifications. 
To be eligible to appointment, the building official shall have had at least ten (10) years' experience as an architect, civil engineer or superintendent of construction. He shall be generally informed on the quality and strength of building materials, on the prevailing methods of building construction, on good practice in fire prevention, on the accepted requirements for safe facilities, and on the proper installation of plumbing, electric wiring, elevators and other installations for the safety, comfort and convenience of occupants. He shall be in good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections of buildings in the course of construction. He shall not have any interest whatsoever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in connection with building construction. He shall be duly licensed by the department of business and professional regulations under Florida Statute, Chapter 468, as a building code administrator. 
(Code 1963, § 5-36; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 6-33. - Duties generally. 
The building official shall receive applications required by this chapter, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all laws, ordinances and the provisions of this chapter relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of buildings and structures, except as may be otherwise provided for. He shall, when directed by the city manager, or when the interests of the city so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this chapter and render written reports on the same. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with this chapter, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require exit facilities in existing buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(Code 1963, § 5-37) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-34. - Authority to adopt rules and regulations; investigations; publications; hearings; to have effect of ordinances; amending and repealing. 
(a)  For carrying into effect its provisions, the building official shall adopt rules as prescribed in this chapter and consistent therewith, it being the intent of this requirement that the standards of federal or state bureaus, national technical organizations or fire underwriters, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall serve as a guide in fixing the minimum rules or practice under this chapter. 
(b)  For the purpose of securing for the public the benefits of new developments in the building industry and yet insuring public safety, he shall make or cause to be made investigations, or may accept duly authenticated reports from reliable sources, of new materials or modes of construction, intended for use in the construction of buildings or structures in the municipality which are not provided for in this chapter, and shall promulgate rules setting forth the conditions under which such materials or modes of construction may be used; provided, however, that no rule shall be promulgated by the building official unless and until such rule has been approved by the city manager or the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 5-38)  
Sec. 6-35. - Records. 
The building official shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, or permits issued, or certificates issued, of inspection made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. 
(Code 1963, § 5-39) 
State Law reference— Public records act, F.S. ch. 119.  
Sec. 6-36. - Right of entry. 
The building official, in the discharge of his duties, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1963, § 5-41) 
State Law reference— Requirement of an inspection warrant, F.S. ch. 933.  
Secs. 6-37—6-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-56. - Construction permit required; inspection, approval prior to use or occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, repair, remove or demolish or to commence the construction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of a building, swimming pool or structure in the city without first obtaining a formal permit from the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any addition, alteration, building or structure for which a building permit was issued until it has been inspected and approved by the building official. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install a mobile/manufactured home or alter or expand any existing mobile/manufactured home within the limits of the city without first obtaining from the building official a permit for said installation, alteration or expansion. 
(Code 1963, § 5-20; Ord. No. 38-2017, § 1, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 47-2017, § 1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 34-2018, § 1, 7-24-18)  
Sec. 6-57. - Application form. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made in writing and filed with the building official and shall be submitted in such form as the building official may prescribe. 
(b)  Such application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work. If such application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee or the person making the application that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that the person making the application is authorized to make such application. 
(c)  Such application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and the owner, and, if the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible officers. 
(d)  Such applications shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by the building official regarding the proposed work. 
(e)  A schedule of fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. The schedule of fees shall establish and review fees for various types of permits. The schedule of fees may be obtained from the building department or the City of Titusville website. 
(Code 1963, § 5-21; Ord. No. 23-2016, § 1, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 6-58. - Qualification for obtaining permits. 
Applications for permits shall be accepted only from contractors holding a current certificate of competency and license when required, in their respective fields and against whom no revocation or suspension is pending, except as follows: 
(1)  Owners of property when acting as their own contractor and providing all material supervision themselves, when building or improving farm outbuildings or one-family or two-family residences or swimming pools, on such property for the occupancy or use of such owners and not offered for sale or lease, or building or improving commercial buildings at a cost of under seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) on such property for the occupancy or use of such owners and not offered for sale or lease. In an action brought under this chapter, proof of the sale or lease, or offering for sale or lease, of more than one (1) such structure by the owner-builder within one (1) year after completion of one (1) such structure is prima facie evidence that the construction was undertaken for purposes of sale or lease. This subsection does not exempt any person who is employed by such owner and who acts in the capacity of a contractor. To qualify for exemption under this subsection, an owner must personally appear and sign the building permit application. The city shall provide the person with a disclosure statement in substantially the following form: 
"OWNER/BUILDER DISCLOSURE 
STATEMENT 
1.  I understand that state law requires construction to be done by a licensed contractor and have applied for an owner-builder permit under an exemption from the law. The exemption specifies that I, as the owner of the property listed, may act as my own contractor with certain restrictions even though I do not have a license. 
2.  I understand that building permits are not required to be signed by a property owner unless he or she is responsible for the construction and is not hiring a licensed contractor to assume responsibility. 
3.  I understand that, as an owner-builder, I am the responsible party of record on a permit. I understand that I may protect myself from potential financial risk by hiring a licensed contractor and having the permit filed in his or her name instead of my own name. I also understand that a contractor is required by law to be licensed in Florida and to list his or her license numbers on permits and contracts. 
4.  I understand that I may build or improve a one-family or two-family residence or a farm outbuilding. I may also build or improve a commercial building if the costs do not exceed $75,000. The building or residence must be for my own use or occupancy. It may not be built or substantially improved for sale or lease. If a building or residence that I have built or substantially improved myself is sold or leased within 1 year after the construction is complete, the law will presume that I built or substantially improved it for sale or lease, which violates the exemption. 
5.  I understand that, as the owner-builder, I must provide direct, onsite supervision of the construction. 
6.  I understand that I may not hire an unlicensed person to act as my contractor or to supervise persons working on my building or residence. It is my responsibility to ensure that the persons whom I employ have the licenses required by law and by county or municipal ordinance. 
7.  I understand that it is a frequent practice of unlicensed persons to have the property owner obtain an owner-builder permit that erroneously implies that the property owner is providing his or her own labor and materials. I, as an owner-builder, may be held liable and subjected to serious financial risk for any injuries sustained by an unlicensed person or his or her employees while working on my property. My homeowner's insurance may not provide coverage for those injuries. I am willfully acting as an owner-builder and am aware of the limits of my insurance coverage for injuries to workers on my property. 
8.  I understand that I may not delegate the responsibility for supervising work to a licensed contractor who is not licensed to perform the work being done. Any person working on my building who is not licensed must work under my direct supervision and must be employed by me, which means that I must comply with laws requiring the withholding of federal income tax and social security contributions under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (F1CA) and must provide workers' compensation for the employee. I understand that my failure to follow these laws may subject me to serious financial risk. 
9.  I agree that, as the party legally and financially responsible for this proposed construction activity, I will abide by all applicable laws and requirements that govern owner-builders as well as employers. I also understand that the construction must comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, building codes, and zoning regulations. 
10.  I understand that I may obtain more information regarding my obligations as an employer from the Internal Revenue Service, the United States Small Business Administration, the Florida Department of Financial Services, and the Florida Department of Revenue. I also understand that I may contact the Florida Construction Industry Licensing Board at 850-487-1395 or http://www.myfloridalicense.com/dbpr/pro/cilb/index.html (Internet website address) for more information about licensed contractors. 
11.  I am aware of, and consent to, an owner-builder building permit applied for in my name and understands that I am the party legally and financially responsible for the proposed construction activity at the following address: 
_____
12.  I agree to notify the City of Titusville, FL immediately of any additions, deletions, or changes to any of the information that I have provided on this disclosure. 
Licensed contractors are regulated by laws designed to protect the public. If you contract with a person who does not have a license, the Construction Industry Licensing Board and Department of Business and Professional Regulation may be unable to assist you with any financial loss that you sustain as a result of a complaint. Your only remedy against an unlicensed contractor may be in civil court. It is also important for you to understand that, if an unlicensed contractor or employee of an individual or firm is injured while working on your property, you may be held liable for damages. If you obtain an owner-builder permit and wish to hire a licensed contractor, you will be responsible for verifying whether the contractor is properly licensed and the status of the contractor's workers' compensation coverage. 
Owners violating the above shall be subject to a penalty and/or fines under Florida Statute 455.228 and 775.082 and may be issued a citation and/or civil penalty. 
Before a building permit can be issued, this disclosure statement must be completed and signed by the property owner and returned to the local permitting agency responsible for issuing the permit. A copy of the property owner's driver license, the notarized signature of the property owner, or other type of verification acceptable to the local permitting agency is required when the permit is issued. 
OWNERS SIGNATURE ___________ 
STATE OF FLORIDA, COUNTY OF _______ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this ___ Day of _______, 20___ by ___________ 
who is personally known to me, or has produced a valid _______ 
I ___________ (Seal) Notary as to Owner or Agent W/Seal 
PERMIT # _______ DATE: _______" 
(2)  The building official may require proof that the applicant is the owner of the property and the lessee or tenant has permission from the owner of the property upon which the construction or installation is to take place. 
(3)  General, building and residential contractors may perform any work listed under specialty contractors to the point that it is included under their normal definition of work and provided that it is not plumbing, electrical or mechanical except as authorized by F.S. § 489.113(3), provided that it is a normal part of their general contract. 
(Code 1963, § 5-47; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 1, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 47-2017, § 2, 12-12-17) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11; building contractors license, § 11-126 et seq. 
State Law reference— Exemptions, F.S. § 489.101.  
Sec. 6-59. - Amendments. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought. Such amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the original application. There is herein established a nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1963, § 5-22; Ord. No. 29-1997, § 1, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 2, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-60. - Plans to accompany application. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such drawings of the proposed work drawn to scale and/or dimensions, including, but not limited to, any floor plans, sections, elevations, plot plan, and structural details as may be necessary for the review and construction of the proposed work. No work will be approved unless detailed on the approved plans. 
(b)  Plans for new construction on commercial property, structural modifications of existing commercial structures and significant remodeling on commercial property exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in valuation, structural modifications of existing residential buildings, as determined by the building official, and new construction of or modifications to multifamily dwellings, are required to be signed and sealed by a duly registered design architect and/or engineer as appropriate in accordance with standards established by the state. 
(c)  No permit may be issued for any building construction, erection, alteration, repair, or addition unless the applicant for such permit provides to the building official any of the following documents which apply to the construction for which the permit is to be issued: 
(1)  Electrical documents for any new building or addition which requires an aggregate service capacity of six hundred (600) amperes (two hundred forty (240) volts) or more on a residential electrical system or eight hundred (800) amperes (two hundred forty (240) volts) or more on a commercial or industrial electrical system and which costs more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000). 
(2)  Plumbing documents for any new building or addition which requires a plumbing system with more than two hundred fifty (250) fixture units or which costs more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00). 
(3)  Fire sprinkler documents for any new building or addition which includes a fire sprinkler system which contains fifty (50) or more sprinkler heads. 
(4)  Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning documents for any new building or addition which requires more than a fifteen-ton-per-system capacity which is designed to accommodate one hundred (100) or more persons or for which the system costs more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00). This subsection does not include any document for the replacement or repair of an existing system in which the work does not require altering a structural part of the building or for work on a residential one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family structure. 
(5)  Any specialized mechanical, electrical, or plumbing document for any new building or addition which includes a medical gas, oxygen, steam, vacuum, toxic air filtration, halon or fire detection and alarm system which costs more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
No such document shall be valid unless a professional engineer who possesses a valid certificate of registration has signed, dated and stamped such document as provided in F.S. § 471.025 or as exempted under F.S. § 471.003(2)(h). 
(d)  Architects' and engineers' plans and specifications shall not be altered in any way except for minor nonstructural details by the contractor or owner. Structural alterations shall be made only by an architect and engineer of record in the form of an addendum to the plans and specifications, and submitted to the building department for examination as to code compliance and approval before any changes in structural construction shall be undertaken by the contractor or owner. 
(e)  The building department may require that the construction contractor, architect or engineer of record, certify completion of every project before a certificate of occupancy is issued. The certificate shall be in the form of a statement that the completed construction complies with the plans, specifications and building codes. In cases where changes, adjustments or refinements have been made during construction, the architect or engineer shall furnish as-built plans and specifications or notations made on the approved set of plans with the certificate of completion. 
(f)  Architects' and engineers' plans and specifications shall be complete with impressed seal and signature and date on each page. Owners' plans and specifications shall be signed and dated on each page. 
(g)  The building official may withhold the building permit to any contractor or homeowner pending necessary receipt of details or information for processing of plans. 
(Code 1963, § 5-23; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 3, 5-12-15) 
State Law reference— Requirements for permits for threshold buildings, etc., and requirements for plans, F.S. § 553.79.  
Sec. 6-61. - Site/plot plans. 
(a)  At application submittal the building official shall require the applicant for any site development or new construction permit to furnish a professional survey of the land. In addition, to this survey, the applicant shall also submit a site/plot plan showing all existing and proposed improvements thereto indicating not only the location but the finished floor elevation and the crown of the street. It shall also be the responsibility of the applicant to have the proposed structure(s) located to conform to the required zoning regulations. The site/plot plan shall be drawn to scale showing accurately the size and exact location of all proposed new construction, or in the case of demolition, of such construction as is to be demolished, and of all existing buildings and structures that are to remain. This site/plot plan shall also contain grading and drainage data in order to establish compliance with drainage and flood control regulations. 
(b)  A form board survey shall be performed after the finished floor is established but prior to the placement of any concrete. The form board survey shall bear the embossed seal of a state registered land surveyor and include all setback dimensions and finished floor elevations. No additional work shall be performed until the form board survey has been approved by the building official. 
(c)  In addition to the form board survey, a final as-built survey shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This final survey shall include all improvements, setbacks, driveways, sidewalks and impervious surfaces. In addition, the final as-built survey will contain all relevant floodplain details and shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(d)  No certificate of occupancy will be issued for any structure until compliance with the requirements of this section has been met and all outstanding site development permit requirements are completed and approved. 
(Code 1963, § 5-24; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 4, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 31-2017, § 3, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 6-62. - Examination of application; rejection, reapplication. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building official to examine applications for permits, within a reasonable time after filing. 
(b)  Applications and plans for permits which after due written notice by the department, have no activity or revision for a period of ninety (90) days shall be deemed abandoned and said application will be destroyed after ninety (90) days unless the applicant picks up the application and plans from the building official. Any reapplication for permit shall be treated as a new application and will be processed in accordance with codes and standards of the date of reapplication. 
(Code 1963, § 5-25; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 5, 5-12-15) 
State Law reference— Requirements for issuance of building permits, F.S. § 553.79.  
Sec. 6-63. - Building official to sign permits. 
Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this chapter shall have his signature affixed thereto, but this shall not prevent him from authorizing a subordinate to affix such signature. 
(Code 1963, § 5-26)  
Sec. 6-64. - Expiration of permits. 
(a)  A permit under which no work is commenced within six (6) months after issuance shall expire by limitation and shall expire regardless, after the expiration of one (1) year from date of issuance. However, one (1) or more extensions of a permit of ninety (90) days as allowed under the Florida Building Code may be granted upon approval of the building official. Permits may be renewed by the building official for a period(s) of one (1) year upon payment of a renewal fee as established in the applicable fee schedule. Approval shall only be granted for permits when an applicant is continuously working toward completion of such work. 
(b)  Upon expiration of a permit, all building materials and debris shall be required to be removed from the site and the land returned to its original topography. The owner of the property, as well as the contractor obtaining the permit, shall have the responsibility of removal of any materials and debris and restoring the site and land to its original topography. 
(Code 1963, § 5-27; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 6, 5-12-15) 
State Law reference— Time limit for issuance of single-family residential dwellings, F.S. § 553.79(14).  
Sec. 6-65. - Revocation. 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Illegal issuance of permit. 
(2)  Material misrepresentation in obtaining the permit. 
(3)  Mistake in granting the permit. 
(4)  A breach of lawful conditions upon which the permit was issued. 
(5)  The permit violates a zoning ordinance or ordinances or any law. 
(Code 1963, § 5-28)  
Sec. 6-66. - Stop work order. 
Whenever the building official shall determine that construction has been started without building permits as required by the building codes adopted by the city, he shall post a "stop work" order on the structure, notify the owner and/or contractor as to code violations and corrections required, and allow forty-eight (48) hours for the owner to apply for a building or demolition permit, after which time with continued violation of the building code, the building official shall take the necessary legal steps to ensure compliance. 
(Code 1963, § 5-28)  
Sec. 6-67. - Building permits formerly issued within newly incorporated areas. 
All newly annexed property upon which current construction activity based on building permits issued by another political subdivision is in progress and incomplete shall be completed under the authority of the original permitting agency. No additional building permits shall be issued by any other political subdivision after the effective date of the annexation, and all preannexation building permits shall expire on the first anniversary of the annexation. In the event of construction being incomplete at the expiration of the permit, a permit shall be obtained from the city building department. Alternatively, the construction may be completed in accordance with codes and standards of the county, provided the engineer or architect of record or inspection firm of record certifies the project is completed in accordance with applicable plans, specifications and applicable codes. All plans and specifications for the construction shall be brought into compliance with the codes and standards as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 5-30)  
Sec. 6-68. - Inspections and building site. 
(a)  All permits issued by the department shall be accompanied by a field inspection card. Plans, when required, shall include an approved field set which will be returned at the permit issuance and must be maintained on the construction site at all times during construction. A permit-posting board, as prescribed by the department, is required to be maintained on the site of all new construction and major renovation work. The posting board shall provide sufficient space for all inspection cards and provide a weather-tight container for the field copy of plans. The permit-posting board shall be securely erected on the parcel, lot or part thereof upon which the improvement is located. A duplicate inspection card shall be provided for a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Reinspection fees of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged when additional inspections are required due to: 
(1)  Improper/wrong address on inspection. 
(2)  Failed work. 
(3)  Additional work of the level of the previous inspection after the completion of the inspection, i.e. modifying or adding additional partitions (framing) after framing inspection approval. 
(4)  Work not substantially complete at the time of inspection as scheduled. 
(5)  Inspection hard card not posted, in accordance with subsection (a) above, at the time of inspection. 
(6)  Approved field plans not available on site for inspection. 
(7)  Failure by contractor to provide access to area to be inspected including, but not limited to, multistory roofs, bond/tie beams, and access roads. 
(c)  Any sidewalks broken during any construction, including swimming pools, shall be repaired to city standards prior to a request being made for a final inspection. 
(Code 1963, § 5-31; Ord. No. 29-1997, § 2, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 43-2002, § 1, 9-27-02; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 7, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 47-2017, § 3, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 6-69. - Proof of waste disposal capability to accompany application. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be accompanied by proof that waste materials which may be generated by the work to be performed will be satisfactorily disposed of by an on-site dumpster or in another manner satisfactory to the building official. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the approved method of waste material disposal is a violation of this section for which the building official may revoke the permit or issue a stop-work order, the certificate of competency of the permit applicant and any person authorizing the permit applicant to obtain the permit may be suspended or revoked, and the permit applicant and any person authorizing the permit applicant to obtain the permit may be assessed the cost of disposing of the waste material to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(Code 1963, § 5-32)  
Sec. 6-70. - Burying of debris from construction; permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, developer, contractor, or their agents or representatives to bury organic debris upon any property in the city in connection with the clearing or removal of organic debris. Any person found violating this section may be subject to the following action by the city: 
(1)  Any outstanding permits that the person may hold may be revoked or work stopped until such time as the violator cures the violation. 
(2)  If a violator does not cure the violation within a reasonable time period, the city may enter the property and correct the violation and impose a lien against the property for the costs to cure the violation. 
(3)  The violation may be prosecuted through the code enforcement board of the city. 
(4)  The city may take such other appropriate action including applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief. 
(Code 1963, § 5-33; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 8, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 13-66 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-71. - Compliance testing. 
The building official may require testing of site conditions, soils, soil compaction, materials, fixtures, or other components of construction activity. All testing shall be accomplished by an independent agency adequately qualified to perform the tests and all costs of required tests shall be borne by the contractor of record. The building official must receive a copy of the test report. 
(Code 1963, § 5-12)  
Secs. 6-72—6-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING STANDARDS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum building codes, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-91. - Finished floor elevations. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, the surface of the lowest level of any building or structure designed for human occupancy, excluding parking garages, shall be not less than twelve (12) inches above the mean crown of the adjoining street or streets to the lot or parcel upon which the building is constructed. The building official may waive this requirement when he is satisfied through submittal of a topographic survey and other supporting engineering documentation, that the conditions of terrain and soils provide adequate protection against the one-hundred-year flood criteria. Other considerations which must be addressed include sanitary waste disposal, either through public or private systems. In addition, the building official will require certification, from a registered engineer that the finished floor is at least twelve (12) inches above the base flood elevation (one-hundred-year flood) for the area and may further require a release of liability signed by the property owner, duly recorded in the county records, releasing the city from any claims arising out of the granting of this waiver. 
(b)  The contractor of record shall ensure that all property corners are staked and flagged. Whenever a portion of the proposed structure is closer than two (2) feet from the required property line setback, the line shall also be stringed prior to a foundation or foundation/slab inspection being approved. The inspector shall require verification as specified in subsection (c) below, only when taping from the required string line is inconclusive. 
(c)  The contractor shall be responsible for engaging the services of a duly licensed surveyor or engineer to perform a foundation survey and a final survey on all new or substantially improved structures permitted after the effective date of this section. The required survey shall include setbacks from lot lines dimensioned on the drawing and the relative elevation of the finished floor to the crown of the road and/or one-hundred-year flood elevation, except as modified in section 44.30(b) of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II. The foundation survey must be submitted to the city's inspection agency as soon as possible and prior to the next regular inspection requirement. The final survey shall be submitted prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(d)  Substantially improved structure shall mean an addition of fifty (50) percent or more of floor area. 
(Code 1963, § 5-11; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 9, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, § 35-81 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; application for a development permit, requirements, § 35-87(b), Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-92. - Prohibition of shipping containers for use as residential structures. 
Shipping containers are not permitted to be installed on any residentially zoned or residentially utilized property for use as a residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 8-2018, § 1, 2-27-18)  
Secs. 6-93—6-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Building code adopted. 
(a)  The latest publication of the Florida Building Code, as it may change from time to time, published by the International Code Council, Inc. including Chapter 1, Administration, with all appendices, standards, requirements and penalties provided in such code are hereby adopted by reference as the building code of the city. All provisions in such code are made a part of this chapter the same as if set forth in this section in full. Wherever the provisions of the building code conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All references to the building code which are found in this Code of Ordinances refer to the edition of the Florida Building Code, adopted in this section. Nothing in this code is intended to prevent the use of systems, methods or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety to those prescribed by this code, providing technical documentation is submitted to the authority having jurisdiction to demonstrate equivalency and the system, method or device is approved for the intended purposes. 
(b)  The specific requirements of this code may be modified by the authority having jurisdiction to allow alternate arrangements that will secure as nearly equivalent safety to life from fire as practical, but in no case shall the modification afford less safety to life than, in the judgment of the authority having jurisdiction, that which would be provided with compliance with the corresponding provisions contained in this code. Buildings with alternative fire protection features accepted by the authority having jurisdiction shall be considered as conforming with the code. 
(Code 1963, § 5-5; Ord. No. 25-1991, § 1, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 1, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 10, 5-12-15) 
State Law reference— Resolution of conflicts with fire safety code, F.S. § 553.73(8).  
Sec. 6-102. - Amendments. 
The following administrative amendments to the Florida Building Code, adopted in section 6-101 are hereby adopted: 
(1)  Section 102.2.2 Moving buildings—Written application must be filed. Any person desiring to move a building shall first file with the building department a written application setting forth the following information and items: 
(a)  Type and kind of building to be moved. 
(b)  Not less than three (3) photographs satisfactory to building official, showing existing building and site of proposed location. 
(c)  The extreme dimensions of the length, height and width of the building. 
(d)  Present building location and proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers. 
(e)  The approximate time such building will be upon the streets, and the route that will be taken from present to new location, with approval of chief of police as to route and time of moving. 
(f)  Certificate from an agency duly licensed in insect control showing that the building is free of termites. 
(g)  Posting of a bond either in cash or surety company bond meeting with the approval of the city attorney in a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), deposited with the clerk of the city; if a cash bond or if a surety bond, payable to the order of the city conditioned upon the applicant's compliance within ninety (90) days from issue of permit in all respects with the zoning regulations, building codes, and ordinances pertaining to the area on which such building shall have been moved. 
(h)  Insurance certificate of liability insurance of mover in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) each person, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each accident, one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.000) each person. 
(2)  Approval or rejection of application. All applications to move a building to a new site within the corporate boundaries shall be referred by the building inspector to the planning and zoning board for recommendation before any permit is issued by him, and no application shall be recommended by such board unless it is made to appear to the reasonable satisfaction of such board that each of the following conditions will be met: 
(a)  That such building will not constitute a nuisance in its proposed new location. 
(b)  That the moving of such building will not be contrary to the public safety, convenience and welfare. 
(c)  That the moving of the building to the proposed new location will not substantially impair the value of property in the vicinity of the new location and lying within five hundred (500) feet thereof, and in determining such effect on property values the board may consider among other things the age of the building to be moved as compared to the ages of buildings in the new neighborhood, whether the size, style of architecture, structural integrity, and materials used in the building to be moved are in reasonable harmony with the development of the area where the building is to be moved, the ratio of building area to lot area for the building to be moved as compared with existing development in the new neighborhood, and the opinions of expert appraisers and city planning officials. Approval of any such application by the planning and zoning board shall not be deemed to be a waiver of the requirements of the building, fire district, zoning and other ordinances of the city. Applications under this section shall be processed by the planning and zoning board in the same manner as to matters of notice and other details, and decisions as applications for zoning changes, and shall be referred to the city council before any approval becomes final. 
(d)  That any building being moved for which permit was granted shall not be allowed to remain in or upon the streets of the city for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(3)—(9)  [Reserved.] 
(10)  Add a new Sec. 107.6.1 as follows: 
107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(11)  Add a new Sec. 117 as follows: 
117 VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(12)  Modify a definition in Section 1612.2. as follows: 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five (5)-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the five (5)-year period begins on the date of issuance of a permit for the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to February 27, 1996. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(13)  The Florida Building Code, Residential is hereby amended by the following technical amendments. 
(a)  Modify Sec. R322.2.1 as follows: 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot, or at least 3 feet if a depth number is not specified. 
3.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
(b)  Modify Sec. R322.3.2 as follows: 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of mat or raft foundations, piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is: 
1.1.  Located at or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented parallel to the direction of wave approach, where parallel shall mean less than or equal to 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach, or 
1.2.  Located at the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented perpendicular to the direction of wave approach, where perpendicular shall mean greater than 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
(Code 1963, §§ 5-6, 5-29; Ord. No. 23-1990, §§ 1, 2, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 42-1990, § 1, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 25-1991, §§ 2—4, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 2, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 29-1997, § 3, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 43-2002, § 2, 9-27-02; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 8-2014, §§ 3—5, 2-11-14; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 11, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Electrical permit fees required, § 6-244; mechanical permit fees, § 6-282; permit fees for commercial, industrial, residential detached/accessory structures and renovations, Ch. 6, App. 6A, § 6A-1; swimming pool permit fees, § 18-10; fees for land development, §§ 47-71 et seq., 47-291 et seq.  
Sec. 6-103. - Penalty. 
Any person or agent thereof who shall violate any provisions of the Florida Building Code, with appendices, as adopted in section 6-101, or who shall fail to comply with such code, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or who has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of such code, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of the code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such persons shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. In addition, any violation of the code may be presented through the code enforcement board. In addition to those remedies, the city may pursue such other remedies as authorized by law. 
(Code 1963, § 5-17; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 12, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 31-66 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-104. - Building construction standards relative to handicapped persons. 
The accessibility features required of new buildings contained in F.S. §§ 553.45 through 553.495 are hereby adopted by reference as a part of the building code adopted by this article, and all provisions therein are made a part of this chapter the same as if they were set forth herein in full. The department will enforce the construction standards for accessibility as published in the most current publication of the Florida Building Code - Accessibility. 
(Code 1963, § 5-7; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 13, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-105. - Florida existing buildings code adopted. 
(a)  The latest publication of the Florida Existing Building Code, as it may change from time to time, with appendices, the standards, requirements and penalties provided in the above code are hereby adopted by reference as the standard code for existing buildings of the city, and all provisions therein are made a part of this chapter the same as if set forth herein in full; provided, however, that whenever the provisions of the Florida Existing Building Code, conflict with the provisions of other sections of the Code of Ordinances, the provisions of the more restrictive section shall apply. One (1) copy is on file in the office of the building official. 
(b)  The Florida Building Code, Existing Building is hereby amended by the following technical amendment. 
(1)  Modify a definition in Section 202 as follows: 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five (5)-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the five (5)-year period begins on the date of issuance of a permit for the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to February 27, 1996. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Code 1963, § 5-14; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 3, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 8-2014, § 6, 2-11-14; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 14, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-106. - Energy efficiency building code adopted. 
The model energy efficiency building code entitled The Florida Building Code - Energy Conservation, as specified in F.S. §§ 553.900 and 553.908 is hereby adopted by reference as the energy efficiency building code of the city and all provisions therein are made a part of this chapter the same as if they were set forth herein in full; provided, however, that when the provisions of the model energy efficiency building code conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Further provided that all construction shall comply with the provisions of the model energy efficiency building code unless exempt by such code. One (1) copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1963, § 5-18; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 15, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-107. - Sun rooms. 
(a)  See Florida Building Code-Building - Section 1202.1 - Sunroom definition and Florida Building Code-Residential Section R303.7.1 - R301.2.1.1.2, Categories I—V. 
(Code 1963, § 5-19; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 16, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-108. - Fair housing standards (handicapped accessibility). 
All new covered multifamily dwellings consisting of four (4) or more units constructed for first occupancy shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-430) and the current edition of the Fair Housing Act Design Manual, as it may be amended periodically. 
(Ord. No. 16-2015, § 17, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-109. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
(a)  The property maintenance code entitled "International Property Maintenance Code" is hereby adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the city and all provisions therein are made a part of this chapter the same as if they were set forth herein in full; provided, however, that when the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code conflict with the provisions of this chapter and/or other provisions of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances, the more restrictive provision shall apply, except as noted herein. Further provided that all property within the corporate limits of the city shall comply with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code unless exempt by such code. One (1) copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk or building official. 
(b)  The intent of the property maintenance code shall be to establish the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, building and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures; known as the property maintenance code. 
(c)  The latest publication of the International Property Maintenance Code, as it may change from time to time, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with appendices, standards, requirements and penalties provided in such code are hereby adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the city. All references to the property maintenance code, which are found in the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances, shall refer to the edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, adopted in this section. Nothing in this code is intended to prevent the use of systems, methods or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety to those prescribed by this code, providing technical documentation is submitted to the authority having jurisdiction to demonstrate equivalency and the system, method or device is approved for the intended purposes. 
(d)  The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised as follows: 
(1)  That Sections 103.1, 103.2, 103.3, 103.4, and 103.6 are hereby deleted and the existing City Codes and Ordinances shall apply and prevail. 
(2)  That Sections 106.2, 106.3 and 106.4 are hereby deleted and the existing provisions of the Code of Ordinances shall prevail, and which are as follows: 
Sec. 31-66. Powers and duties. The Code Enforcement Board shall have such duties, responsibilities and powers as set forth in and shall be governed in all respects by Florida Statutes, Chapter 162, as presently enacted and as amended form time to time by the State Legislature. 
Sec. 31-67. Appointments and terms of office. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council. 
(b)  Members of the Board shall be registered voters and residents of the City of Titusville for at least one (1) year, and whenever possible, include an architect, a business person, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a realtor. 
(c)  Appointments to the Board shall be made for a term of three years. Each member may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. The City Council shall fill any vacancy occurring on the Board and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
(d)  Members of the Board may be removed at the discretion of the City Council. If any member of the Board is convicted of a felony his position on the Board shall be forfeited immediately and his seat vacated. The seat of any member who is absent from three (3) or more meetings during any period of six (6) successive months shall be vacated, unless such absences are officially excused by a majority of the Board members. 
(e)  During the January meeting of the Board and on a biannual basis beginning January of 1987, the Board all by majority vote of the membership elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. 
(f)  The conduct of the hearing and the enforcement procedure shall be in accordance with Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
Sec. 31-68. Organization and hearings. 
(a)  The Board shall meet on the second Monday of each month. Additionally, if the Code Inspector has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the Code Inspector with concurrence of the Administrator, may immediately notify the Enforcement Board and request a hearing. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all hearings and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The City Council shall provide clerical staff, administrative personnel and legal counsel, as may be reasonably required by the Code Enforcement Board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(c)  All notices required by this chapter shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the local governing body, or by leaving the notice at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of such notice. At the option of the Code Enforcement Board, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting. 
(d)  All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Enforcement Board shall issue Findings of Fact, based on evidence of record and conclusion of law and shall issue an Order. The Order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the Order is not complied with by said date. 
(f)  If the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the enforcement board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board rehearing, and the notice shall so state. 
Sec. 31-69. Administrative fines and liens. 
(a)  The Enforcement Board, upon notification by the Code Inspector that an Order of the board has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine. 
(b)  The order of the board may require the violator to pay a fine, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day, for each day that the violation continues past the date set in the order for compliance. In the case of a repeat violation the board may order the repeat violator to pay a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) a day, for each day the repeat violation continues past the date of notice to the violator of the repeat violation. If a finding of violation or repeat violation has been made, then a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of an order imposing the fine. A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records of Brevard County, Florida; and once recorded, it shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the violation was found to exist, and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator, and upon petition to the circuit court it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed otherwise to be a judgment of the court except for enforcement purposes. The lien shall be superior to all other liens or encumbrances, including prior recorded mortgages or judgments and only inferior to liens for taxes. A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose the lien, whichever occurs first. After three (3) months from the filing of any such unpaid lien, the board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose upon the lien. The duration and effect in such lien shall be consistent with Florida law, which is a period of twenty (20) years. 
(1)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the Enforcement Board shall consider the following factors: 
(aa)  The gravity of the violation; 
(bb)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(cc)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(2)  The Enforcement Board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this Section. 
(c)  A certified copy of an Order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. 
(1)  A fine imposed pursuant to this chapter shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this Section, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the Enforcement Board may authorize the local governing body attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(3)  The lien shall be superior to all other liens or encumbrances, including prior recorded mortgages or judgments and only inferior to liens for taxes. 
(d)  Duration of Lien. No lien shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an Order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee that it incurs in the foreclosure. 
(e)  The lien may be enforced as authorized by Chapter 162, Florida Statutes (1989), as amended. 
(f)  An aggrieved party, including the City Council, may appeal a final administrative Order of the Code Enforcement Board to the Circuit Court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the Code Enforcement Board. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the Order to be appealed. 
(3)  That Sections 107.1, 107.2, 107.3 and 107.4 are hereby deleted and the existing provisions of the Code of Ordinances shall apply to notices and orders. [See Section (d)(2) above] 
(4)  That Section 109.5, entitled Cost of Emergency Repairs, is amended to read as follows: 
109.5 Cost of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction, subject, however, to the provision as provided for by applicable law that the City may seek reimbursement from the property owner or the person creating the need for the emergency repair and the cost incurred by the City may be recovered and the City may impose a lien upon said property for said costs. The lien shall be superior to all other liens or encumbrances, including prior recorded mortgages or judgments and only inferior to liens for taxes. In the event the owner or person creating the need for the emergency repairs, fails and refuses to pay or reimburse the City for the costs, then in that event, the City is authorized to foreclose said lien in accordance with the provisions as provided for by law for foreclosure of municipal liens, and the City may recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(5)  That Section 110.3 , entitled Failure to Comply, is amended to read as follows: 
110.3 Failure to Comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or through contract, or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate from which the structure is located and a lien shall be imposed against said property. The lien shall be superior to all other liens or encumbrances, including prior recorded mortgages or judgments and only inferior to liens for taxes. In the event the City finds it necessary to foreclose said lien, the City is entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs for foreclosing said lien and the foreclosure procedure shall be as authorized by law for foreclosure of municipal liens. 
(6)  That Section 111 , entitled Means of Appeal , shall remain in force and effect, except that the process for an appeal shall be governed by the process and procedures as provided for in the Code of Ordinances for the Board of Adjustment and Appeals and the membership of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the notices, meeting process and procedures, decisions, shall govern the means of appeal for purposes of Section 111 of the Code of Ordinances, which reads as follows: 
Sec. 31-51. Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals of any decision, order, requirement or an interpretation of an administrative official of these regulations, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Zoning of land and water use (Chapter 59); 
(2)  Subdivision regulations (Chapter 51); 
(3)  Protection of potable water well fields, the regulation of areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding, drainage and stormwater management and the protection of environmentally sensitive lands (Chapter 35); 
(4)  Signage; 
(5)  The provision of public facilities and service concurrent with the impacts of development, and; 
(6)  The provision of safe and convenient on-site traffic flow, including vehicle parking (Chapter 39). 
(b)  The Board shall also hear and decide appeals and variances regarding the following: 
(1)  Building code, electrical code, International Property Maintenance Code, fire prevention code, gas code, housing code, mechanical code, motion picture theaters ordinance, plumbing code, streets regulations, swimming pool regulation, as provided for in the Code of Ordinances, Volumes I, and II. 
(2)  Hear and decide requests for variance from these regulations in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 47, Article VIII of these regulations. 
(3)  Hear and decide conflicts between the minimum building code and minimum safety code as authorized by Florida Statutes Section 553.73 including any conflicts between the local building official and local fire official concerning the application or interpretation of the minimum building code and minimum safety code. 
(c)  Appeals, variances and interpretations, shall not extend to decisions of an administrative official relating to public projects; or public policy decisions made by the City Council. 
Sec. 31-52. Appointment and terms of office. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall be composed of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternates. All members shall be residents of the City of Titusville for at least one (1) year and be a registered voter. Members of the Board shall consist of the following: 
(1)  At least three (3) of the regular members of the Board shall be persons with the following expertise/experience in at least one of the following disciplines: 
a.  A licensed architect, engineer, landscape architect or surveyor; 
b.  A general or building contractor; 
c.  A person associated with the building trades industries; 
d.  A person having an education degree (bachelor or master degree) in urban planning or with a current American Institute of Certified Planner certification; 
e.  A person with a minimum of ten (10) years experience in land development or urban planning field. 
(2)  The other two (2) remaining members of the Board and the two (2) alternates may be appointed from the City citizenship at large. 
(b)  All five (5) regular members and the two (2) alternates of the Board shall be appointed by the City Council for two-year terms. There shall be appointed at the second regular meeting in July of each odd-numbered year three (3) regular members and one alternate for two-year terms, and in each even-numbered year, two (2) regular members and one alternate for two-year terms. The term of the members appointed shall commence on August 1, and shall be for a period of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  The City Council shall fill any vacancy occurring on the Board, and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the vacancy. The alternate members may serve on the Board in lieu of a regular member when said regular member is unable to attend an official meeting of the Board or when a regular member has a conflict of interest on any item, and said alternate shall serve for the entire meeting. 
(d)  Members of the Board may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
(e)  Members of the Board may be removed at the discretion of the City Council. If any member of the Board is convicted of a felony his position on the Board shall be forfeited immediately and his seat vacated. The seat of any member who is absent from three (3) or more meetings during any period of six (6) successive months shall be vacated, unless such absences are officially excused by a majority of the Board members. 
Sec. 31-53. Organization and meetings. 
(a)  The Board shall establish rules and regulations of its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these Land Development Regulations. The Board shall meet on the fourth Wednesday of every month or in any event frequent enough so that business of the Board may be expeditiously completed. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all Board meetings. 
(c)  The Board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures set forth in Chapter 47, Articles VIII and IX of these regulations. 
(d)  All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and the agenda for same shall be available to the public at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. 
(e)  Board members shall be subject to Chapter 286 F.S., the "Open Meetings Law." 
(f)  Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any of the provisions of any City ordinance or in modifying any order of any administrative City official, concurring votes of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary. If four concurring votes can not be reached, the subject matter before the Board shall be considered denied. 
(g)  The procedure for a member to withdraw, abstain or be excused from voting is in accordance with Section 112.3143, Florida Statutes. 
Sec. 31-54. Board of Adjustments and Appeals officers and staff. 
(a)  At its first regular meeting in August, the Board shall, by majority vote of its membership (excluding vacant seats) elect one of its members to serve as Chairman and preside over the Board's meetings and one member to serve as Vice-Chairman who shall preside in the absence or withdrawal of the Chairman. 
(b)  The Chairman shall sign all correspondence for the Board and shall sign all opinions of the Board. 
(c)  The Chairman or any member temporarily acting as Chairman may administer oaths to witnesses coming before the Board. 
(d)  The Chairman and Vice-Chairman may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. 
(e)  An official in the employ of the City shall be appointed by the Administrator to act as secretary to the Board and shall be responsible to supply the Board with the proper facilities, agendas, minutes, evidence and information which the Board may request in the performance of their duties. Said secretary shall receive and schedule for hearings all appeals filed, notify the Board of same and coordinate the advertisement of the Board's agenda with the City Clerk, as required, in a locally circulated newspaper. 
(f)  The Board, with the prior approval of the City Council, is authorized and empowered to employ such clerks and subordinates, including technical and expert advisors, and to incur such expenses as in its judgment may be necessary, provided that the total expense shall not exceed the amount set apart in the budget of the City for such purpose. 
(g)  The Board may, if it is deemed necessary, call upon any City official in the employ of the City or upon other appointed City board(s) for technical advice, information, or recommendations prior to acting on any appeal which may be brought before it. 
Sec. 31-55. Appeal to decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Any person substantially effected (as defined in Florida Statutes) by the decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of Brevard County, Florida. Said decision must be appealed within thirty (30) days after rendered. The decision shall be presumed correct and the appeal shall be a review of the record before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The appeal shall not be a trial de novo. The clerk shall prepare the record in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. The time periods set forth in the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for processing appeals from the County Court to the Circuit Court shall govern appeals from the Board of Adjustments and Appeals to the Circuit Court. 
Secs. 31-56—31-65. Reserved. 
(7)  That Section 302.4, entitled Weeds, is hereby deleted and the provisions contained in Sections 13-26 through 13-32 shall prevail as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, and which are as follows: 
Sec. 13-26. Conditions constituting menace to public health, welfare enumerated, declared public nuisance. 
(a)  The allowing of debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers, or stagnant water, diseased, dead or damaged trees to accumulate or a dense growth of vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and/or grass in excess of twelve (12) inches in height from the ground to exist on any lot, tract or parcel of land which is bordered by other improved property or a dedicated public street on at least two (2) opposite sides and provided that the distance between these opposite sides (measured from lot/property lines) is less than two hundred fifty (250) feet. If the distance between the dedicated public street and/or improved property is greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet, the point of measurement shall be defined as a strip or buffer twenty-five (25) feet wide along the lot/property line of the improved property and/or dedicated street side of the lot, tract, or parcel in question unless the twenty-five-foot strip is not accessible by reason of a fence, ditch, cliff or other impassable obstacle. The condition described in this section along any improved property described in the city to the extent and in the manner that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare; creates a fire hazard; or provides a nest and/or breeding ground for sandflies, mosquitoes, rats, mice, other rodents, snakes, and other types of pests and vermin shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Placing, discarding or allowing debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, weeds, noxious plants, sand, leaves or grass on any sidewalk located on the owner's or occupant's lot, and placing, discarding or allowing debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, weeds or noxious plants, except as provided in chapter 16 for solid waste collection in the planting space between the sidewalk or property line and the street shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. Such nuisance shall be subject to the notice and remedy provided in sections 13-29 through 13-32. Such unlawful conduct shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
Sec. 13-27. Enforcement. A property owner who fails to maintain his property as required by section 13-26 shall constitute, a violation of a municipal ordinance and the property owner as a separate and additional remedy may be subject to enforcement and fines pursuant to the city code enforcement board, § 14.01 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Volume II. Repeat violations may be subject to fines up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
Sec. 13-28. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, manager, owner, agent, or renter to allow debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers, stagnant water; diseased, dead or damaged trees to accumulate, or a dense growth of vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and/or grass on any lot, tract, or parcel of land in the city, which provides or may provide a nest and/or breeding ground for sandflies, mosquitoes, rats, mice, other rodents, snakes and any other types of pests; or become a menace to life, property, public health, or create a fire hazard. Any person found violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-15. 
Sec. 13-29. Notice to property owner to remedy or authorize city to remedy conditions. 
(a)  If the city manager finds that debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, paper or stagnant water, diseased, dead or damaged trees have accumulated or a dense growth of vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and/or grass in excess of twelve (12) inches in height from the ground exists on any lot, tract or parcel as aforedescribed within the city, to the extent and in the manner that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare; creates a fire hazard; or provides a nest and/or breeding ground for sandflies, mosquitoes, rats, mice, other rodents, snakes and other types of pests and vermin, he shall in writing, direct a notice to the owner of record of such property by certified mail at his last-known mailing address as shown by the records of the tax appraiser of the county advising that the aforementioned debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, etc., have been found to exist on the property described on such notice and demand that such owner cause such condition to be remedied forthwith, or the city is authorized to have such work done on behalf of the owner at the rates on file in the code enforcement division, and the cost of such work, including an administrative charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first notice concerning such property, thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the second notice, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the third notice, and a fifty-dollar charge for each additional notice thereafter occurring within a one-year period, shall be assessed against the owner and shall automatically become a lien against the property if not paid in the time prescribed in section 13-31. The written notice shall state the specific violation of which the owner is charged and the location where information may be obtained concerning the costs of city lot cleaning. 
(b)  If there is an occupied dwelling on the property, a copy of the notice shall be served by an appropriate official of the city, including but not limited to a police officer, upon the occupant of the property, or upon any agent of the owner thereof, or by mailing the notice by registered or certified mail. The mailing of such notice shall be sufficient proof thereof and the delivery of notice to an occupied dwelling shall be equivalent to mailing. If the mailing address of the owner is not known and the property is unoccupied and the owner has no agent in the city, the notice shall be posted upon the property as notice to the owner thereof and a copy posted at an appropriate location at the city hall. The form of notice to be used is provided in section 13-30. 
(Code 1963, § 12-28) 
Sec. 13-30. Form of notice of public nuisance. The following is the form for the notice of public nuisance: 
"NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
"Dear _______: 
RE: [Fill in Legal Description of Lot] 
"According to the tax records of the City of Titusville, you are the owner of the above legally described property. Said property was inspected by the City on _______, 19___. This inspection revealed a violation of section 13-26 of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances dealing with public nuisances. Specifically, the violation noted was: 
[Fill in appropriate violation] 
"According to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, the owners of property deemed a public nuisance and so notified herein are required to eliminate the nuisance within ten (10) calendar days. 
"The failure to maintain your property in accordance with section 13-26 of the Code, is a violation of the City of Titusville's Ordinances and if not corrected within the time period enumerated above, the violation will be abated by the city and you will be billed for the cost at rates on file with the city and, in the event payment is not made within thirty (30) days, the cost will be assessed against the property as a lien, foreclosure to follow with fees incident to foreclosure. 
"As a separate and additional remedy, the violation shall be processed through the City of Titusville Code Enforcement Board, which has authority to impose fines up to $250.00 per day, and for repeat violations, up to $500.00 per day. 
"Pursuant to the provisions of section 13-31 of the Code of Ordinances of Titusville, Florida, you have the right to appeal the finding that your property has become a nuisance. If you elect to protest the finding that your property is a nuisance, you must file a written appeal with the city clerk of the City of Titusville within ten (10) calendar days from the date of this letter. 
"The city regrets having to take a hard line on nuisance abatement. We ask for your assistance in maintaining proper standards for the health, safety, and general welfare for the citizens of Titusville. 
Code Enforcement Officer " 
Sec. 13-31. Protest by property owner; council determination final. 
(a)  If the property owner or his duly authorized agent elects to protest the notice as set forth in sections 13-29 and 13-30, he must file a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the notice to the owner. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting and the city council shall determine conclusively whether the condition described in section 13-26 exists. Such determination shall be final. If the owner or duly authorized agent fails to appeal the notice as set forth in sections 13-29 and 13-30 in the time prescribed, the owner or agent shall waive any right to question whether or not the condition as described in the notice to the owner or agent did, in fact, constitute a public nuisance and the owner or agent shall not be entitled to raise that defense in any subsequent foreclosure proceeding or any other proceeding incident to lot cleaning. 
(b)  If the city council determines that the situation and condition as set forth herein and in the notice to the owner does not exist, the notice to the owner shall be considered forthwith null and void and of no effect and no action shall be taken by any agency of this city in regard to such condition at that time. If the city council shall determine that the condition described in the notice to the owner does exist, the owner shall have ten (10) days from the date of such determination by the city council to correct such condition. 
(c)  If the owner does not appeal such notice or fails to correct such condition within the ten (10) days specified, the city manager shall direct the appropriate agency of the city to correct such condition as outlined in sections 13-29 and 13-30. 
Sec. 13-32. Payment within specified time when conditions remedied by city. 
(a)  If the owner shall not correct or remedy the condition prescribed in the notice and the city takes action pursuant to the notice to have the lot, parcel, or strip of land cleaned, the expenses incurred in remedying the condition shall be computed in accordance with the rates on file in the code enforcement division and a statement of the expenses shall be mailed to the owner of the affected property. In addition to the expense of actually cleaning the lot or strip, the city shall be entitled to include an administrative fee as provided in section 13-29(a). 
(b)  If the owner or his agent fails to make payment within thirty (30) days, the expense shall become and automatically constitute a lien upon the property, which shall be payable with interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from thirty (30) days after the statement was mailed to the owner, and which expense and charge shall be a first and prior lien against the property, subject only to the lien of taxes due to the county and state, and of the same character as a lien of the city for municipal taxes. 
(c)  Upon failure of the owner of the property, to pay the lien, it will be foreclosed in the same manner as tax liens in favor of the city are foreclosed, or foreclosed in the same manner as mortgages under state law are foreclosed, and it shall be lawful to join in any complaint for foreclosure of any one (1) or more lots or parcels of land. The suit for foreclosure may be brought at any time after the expiration of sixty (60) days after the statement has been mailed to the owner. In addition to the costs and expenses which constituted the lien and the interest accumulated thereon, the city shall be entitled to collect and receive its costs in prosecuting the foreclosure, which costs shall include court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, abstract costs, publication costs, and such other costs as are assessable in foreclosure actions. 
(d)  Any property owner shall have the right to have a hearing before the city council to show cause, if any, why the expenses and charges should not constitute a lien against the property, provided, however, that the finding by the city council that the condition described herein and notice to the owner thereof exists, shall be final. 
(8)  That Section 302.8, entitled Motor Vehicles, is hereby deleted and the current provisions of the Code of Ordinances as contained in Sections 13-71 through 13-74 shall prevail as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, which provide as follows: 
Sec. 13-71. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
Sec. 13-72. Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street prohibited. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. No vehicle shall be parked on any street, highway or right-of-way within the city unless the vehicle has a current automobile tag. 
Sec. 13-73. Wrecked, discarded vehicles; time limit for disposition; exception. 
(a)  No person in charge or in control of any property within the city, whether an owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or dismantled vehicle to remain on such property longer than seventy-two (72) hours. No person shall leave any vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than seventy-two (72) hours unless the vehicle has a current automotive tag. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building or carport, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate screened storage space, or depository, maintained in a lawful place and manner in the city. 
Sec. 13-74. Impounding of vehicles. 
(a)  Authority of city manager. The city manager is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of any provisions of this division or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such a vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with this division. 
(b)  Notice. Whenever the city manager determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this division, then the city manager shall cause a notice to be placed upon such vehicle, in substantially the following form: 
"Notice to the owner and all persons interested in the attached property. This property to wit: (setting forth brief description), located at (setting forth brief description of location), is improperly stored and is in violation of (setting forth ordinance regulation violated), and must be removed within 10 days from the date of this notice; otherwise it shall be destroyed by order of the City of Titusville. This order may be appealed by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk on or before 4 hours from the time said vehicle is ordered to be removed. 
"Dated this (setting forth date of posting notice). 
"Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of City Manager or designated representative)." 
If the vehicle in violation of this division is located on any public street or highway, such notice as stated above may require the vehicle to be removed within twelve (12) hours from the placing of the notice on such vehicle, and if it should be determined by the city manager that the location of such vehicle on the public street or highway of the city constitutes a hazard, such vehicle may be, under the circumstances, immediately impounded to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the community. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person may postpone the operation of such order of the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk on or before four (4) hours from the time such vehicle was ordered to be removed. If such appeal is filed, the city manager shall not take action until such appeal is reviewed by the city council at its next regular council meeting following the filing of the notice of appeal. In the event the appeal is denied, such automobile shall be removed, at the owner's expense, within twenty-four (24) hours after the person making the appeal is notified of the adverse decision by the city council. If the appeal is granted by the city council, the order of the city manager shall be of no force and effect. Appeals to any section of this division may be sought through the city council. 
(d)  Disposition of vehicle. If the vehicle is not removed in accordance with the notice set forth in subsection (b) above, the city manager may cause the vehicle to be removed and such vehicle may be disposed of in any manner as determined by the city manager, and all proceeds from the disposition of such vehicle shall be retained by the city. 
(e)  Reclaiming vehicle. The city manager shall cause the vehicle to be retained by the city for a period of twenty (20) days after such vehicle is removed. If, at any time during the twenty-day period after removal, the owner provides proof of ownership (title, registration, a bill of sale) to the city manager and pays the required fee to the city, the owner shall be issued a release which will allow him to pick up the vehicle at the depository where the vehicle has been stored. The owner will be required to remove the vehicle from the depository to a satisfactory place of storage within forty-eight (48) hours. The owner will be required to pay towing and storage fees as set forth by city contract and a twenty-dollar administrative fee. 
(f)  Penalty for obstruction. Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists the city manager or any person authorized by the city manager in the discharge of his duties, as provided for in this section, upon conviction shall be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(g)  Immunity from prosecution. The city manager or the city shall not be liable for damages caused during the removal or impounding of any vehicle impounded or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(9)  That Section 303.15 is amended to read as follows: 
303.15 Insect screens. During the entire year, every door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 19-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 18, 5-12-15)  
Secs. 6-110—6-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - UNSAFE, DILAPIDATED OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 6-116. - Code adopted. 
The latest publication of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code as it may change from time to time, the standards, requirements, and penalties provided in such code are hereby adopted by reference. All provisions therein are made a part of this chapter the same as if set forth herein in full. Wherever the provisions of such code conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. One (1) copy is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1963, § 5-13(a); Ord. No. 26-1995, § 4, 9-12-95)  
Sec. 6-117. - Amendment. 
The provisions of the code adopted in section 6-116, are herein amended as follows: 
Section 105.1. Appointment of Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
a.  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals, as established by the provisions of Section 31-51 et seq., of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II of the Code of Ordinances, shall serve as the board to provide final administrative interpretation of the provisions of the Standard Code for the Elimination or Repair of Unsafe Buildings. 
b.  The Code Enforcement Board, as established by the provisions of Section 31-66 et seq., of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II of the Code of Ordinances shall serve as the hearing officer for all matters other than code interpretation. Remedies under law for violation of the provisions of the code shall be heard before this board. 
(Code 1963, § 5-13(b); Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09) 
Cross reference— Board of adjustments and appeals, § 13.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; code enforcement board, § 14.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 6-118. - Unsafe buildings; vacated buildings and closing streets. 
When a building or structure is in an unsafe condition so that life is endangered thereby, the building official may order and require the inmates and occupants to vacate it forthwith. He may, when necessary for the public safety, temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings, structures and places adjacent to such building or structure, and prohibit them from being used. 
(Code 1963, § 5-16)  
Secs. 6-119—6-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing requirements for swimming pools, § 18-9; negligence of plumbers, § 21-80; utilities, Ch. 21; utility connections and regulations, § 53.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Plumbing, F.S. § 553.01 et seq.; plumbing code, F.S. § 553.73(1)(a). 
 
Sec. 6-141. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "plumbing" shall mean the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of storm water, liquid waste or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with acceptable terminal. Plumbing shall include the practice and materials used in the cleaning and maintenance of building drains and sewers when such cleaning and maintenance results in the removal of a fixture, trap or cutting a draw line for entry access for the purpose of cleaning and/or removing blockage causing stoppage. The removal of a cleanout plug for the purpose of cleaning and/or removal of blockage causing stoppage is not included in the definition of the term "plumbing." This shall also include the installation and alteration of low pressure gas piping on the discharge side of the meter. 
(Code 1963, § 17-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-142. - Code; adopted; penalty. 
The latest publication of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, as it may change from time to time, and the standards, requirements and penalties provided therein, are hereby adopted by reference as the plumbing code of the city. All provisions therein are made a part of this article the same as if they were set forth herein in full. Wherever the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, conflict with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall prevail. One (1) copy of such code is on file in the office of the building official. Any person who shall fail to comply with such code, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each and every day or portion thereof, during which any violation of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, is committed or continued, and upon conviction of such violation such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 17-1; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 5, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 19, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-143. - Inspection and tests. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of this article and to make the required inspections and tests. 
(b)  The building official shall, after proper identification, have the right to enter any premises for the purpose of inspecting any plumbing system at such times as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the building official or any inspectors in the discharge of their duties under this article. 
(Code 1963, §§ 17-16, 17-17) 
State Law reference— Inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq.  
Sec. 6-144. - Permit for plumbing work. 
No plumbing work, unless excepted in this article, shall be undertaken prior to the issuance of a permit by the building official. Application for permit shall be made on suitable forms provided by the building official. The application shall be accompanied by deeds in accordance with schedule of fees in section 6-145. 
(Code 1963, § 17-10)  
Sec. 6-145. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 43-2002, § 3, adopted Sept. 27, 2002, repealed former § 6-145 of the Code, which pertained to the schedule of fees for permits and inspection fee and derived from the 1963 Code, § 17-11; and Ord. No. 29-1997, § 4, adopted Sept. 23, 1997.  
Sec. 6-146. - Plans and specifications. 
No permit shall be issued until plans and specifications showing the proposed work in necessary detail have been submitted to the building official, and the building official has determined, from examination of such plans and specifications, that they give assurance that the work will conform to the provisions of these ordinances. If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications without payment of additional fee. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and a supplementary permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to original application for permit, shall be issued to cover the change. 
(Code 1963, § 17-12)  
Sec. 6-147. - Certification required. 
No individual shall engage in the business of plumbing in the city unless he is certified as a master plumber as provided in F.S. Ch. 489. No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the course of such business is under the supervision of a certified master plumber. 
(Code 1963, § 17-3; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 20, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11; contractor licenses, § 11-126 et seq.  
Sec. 6-148. - Use of master's name by another. 
No person who has obtained a master plumber's certificate of competency shall allow his name to be used by another person, directly or indirectly, either for the purpose of obtaining permits or for doing business or work under the certificate of competency. 
(Code 1963, § 17-9; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 21, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Building contractors license, § 11-126 et seq.  
Sec. 6-149. - Repairs. 
Repairs of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) value, involving only the working parts of a faucet or valve, the clearance of minor stoppages, repairing of leaks, or replacement of defective faucets or valves may be made without a permit provided no changes are made in the piping to the fixture. 
(Code 1963, § 17-13; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 22, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-150. - Plumbing installation or maintenance by owner. 
As provided for in F.S. Ch. 489, exemptions, any homeowner, after personally appearing before the building official and after obtaining the required plumbing permit from the building official and paying the required fee, shall be permitted to install and maintain plumbing within the boundaries of his own property, provided that such plumbing work is personally done by such homeowner and provided further that the property upon which the work is done is exclusively used by the homeowner or his family. This article shall not relieve the homeowner of the duty to obtain a permit from the city building official and to pay the required fees for such permit. Any material used by the homeowner must be approved by the city building official and any plumbing work done by any homeowner shall not be covered until the same has been inspected and approved by the building official. The building official is an inspecting authority and is not available as a technical advisor. The homeowner is specifically prohibited from making any house connection to any public sewer or water line. 
(Code 1963, § 17-15; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 23, 5-12-15)  
Secs. 6-151—6-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GAS 
 
Sec. 6-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official shall mean the office of building official or the person appointed as gas inspector, and shall include each assistant gas inspector acting as such under this article by appointment of the city manager. 
Certificate of approval shall mean a document or tag, issued and/or attached by the inspector to the inspected material, piping or appliance installation, filled out, together with date, address of the premises and signed by the inspector. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, city or other governmental unit, or any organized group of individuals distributing undiluted liquefied petroleum gas and natural gas and/or engaging in the act of installing piping and tubing or appliances or equipment for undiluted liquefied petroleum gas and natural gas within the corporate limits of the city, or authorized and proposing to so engage. 
(Code 1963, § 11-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-172. - Code; adopted; penalty. 
The latest publication of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, as it may change from time to time, together with all appendices thereto, and the standards, requirements and penalties provided therein, are hereby adopted by reference as the gas code of the city. All provisions therein are made a part of this chapter the same as if they were set forth herein in full. Wherever the provision of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, conflict with the provisions of this chapter the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. One (1) copy of such code is on file in the office of the building official. Any person or agent thereof, who shall violate any provisions of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, or who shall fail to comply with such code, or with any of the requirements, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 11-1; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 6, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 24, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-173. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 43-2002, § 4, adopted Sept. 27, 2002, repealed former § 6-173 of the Code, which pertained to amendment of the gas code and derived from the 1963 Code, § 11-1; and Ord. No. 29-1997, § 5, adopted Sept. 23, 1997.  
Sec. 6-174. - Office of building official, powers and duties. 
(a)  The administration and enforcement of this article shall be by the office of building official. 
(b)  The building official is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article and upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations of this article. 
(c)  The building official is authorized to have disconnected or turned off, if necessary, the gas supply serving any gas piping or fixture or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been issued with respect to same or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture or appliance ordered turned off or disconnected by the building official. The notice shall state that the same has been ordered turned off or disconnected by order of the building official, together with the reason therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice or reconnect or turn on the gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the building official and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put into service or used until the building official has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his prior disconnection or turn off notice. 
(Code 1963, § 11-4) 
State Law reference— Inspection warrants may be required, F.S. § 933.20 et seq.  
Sec. 6-175. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall install any liquefied petroleum or natural gas appliance or consumer's gas piping to utilize undiluted liquefied petroleum or natural gas without obtaining a permit to do such work from the city. 
(b)  When only temporary use of gas is desired, the building official may issue a permit for such use for a period of not to exceed sixty (60) days, provided the consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a regular piping inspection. 
(c)  Each application for a permit shall bear the number of the applicant's liquefied petroleum or natural gas license issued by the state department of insurance as required by F.S. § 527.02(1). Applicant must show proof of a current license issued by the state department of insurance to allow him to do such work in the state, along with proof that the liability insurance as required by that office is in full force and effect. 
(Code 1963, § 11-5(a)—(c)) 
Cross reference— Licenses for contractors, § 11-126 et seq.  
Sec. 6-176. - Certificate of approval. 
If after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of this article, the inspector shall issue a certificate of approval after the completion of the work for which a permit has been issued. A duplicate of each certificate issued shall be delivered to the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(Code 1963, § 11-5(d))  
Sec. 6-177. - Nonliability of city. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliances mentioned herein, or by installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the inspector. 
(Code 1963, § 11-6(a))  
Sec. 6-178. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person that shall fail to comply with or violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 11-6(b))  
Secs. 6-179—6-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Minimum electrical standards, F.S. § 553.19. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice electrician shall mean a helper or assistant to a journeyman. The apprentice is not qualified to work on electrical construction alone but must at all times work under the direct supervision of and be accompanied by a qualified journeyman or master electrician. A master electrician found guilty of allowing or sending an apprentice or helper to do any type of electrical work alone will be summoned to a meeting of the board to show cause why his certificate should not be suspended or revoked. 
Board shall mean the building trades board created in section 11-141 et seq. unless specifically stated herein. 
Domestic shall mean a residence of one (1) or two (2) living units. All others are to mean commercial. 
Electrical construction shall mean, include and govern all work and materials used in installing, maintaining and/or extending a system of electrical wiring for light, heat or power and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, inside or attached to any building, structure, lot or premises. 
Electrical contractor shall mean a person engaging in the business of electrical contracting. The person in charge of the electrical installations shall have qualified as a master electrician according to the provisions of this article and possess a master electrician's certificate paid to date and be certified or registered as prescribed by the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation under F.S. Ch. 489. 
Electrician shall mean a person who is engaged in the trade or business of electrical construction and who is qualified under the terms and provisions of this article. 
Journeyman electrician shall mean a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to install electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power and who is qualified under the terms and provisions of this article, and he shall be capable of doing electrical work according to the plans and specifications furnished to him, and in accordance with the rules and regulations governing wiring installations within the limits of the city's jurisdiction. 
Master electrician shall mean a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to plan, lay out and supervise the installation of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power and who is qualified under the provisions of this article. 
Qualified person shall mean any person qualified under the provisions of this article, and certified or registered under F.S. Ch. 489. 
(Code 1963, § 8-3; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 25, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-202. - Scope of provisions. 
The electrical code shall have jurisdiction over all that certain territory in the legal boundary of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 8-1)  
Sec. 6-203. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 26 of Ord. No. 16-2015, adopted May 12, 2015, deleted § 6-203, which pertained to classification of electrical workers and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 6-204. - Prerequisites to performing electrical work; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not registered or certified as an electrical contractor in accordance with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 489, et seq. to do any electrical construction, or make repairs, alterations, additions or changes to any existing system of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power within the city's jurisdiction, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section and section 6-205. 
(b)  An owner of property may personally make application for a permit, supervise and do the work in connection with the construction, maintenance, repair and alteration of and addition to a single-family or duplex residence for his own use and occupancy and not intended for sale. A person may wire his own home if it is his bona fide residence and is for single occupancy or duplex for himself and by himself providing the work is done in a manner which complies with this electrical code. Satisfactory proof of ownership will be required by the building official. Applicants under this provision are advised that the building official is an inspecting authority and is not available as a technical advisor. 
(c)  The following work may be performed for employers by regular employees of public utility companies, who are regularly engaged in the manufacture or distribution of electrical energy for light, heat or power, or regularly engaged in the operation of a signaling system or in the transmission of intelligence provided that all such work shall be performed under the supervision of the duly authorized officials of such utilities: 
(1)  Outside construction work, either overhead or underground. 
(2)  The installation and maintenance of underground service conductors and all primary services, service equipment or metering equipment on consumer premises, which is the property of the utility. 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of electrical wiring apparatus and equipment necessary for the operation of the utility, in central stations, substations, plants or exchanges owned or occupied by such public utility companies or franchise utility company. 
(Code 1963, § 8-23; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 27, 5-12-15) 
State Law reference— Exceptions to requirement for certification, F.S. § 489.503.  
Sec. 6-205. - Certificate holders required on electrical work; exception. 
A master electrician or master neon serviceman can allow the working of helpers or apprentices on any job of electrical construction, when the work of such helpers or apprentices is performed under the personal supervision and accompanied by an electrician or neon serviceman holding a certificate of competency or a certificate. 
(Code 1963, § 8-25; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 18, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-206. - Master or journeyman electrician to show proof of competency before engaging in trade or business. 
Every master or journeyman electrician, before carrying on his trade or business within the city, shall appear before the building trades board and show proof of competency in the form of a license issued by the State of Florida under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 489. 
(Code 1963, § 8-28; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 19, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-207. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating or permitting to be violated any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 8-2) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 6-208—6-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 6-221. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
The latest publication of the National Electrical Code, as it may change from time to time, and the standards, requirements and penalties provided therein, are hereby adopted by reference as the electrical code of the city. All provisions therein are made a part of this article as if the same were set forth herein in full. Wherever the provisions of the National Electrical Code conflict with the provisions of this article, the provisions of the National Electrical Code shall prevail. One (1) copy of the code is on file at the office of the building official. 
(Code 1963, § 8-5; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 7, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 20, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-222. - Rules and regulations; general. 
(a)  All electrical construction and all materials and appliances used in connection with the installation, maintenance and operation of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power within the city shall conform to the rules and regulations embodied in this regulation and such as may be adopted as hereinbefore provided and shall conform with such construction and approved methods of construction as reasonably necessary for safety to life and property. The National Electrical Code adopted in section 6-221, with all amendments, appendices thereto and standards contained therein, is hereby confirmed and ratified, and made a part hereof. 
(b)  A rough-in inspection will be required for all wiring installations. 
(c)  All industrial and commercial buildings will be wired by a licensed electrical contractor. 
(d)  Feeder loads for all construction shall comply to article 220, Feeders, in the National Electrical Code. 
(e)  All electrical specifications not covered by this Code will comply with the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-2015, § 31, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-223. - Approved materials, devices, or appliances. 
(a)  No electrical materials, devices or appliances designated for attachment to or installation on any electrical circuit or system for light, heat or power shall be installed, used, sold or offered for sale for use in the city unless they are in conformity with approved methods of construction for safety to life and property. Conformity of electrical materials, devices or appliances with the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as indicated by the lists of inspected electrical appliances published and distributed from time to time by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or with other standards approved by the American National Standards Institute shall be prima facie evidence that such electrical materials, devices or appliances comply with the requirements of this regulation. The maker's name, trademark or other identification symbol shall be placed on all electrical materials, devices or appliances sold, installed or used under the provisions of this article, together with such other markings giving voltage, current, wattage or other appropriate ratings as are prescribed in the National Electrical Code, or as may be necessary to determine the character of the material, devices or equipment and the use for which it is intended. 
(Code 1963, § 8-71; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 32, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-224. - Safety switches required. 
Knife switches operating at a potential of six hundred (600) volts or less, except on switchboards or panelboards accessible to qualified persons only, shall be of the externally operable, enclosed type with proper marking to show when the switch is in the "on" or "off" position. 
(Code 1963, § 8-74)  
Sec. 6-225. - Additions, remodeling and rewiring. 
(a)  In the wiring of new buildings or the installation of new wiring in old buildings or additions thereto, or in the remodeling or alteration of old wiring, where more than fifty (50) percent of the existing wiring installations is remodeled or changed, all wiring shall meet the present requirements of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code. All extensions to existing wiring shall be in accordance with those same standards. When wiring for any added load is installed in a building the services shall also be revised and sizes increased to carry the new total load. 
(b)  A larger service shall be installed to meet load requirements if so indicated. 
(c)  Circuit protection shall be either circuit breakers or in the case of existing fuse panels, nontamperable fuse bases of the proper sizes shall be installed. 
(Code 1963, § 8-78; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 33, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-226. - Temporary wiring; when permitted. 
(a)  Temporary power for construction work shall be a minimum size of sixty (60) amps capacity with circuit breaker for overcurrent protection. Fused switches or pullouts shall not be approved. All receptacles shall have proper overcurrent protection. 
(b)  Temporary wiring for other purposes may be allowed by special permission, in writing, by the building official provided such use is for no longer than thirty (30) days, is wired by electrical contractor, and maintained in a safe condition at all times. No conductor or equipment used for temporary power shall be installed for permanent use in any building. 
(Code 1963, § 8-79)  
Sec. 6-227. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 34 of Ord. No. 16-2015, adopted May 12, 2015, deleted § 6-227, which pertained to wiring of cold storage plants and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 6-228. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 35 of Ord. No. 16-2015, adopted May 12, 2015, deleted § 6-228, which pertained to bell transfers and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 6-229. - Main service disconnects. 
Each service shall terminate into a loadcenter or other Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved electrical device. In no case shall service equipment or subpanel be located in the bed rooms, clothes closets, bathrooms or kitchens. No service equipment or panels shall be mounted above clothes dryers, water heaters or washing machines. The height of the main switch or circuit breaker or meter shall not be higher than seven (7) feet or less than five (5) feet from the ground or floor. 
(Code 1963, § 8-85)  
Sec. 6-230. - Separate service required. 
(a)  Each separate building into which electrical current is introduced for light, heat or power shall have an independent service. When a building is partitioned with an unpierced fire wall, the space between such partitions shall be considered as a separate building. 
(b)  Provided that a private garage on the same lot as a main building and used in connection with same may be supplied from the same service, provided that no garage on the same lot as the place of residence is used as a manufacturing or other business establishment or used for rental purposes. 
(Code 1963, § 8-88)  
Sec. 6-231. - Wiring methods. 
(a)  Inspection. All concealed plumbing and other piping or ductwork should be in place before the wiring inspection is called for. 
(b)  Circuit identification. The contractor shall identify all branch circuits at the panel showing the outlet so served before calling for final inspection. 
(c)  Contractor's decal. Every electrical contractor shall stencil or provide a decal with the contractor's name, address and phone number on the main switch or panel. 
(Code 1963, § 8-90; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 36, 5-12-15)  
Secs. 6-232—6-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 6-241. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  A permit will be required to do any electrical construction of any character, install any electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment, or make any extensions or changes to existing systems of wiring for light, heat, or power, within the city's jurisdiction, excepting work done by employees of public utility companies, as permitted by section 6-204(c) and further excepting the repairing of damaged apparatus or equipment and the ordinary work necessary for the proper maintenance of same. 
(b)  No permits will be required on service calls involving no wiring or installation of equipment or fixtures, by a master electrician and/or his certified journeyman serving in the name of a certified master. 
(Code 1963, § 8-54)  
Sec. 6-242. - Application; issuance. 
Before any electrical wiring or electrical apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power shall be installed, within or attached to any building or structure, either public or private, within the city's jurisdiction, a written application for a permit to do so must be made to the city building official by an applicant intending to install the work, and the permit when issued shall be to such applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans, specifications and schedule as may be necessary, in the opinion of the building official, to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. If it shall be found by the building official that the installation as described will in general conform with the requirements of this article, and if the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article, a permit for such installation shall be issued by the city building official. The permit when issued shall be for such installation as is described in the application. 
(Code 1963, § 8-55; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 37, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-243. - Classification of meter service for permit purposes. 
For the purpose of this article to regulate the issuing of permits, each recording watt-hour meter and all feeder wires, subfeeder wires and branch circuit wires connecting to it shall be construed as one meter service. A separate permit must be obtained for work requiring a permit performed on each such meter service, but may be included in one permit when all work is under the supervision of the same master electrician. 
(Code 1963, § 8-56)  
Sec. 6-244. - Permit fees required. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued for the installation or alteration of electric wiring, device or equipment, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee as required in Appendix 6A of this chapter. 
(b)  Electrical work valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall not require a permit if work is performed by a licensed electrical contractor. Value of work as referred to above shall be the cost of the work inclusive of labor and materials or in the event there is no charge for the labor or materials then the fair market value of the labor and materials shall be the criteria used in determining the value of the work. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permit is required, the decision of the building official shall be final. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-57, 8-58; Ord. No. 23-1990, § 3, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 29-1997, § 6, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 43-2002, § 5, 9-27-02; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 38, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-245. - Inspection fees. 
When extra inspection trips are necessary due to one (1) of the following reasons, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall apply. 
(1)  Wrong address. 
(2)  Failed inspection. 
(3)  Additional work done after inspection has been made. 
(4)  Work not ready for inspection when inspector is called. 
(5)  Inspection card not posted when inspection made. 
(Code 1963, § 8-59; Ord. No. 29-1997, § 7, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 39, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Surcharge on all permit fees, § 6-102(10)(d); land development fees, §§ 47-71 et seq., 47-291 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 6-246—6-255. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Permit and inspection fees, §§ 6-244, 6-245. 
 
Sec. 6-256. - Duties and powers of city. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building official to issue permits for, and inspect all electrical wiring apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power, inside of or attached to buildings within the city's jurisdiction, and to supervise the enforcement of laws, rules and regulations, relating to all electrical construction, and over all electricians certified to carry on their business or trade under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any electrical current in or through any wiring apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power in or on any building or structure within the city's jurisdiction, until the same shall have been inspected and approved by the building official, and the certificate provided for in subsection (d) below shall have been issued herefor. 
(c)  When any electrical wiring, apparatus or fixtures covered by a permit shall be found upon inspection by the building official to conform to the rules and regulations provided by this article, the building official shall certify that the wiring, apparatus or fixtures have been inspected and found to comply with the terms of this article and such equipment conforms to such rules and regulations. 
(d)  The building official, before such certification is issued, may give temporary permission to connect and furnish electric current to any wiring, apparatus or fixtures for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days, if such wiring, apparatus or fixtures are in such condition that current may safely be connected therewith for such period of time and there exists a necessity for such use, when written application is filed with him requesting such permission. 
(e)  The building official is hereby empowered to inspect or reinspect all interior wires and apparatus, conducting or using electric current for light, heat or power. When the conductors or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, he shall notify the person owning, using or operating them, or either of them, to place same in a safe and secure condition within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such additional time as the building official shall reasonably determine is necessary. 
(f)  Whenever any wiring, apparatus or fixtures conducting or using current for light, heat or power is found upon inspection by the building official to be especially or immediately hazardous to life or property, the building official shall immediately open the switch or circuit breaker controlling the supply of current to such wiring, apparatus or fixtures, and shall post in a conspicuous place near such switch or circuit breaker, a notice, printed in red letters as follows: 
"NOTICE—WIRING CONDEMNED 
"The use of electric current is prohibited through this wiring or equipment until proper repairs have been made and approved by the building official. Repairs shall be made by a certified electrician and the building official shall be notified when completed." 
After such notice is posted no person shall close the switch or circuit breaker which has been opened by the building official nor use or attempt to use any current through such wiring, apparatus or fixture which has been condemned, until necessary repairs have been made and approved by the building official. The building official may also notify the person furnishing current to such wiring, apparatus or fixtures to disconnect the supply wires and cut off the current from the premises where such wiring, apparatus or fixtures are located. 
(Code 1963, § 8-41; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 40, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-257. - Interference. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the building official in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Code 1963, § 8-42)  
Sec. 6-258. - Inspection of work. 
(a)  All plumbing and other piping or tube work shall be in place on work to be concealed before the electrical wiring is inspected, and no such wiring shall be considered as complete until all such plumbing or piping is in place. Upon making an inspection of any electrical wiring or equipment, when it is found to have been installed in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the provisions of this article, the building official shall place a notice at the service switch or other suitable place stating that the electrical work has been inspected and found to be in accordance with the rules as prescribed and the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to lath, seal or in any manner conceal any electrical wiring or equipment until same has been inspected and the notice posted as herewith required. It shall be unlawful to cover or fill any switch or outlet box with plaster, cement or other materials. When the electrical work, in any building for which a permit has been obtained, is ready for inspection, notice shall be given stating the location of the work, name of the owner, name of the master electrician having the permit, to the building official at his office. 
(b)  Notice of readiness for inspections shall be made only by master electricians or their authorized agents. Requests by builders, general contractors, owners, etc., shall not be considered as fulfilling this intent. Upon completion of the work, notice shall be given at the office of the building official for a final inspection, and if the work has been properly done, he shall certify the final inspection upon the request of the master electrician holding the permit. This certification shall not relieve the electrician of responsibility for any defective work which may have escaped the notice of the building official. Where a written electrical inspection report is required by state, county or federal agency, the inspection shall be made and the report signed by the building official. 
(c)  All wires at switch outlets must be shorted before a test will be made. All wires at every outlet must extend out six (6) inches or more. Where wires are installed in conduit or any wiring method used which is to be installed before wires are pulled in, the following inspection must be made: 
(1)  When installed as a complete system without wires, where the same are to be concealed, the system must be inspected before being covered. 
(2)  Upon completion of jobs with all conduits, wires, fixtures, fuses and receptacles in place, a final inspection will be made, giving an insulation test on wiring in fixtures. In each case the contractor doing the wiring shall be held responsible for resistance test on wiring, and the contractor installing the fixtures shall be held responsible for insulation test on wires in fixtures. Radiant ceiling heat installation inspections shall be made before plastering ceilings or lathing walls. 
(3)  All panel, switch and innerface covers shall be removed for final inspection. 
(4)  At the request of the building official temporary electrical power shall be connected to permanent wiring systems for the purpose of testing branch circuits and ground fault circuits. 
(Code 1963, § 8-43; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 41, 5-12-15)  
Secs. 6-259—6-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Standard mechanical code, F.S. § 553.73. 
 
Sec. 6-281. - Code; adopted; penalty. 
The latest publication of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical current edition, as it may change from time to time, together with all appendices thereto, and the standards, requirements and penalties provided therein, are hereby adopted by reference as the mechanical code of the city. All provisions therein are made a part of this article the same as if they were set forth herein in full. Wherever the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical current edition, conflict with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall prevail. One (1) copy of the code is on file in the office of the building official. Any person, or agent thereof, who shall fail to comply with this code, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 13B-1; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 8, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 42, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 6-282. - Fees. 
(a)  When extra inspection trips are necessary due to one (1) of the following reasons, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall apply. 
(1)  Wrong address. 
(2)  Failed inspection. 
(3)  Additional work done after inspection has been made. 
(4)  Work not ready for inspection when inspector is called. 
(5)  Inspection card not posted when inspection made. 
(b)  Permit fees will be charged as follows: 
(1)  A nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  The permit fee shall be charged in accordance with the permit valuation schedule. 
(3)  The minimum permit fee is fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(4)  Duplicate/revised plan charge or cost if exceeds charge: 
a.  Residential: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
b.  Commercial: Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1963, § 13B-2; Ord. No. 23-1990, § 4, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 29-1997, § 8, 9-23-97; Ord. No. 43-2002, § 6, 9-27-02; Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2015, § 43, 5-12-15) 
Cross reference— Land development regulation fees, §§ 47-71 et seq., 47-291 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City council, art. II; elections, art. IX. 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Florida election code, F.S. chs. 97—106. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - State election laws adopted. 
The general election laws for the state, F.S. chs. 97 through 106, are hereby adopted by reference as may be applicable to the elections of the city. Any provisions of the state election law in conflict with the Code of Ordinances of the city shall be superseded by the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 7-6)  
Sec. 7-2. - Qualification of candidates. 
(a)  Candidates for office of council member in any election of the city shall have been residents of the city for one (1) year prior to filing for council member, and shall have the qualifications of electors in the city. 
(b)  Any incumbent council member whose term shall extend into the year or years following the election, may qualify and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as a candidate for mayor and any candidate who files for one (1) of the city council seats to be filled at such election may qualify as a candidate for mayor provided the council seat was resigned not less than ten (10) days prior to the first day of qualifying. 
(c)  The qualifying fee for the office of the council members shall be the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  Candidates for office of city council member and mayor are required to file their qualification papers with and pay the qualification fees to the city clerk of the city at any time after noon of the first filing date, which shall be the eighty-first day prior to the Tuesday of the general election of candidates or nominees to the city council or mayor or such other date as established by applicable general law for state primary elections, but not later than noon of the sixty-seventh day prior to the date of the Tuesday for the election of candidates or nominees to the city council or such other date as established by applicable general law for state primary elections. 
(e)  Candidates for the office of city council member in a recall election shall file their qualification papers with and pay the qualification fee to the city clerk of the city at any time during the afternoon of the first filing date, which shall be the thirteenth day prior to the first election, but not later than noon of the twenty-fifth day prior to the date of the first election. 
(Code 1963, § 7-1; Ord. No. 40-1991, § 4, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 3-1998, § 2, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 1, 9-11-07) 
Charter reference— Qualifications of members of city council, § 13. 
State Law reference— Requirements for qualifying for public office, resignations, etc., F.S. § 99.012; additional assessment for candidates, F.S. § 99.093.  
Sec. 7-3. - Conducting the election. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in the Charter or this chapter, the elections shall be conducted in accordance with the general laws of the state including the provisions regarding absentee voting. 
(b)  The inspectors and clerk at each polling place shall be appointed by the city clerk or as provided for in the agreement between the county and the city. 
(Code 1963, § 7-2) 
State Law reference— Absentee voting, F.S. § 97.063.  
Sec. 7-4. - Notice of election. 
(a)  Notice of election for the office of mayor and councilmember shall be in accordance with the state general election laws which are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  If a special election is held where no notice provision is applicable in the general election laws, the mayor shall issue a proclamation announcing the election at least thirty (30) days prior to the election and the proclamation shall be published in a newspaper within the city once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks. 
(Code 1963, § 7-3) 
State Law reference— Notice of special elections, F.S. §§ 100.151, 100.342, 100.75.  
Sec. 7-5. - Certification of returns; canvassing returns. 
(a)  Pursuant to the agreement with the county, the supervisor of elections of the county shall count or supervise the counting of the votes and shall make out a list of those voted for with the number of votes for each and certify the correctness of the count. If the city does not have an agreement with the county, the inspectors at each polling place shall count the votes and shall make out a list of those voted for with the number of votes for each, certifying in duplicate as to the correctness of the count. The certification as to the count shall be signed by the clerk and the majority of the inspectors of the election. One (1) list shall be delivered to the mayor and the other list to the city clerk. The mayor and city clerk shall transmit the returns to the city council at the first council meeting following the receipt of the official results for the primary election and at the organizational meeting held on the fourth Tuesday of November for the general election or such other date as established by the city council. 
(b)  After receiving all returns from the supervisor of elections under such agreement in subsection (a) above or by the city clerk, the city council shall canvass the returns and the results as shown by such returns shall be declared as the result of the election by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 7-4; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 5, 12-10-13)  
Sec. 7-6. - Selection of vice mayor. 
The city council shall have an organizational meeting on the fourth Tuesday in November at 11:00 a.m. in an election year. At the organizational meeting, the council shall select one (1) of its members as vice mayor to serve for a period of one (1) year or until a successor is appointed by the council and qualified. If no election was held, the city council shall select one (1) of its members as vice mayor to serve for a period of one (1) year or until a successor is appointed by the council and qualified during the regular city council meeting held on the fourth Tuesday in November or such other date as established by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 7-11; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 6, 12-10-13) 
Charter reference— Election of mayor and vice-mayor, § 14.  
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, F.S. ch. 252; declaration of emergency, F.S. § 870.041 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew is a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the city excepting the persons officially designated to duty with reference to an emergency. 
Emergency shall mean any occurrence or threat thereof, whether accidental, natural or caused by man, in war or in peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property. 
(Code 1963, § 6A-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-2. - Proclamation by mayor. 
When in the judgment of the mayor an emergency is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of same. 
(Code 1963, § 6A-2) 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Person to be designated to declare emergency, F.S. § 870.042.  
Sec. 8-3. - Curfew. 
After proclamation of an emergency by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city, or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
(Code 1963, § 6A-3) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17.  
Sec. 8-4. - Orders issuable by mayor. 
After proclamation of an emergency, the mayor may, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders: 
(1)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores. 
(2)  Order the closing of all beer taverns. 
(3)  Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer. 
(5)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(6)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(7)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(8)  Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms and/or ammunition. 
(9)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Code 1963, § 6A-4) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Emergency measures, F.S. §§ 870.044, 870.045.  
Sec. 8-5. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any executive order issued pursuant hereto, or any person who wilfully fails or refuses to comply with the order or orders of any duly authorized law enforcement officer or personnel charged with the responsibility of the enforcement of such executive order shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 6A-5)  
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 27-2009, adopted July 28, 2009, amended chapter 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 9 consisted of §§ 9-1—9-14, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 2-1993, adopted Feb. 9, 1993; Ord. No. 26-1995, adopted Sept. 12, 1995; Ord. No. 10-1997, adopted May 13, 1997; Ord. No. 24-1999, adopted Aug. 24, 1999; Ord. No. 18-2003, adopted Apr. 22, 2003; and Ord. No. 63-2004, adopted Sept. 28, 2004. 
Charter reference— Creation of fire rescue department, §§ 32, 45. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; electrical standards, § 6-201 et seq.; prerequisites for incineration by private solid waste collectors, § 11-409; fire hydrants, § 53.54, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection, F.S. ch. 633. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Adoption of Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purposes of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, those certain codes known as the Florida Fire Prevention Code which includes N.F.P.A. 1 and N.F.P.A. Life Safety Code 101, as it may change from time to time, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended but including supplementary regulations, of which codes copies have been and are now filed in the office of the city manager, the office of the building official and the office of the fire chief, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. The fire official, as referred to in the Florida Fire Prevention Code, shall mean the chief of the department of fire rescue or his designated representative. Nothing in this code is intended to prevent the use of systems, methods or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability and safety to those prescribed by this code, providing technical documentation is submitted to the authority having jurisdiction to demonstrate equivalency and the system, method or device is approved for the intended purposes. 
(b)  The specific requirements of this code may be modified by the authority having jurisdiction to allow alternate arrangements that will secure as nearly equivalent safety to life from fire as practical, but in no case shall the modification afford less safety to life than, in the judgment of the authority having jurisdiction, that which would be provided with the compliance with the corresponding provisions contained in this code. 
(c)  Buildings with alternative fire protection features accepted by the authority having jurisdiction shall be considered as conforming with the code. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-2. - Enforcement. 
The codes adopted by this chapter shall be enforced by the chief of the department of fire rescue. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-3. - Enforcement assistance. 
Police and other law enforcement agencies having authority in this jurisdiction shall render necessary assistance in the enforcement of this code when requested to do so by the chief of the department of fire rescue. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-4. - Implied consent. 
Any application for, or acceptance of, any permit requested or issued pursuant to this code constitutes agreement and consent by the person making the application or accepting the permit to allow the fire chief to enter the premises at any reasonable time to conduct such inspections as required by this code. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-5. - Authority of the fire chief to stop work contrary to public welfare. 
Whenever in the opinion of the fire chief, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, the continuance of a building operation is contrary to public welfare, he may order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of work until the condition in violation has been remedied. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-6. - Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires. 
(a)  No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land; except small bonfires for social activities such as cookouts, pep rallies, scout organizations and other similar events may be permitted by securing the permission of the fire chief. Fires for the purpose of burning trash, underbrush, etc., in connection with land clearing are prohibited. 
(b)  The fire chief may approve the issuance of special burn permits for the purpose of large-scale land clearing operations on a case-by-case basis. Upon approval from the fire chief or his/her designee the following conditions will apply: 
(1)  A two hundred-dollar permit fee shall be paid to the fire department and a city permit shall be issued, upon site approval. The city permit will include all of the conditions required based on fire safety standards as determined by the Florida Division of Forestry and the Titusville Fire and Emergency Services Department. 
(2)  Individuals burning without a permit or after a violation has been issued or with a revoked permit shall be subject to a five hundred-dollar fine for each occurrence. Payment of such fine must be made prior to any continuance of open burning. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-7. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  The chief of the department of fire rescue shall be authorized to designate fire lanes on or in any public street, alley, roadway or premises, or on any private or public property, which, in his opinion, would be necessary or desirable for the free movement of fire apparatus of firefighting personnel responding to or operating at a scene of fire or other emergency. 
(b)  Designated fire lanes, authorized and required by the chief of the fire rescue department, shall be appropriately identified with signs bearing the words "FIRE LANE, NO PARKING." Said signs and letters shall be standard information-type traffic signs, with red letters on white background. 
(c)  Vehicles, equipment or materials parked or stored in the area designated or identified as a fire lane shall be removed, ordered to be removed or impounded at the discretion of the chief of the department of fire rescue and all costs of such removal or impounding shall be the responsibility of the violator. 
(d)  Whoever shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed a properly identified fire lane shall be subjected to the penalties of this code. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-8. - Access for fire rescue/combat division, lock boxes. 
(a)  When access to or within listed occupancies is unduly difficult due to secured openings and immediate access is necessary for life safety and fire combat considerations, a key lock box shall be installed by the owner for use by combat division personnel. The key box shall be of a type, as designated by the fire chief. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, listed occupancies include the following: 
(1)  Mercantile occupancies over twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in floor area. 
(2)  Factory/industrial occupancies over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in floor area. 
(3)  All malls or enclosed shopping centers. 
(4)  School buildings over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in floor area. 
(5)  Assembly occupancies over three hundred (300) occupant content. 
(6)  All hazardous occupancies. 
(7)  Storage occupancies over twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or twenty-five thousand (25,000) cubic feet storage area. 
(8)  Institutional occupancies (medical care facilities, jails, etc.). 
(9)  All high rise structures for accessibility to common and mechanical areas. 
(10)  Other buildings and structures as deemed necessary by the fire chief. 
(c)  The key lock box shall contain a key for access to the following areas: 
(1)  Keys to points of ingress and egress, whether doors are on the interior or exterior of the building. 
(2)  Keys to mechanical and electrical equipment rooms. 
(3)  Keys to elevator controls. 
(4)  Keys to all common areas of the building which may be secured. 
(5)  Keys to other areas as directed by the fire chief. 
All keys contained in the lock box shall be properly identified as to function by a metal tag or stamped identification on the key. 
(d)  Failure to maintain key lock boxes or maintain the required keys in the lock box shall constitute a violation of this code and each day of noncompliance of these provisions shall constitute a separate offense. Violations of these provisions may be prosecuted before the municipal code enforcement board or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  All occupancies which continuously maintain personnel on-premises seven (7) days a week, twenty-four (24) hours a day, and who can provide immediate access for the fire rescue/combat division, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(f)  All other commercial occupancies not listed under subsection (b) above shall provide the department of fire rescue with a list of one (1) or more key holders to be called in case of a life safety or fire combat emergency for access to the interior of the structure. Once a key holder has been notified to respond to the scene, failure to respond within thirty (30) minutes shall result in a minimum charge to the business or property owner of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) an hour or fraction of an hour thereof, until such time as access is supplied. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-9. - Incident security watch, cost recovery. 
When an emergency incident causes a building or structure to be no longer secure against unauthorized entry, or when origins of a fire are of a suspect nature, the combat division shall post a security watch until the required investigations have been completed. This watch may be relieved when authorized by the fire marshal's office or fire chief upon adequate security measures being taken to secure the structure. The costs of this security watch shall be borne by the owner of the real property at the following rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour, and per engine company, beginning two (2) hours after the combat team has secured the building or structure. The first two (2) hours are considered a combined responsibility smoke/fire regeneration and security watch. The watch is established as a service directly to the property owner and therefore is billed directly to him. Failure to pay these charges shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this code and may be prosecuted before the municipal code enforcement board or before any court of legal jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-10. - Hazardous waste cleanup and disposal. 
(a)  Removal and cleanup of accidental spills of materials classified by state or federal agencies as hazardous, shall be accomplished in the following manner: 
(1)  The parties responsible for the spill shall have the sole responsibility for taking immediate corrective action and shall immediately contact the fire rescue/combat division. When the fire rescue/combat division provides response for accidental spills it shall have the authority to take whatever action it determines to be necessary to contain the spill. 
(2)  An emergency purchase order shall be authorized for removal and proper disposal of the hazardous waste in accordance with all applicable regulations of the city, state and federal governments by a duly licensed private company. 
(3)  The department of fire rescue personnel shall be authorized to contact hazardous waste disposal companies to provide expeditious removal of accidental spills. Severity and toxicity of the spill may be considered in evaluating the response capability of each private company for each incident. 
(b)  Payment for the cleanup shall be made by the party responsible for the spill within five (5) days. Recovery by the city of any and all expenses incurred in hazardous waste cleanup and disposal shall be through direct billing to the party responsible for the spill and further through any and all remedies provided by law, and shall include attorneys' fees incurred to collect payment. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-11. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or to violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or to knowingly and willfully resist, obstruct or oppose the fire chief in the lawful execution of any inspection or legal duty, with or without offering or doing violence to the fire chief. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to permit inspection of his property or to build, modify or alter in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder or to fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties imposed above, the fire chief may: 
(1)  Remove or eliminate prohibited conditions. 
(2)  Have the building locked and/or sealed. Such building shall not be entered until the seal is removed by the fire chief. 
(3)  Enjoin the business by court proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 9-12. - Occupancy inspection fee schedule. 
Each and every occupancy as hereinafter provided shall pay an annual fee for the inspection of the occupancy for compliance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted in section 9-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Said fee shall be paid concurrent with the renewal of the business tax receipt for existing businesses. The fire chief or designee shall cause an inspection to occur annually of each commercial occupancy type. In addition, any new occupancies or businesses applying for a new business tax receipt or any applicant applying for a transfer of a business tax receipt from one (1) location to another, shall have an inspection pursuant to section 11-50 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. This inspection shall take place prior to the issuance of the business tax receipt, to ensure compliance with the Code of Ordinances. This fee shall be paid prior to issuance of a new business tax receipt. The schedule of fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be obtained from the Fire Department, Community Development Department or the City of Titusville website. 
The fire department shall administer the provisions of this Code. 
In the event any occupancy fails or refuses to pay the required inspection fee, said violator shall be deemed to be in violation of the Code of Ordinances and enforcement shall be processed through the Titusville Code Enforcement Board or as otherwise provided for in the Code of Ordinances. The violator shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city in the collection of said fee. All fees collected shall be set aside and restricted to be utilized for the fire inspection program in the fire emergency services department. 
(Ord. No. 27-2009, § 2, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 36-2012, § 1, 10-23-12, Ord. No. 23-2016, § 3, 9-27-16)  
Chapter 10 - HOUSING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as published by the latest publication of the Standard Housing Code as it may change from time to time. Such code shall be of the same force and effect as if set forth in full in this article. One (1) copy of the code is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1963, § 12A-1; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 10, 9-12-95)  
Sec. 10-27. - Amendments. 
The housing code adopted in section 10-26 is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 106, on board of adjustments and appeals, is amended to read as follows: 
The board of adjustments and appeals provided for in section 13.00 of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II of the Code of Ordinances of the Code and shall be the applicable board as set forth in section 106 of the last publication of the Standard Housing Code, to decide all matters within the jurisdiction of the housing board of adjustments and appeals; provided, however, that there shall be no fees charged by the city for appeals from the Standard Housing Code, and the provisions of the Standard Housing Code shall govern such board in its proceedings. 
(2)  Section 303, minimum requirements for electrical systems, is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 303.1. General. All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed and connected to the source of electrical power in a safe manner. All services shall be grounded by connection, securely to the building metallic pipe system or a driven ground. 
(1)  No pull-chain type switches shall be allowed which are within normal reach of any water outlet. 
(2)  All electrical installations shall be protected by a fused main disconnect switch or circuit breaker, which shall be placed in an accessible location. The main disconnect shall not be located inside a closet or above a major appliance. 
(3)  The minimum acceptable electrical service shall be a 60 amp. capacity. 
(4)  All knob and tube systems or installations wired with less than N.M.S. cable are by definition obsolete and in violation of this code. 
(b)  Section 303.2. Additions. When wiring or any added load or additional circuits are installed in a building, the service or services shall also be revised as necessary and sizes increased to carry the new total load. Additional circuit protection shall be added for the additional load or circuits. Any new circuit protection required shall be of a type approved under the electric code adopted in section 10-26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(1)  All extensions or alterations to existing systems shall be made in accordance with the standards of the current electrical code adopted in section 10-26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Where more than fifty (50) percent of the existing wiring installation is remodeled or changed, all wiring shall be made to meet the requirements of the electrical code adopted in section 10-26 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Any requirement found necessary due to the condition or occupancy of the building, to insure the safety and welfare of the inhabitants or the public, shall be necessary as if set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, § 12A-3; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 10, 9-12-95)  
Sec. 10-28. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provisions of the housing code adopted by this article, or who shall fail to comply with such code, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of such code shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the housing code is committed or continued and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 12A-1) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 10-29—10-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 10-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Fair Housing Ordinance. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-1)  
Sec. 10-52. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in keeping with the laws of the United States of America and the spirit of the constitution of the state, to promote through fair, orderly and lawful procedure the opportunity for all persons so desiring to obtain housing of their choice in the city, without regard to race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin; and to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-2; Ord. No. 29-1996, § 1, 10-8-96)  
Sec. 10-53. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the provisions of this article are to provide a positive means for implementation of the above-declared policy and to discourage and eliminate discriminatory practices. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-3)  
Sec. 10-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director shall mean the city manager or some other person designated as provided for in this article. 
Discriminatory housing practice shall mean an act that is unlawful under this chapter. 
Family includes a single individual and shall mean one (1) or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit; the presence of one (1) or more children under age eighteen (18) living with a parent or legal custodian or their designee; pregnancy; a person adopting or securing legal custody of a child under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Familial status is established when an individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years is domiciled with a: 
(1)  Parent or other person having legal custody of such individual; or 
(2)  Designee of a parent or other person having legal custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
Handicapped person shall mean a person who is determined to: 
(1)  Have, has a record of having, or is regarded as having a physical, mental or emotional impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities (i.e., self-care, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, or working); 
a.  Is expected to be of a long-continued and indefinite duration; 
b.  Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently; and 
c.  Is of such a nature that ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions; or 
(2)  Have a developmental disability, as defined in section 102(7) of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (42 U.S.C. 6001—6007); or 
(3)  Be the surviving member or members of any family that had been living in an assisted unit with the deceased member of the family who had a disability at the time of his or her death. 
(4)  Physical or mental impairments entail a lengthy list of infirmities which can include, but are not necessarily limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV or AIDS) infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance), or alcoholism. 
A landlord cannot make preoccupancy inquiries regarding the nature or severity of a prospective tenant's handicap, nor can the landlord ask an individual questions that would require the applicant or tenant to waive rights of confidentiality regarding medical history. However, the law provides that a dwelling need not be made available to an individual "whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individual(s) or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others." In this regard, the landlord can make inquiries into a tenant's past rental history, and whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance and whether the applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
In addition, an individual cannot be considered to have a handicap solely because that individual is a transvestite. 
Housing or housing accommodation shall mean any building, structure or portion thereof, mobile home or trailer or other such facility, which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof, mobile home or trailer or other such facility. 
Lending institution shall mean any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association or any other person or organization regularly engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans. 
Owner shall mean any person, including but not limited to a lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager or agent, and also including the city and its departments or other subunits, having the right of ownership or possession or the authority to sell or lease any housing accommodation. 
Person shall mean one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries or public corporations. 
Real estate broker shall mean any person duly licensed as a real estate broker in accordance with the laws of the state. 
Real estate salesperson shall mean any person duly licensed as a real estate salesperson in accordance with the laws of the state. 
Real estate transaction shall mean the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real property, and any contract appertaining thereto. 
Respondent shall mean any person against whom a complaint is filed pursuant to this article. 
To rent shall include to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-4; Ord. No. 29-1996, § 1, 10-8-96)  
Sec. 10-55. - Discriminatory housing practices. 
(a)  Sale or rental. Except as provided in section 10-56, it shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for any owner, or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a real estate broker or salesperson, because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin to: 
(1)  Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or otherwise make unavailable or deny housing to any person. 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(3)  Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person. 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person. 
(5)  Represent to a person that housing is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail to bring a property listing to the person's attention, or to refuse to permit such person to inspect the housing. 
(6)  Steer any person away from or to any housing. 
(7)  Make, print, publish, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, printed, published or circulated any notice, statement, advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application or photograph for a real estate transaction or to make a record or oral or written inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates directly or indirectly an intent to make a limitation, specification or discrimination with respect thereto. 
(8)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of housing with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(9)  Induce or attempt to induce any person to transfer an interest in any housing by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of housing owned, used or occupied by any person protected by the terms of this article. 
(10)  Make any misrepresentation concerning the listing for sale or rental, or the anticipated listing for sale or rental, or the sale or rental of any housing within the effective area as governed by this article for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce any such listing or any of the above transactions. 
(11)  Retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any person resulting from that person's opposition to a practice declared unlawful by this article or because the person has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or conference under this article. 
(12)  Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by the provisions of this article, or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article, or any conciliation agreement entered into thereunder. 
(13)  Canvass or solicit to encourage an unlawful practice prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(14)  Otherwise deny to, or withhold, any housing accommodations from a person. 
(15)  Promote, induce, influence or attempt to promote, induce or influence by the use of postal cards, letters, circulars, telephone, visitation or any other means, directly or indirectly, a property owner, occupant or tenant to list for sale, sell, remove from, lease, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of any housing by referring tenants or prospective buyers of any housing as part of a process or pattern or inciting neighborhood unrest, community tension, or fear of change in the composition of any street, block, neighborhood, or any other area, resulting from anticipated neighbors due to their race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin. 
(16)  Cause to be made any untrue or intentionally misleading statement or advertisement, or in any other manner, attempt as part of a process or pattern of inciting neighborhood unrest, community tension or fear of change in the composition of the race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin in any street, block, neighborhood, or any other area, to obtain a listing of any housing for sale, rental assignment, transfer or other disposition, where such statement, advertisement or other representation is false or materially misleading to where there is insufficient basis to judge its truth or falsity or warrant material misrepresentation in order to obtain such listing, sale, removal from, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition of such housing. 
(17)  Place a sign or display any other device either purporting to offer for sale, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition or tending to lead to the belief that a bona fide offer is being made to sell, lease, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of any housing that is not in fact available or offered for sale, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition. 
(b)  Block busting. It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for a person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which that person may benefit financially to: 
(1)  Represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in composition, with respect to race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin, of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the housing accommodation is located. 
(2)  Represent that the change referred to in subsection (b)(1) above will or may result in the lowering of property values, and increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or prompt a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the housing accommodation is located. 
(3)  Make, as part of a process or pattern of discouraging the purchase, rental, occupancy or otherwise of any housing in a particular block, neighborhood or area, any representation to a person known to be a prospective purchaser, that such block, neighborhood, or area may undergo, is undergoing, or has undergone a change in composition with respect to the race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin. 
(4)  Engage in, or hire to be done, or to conspire with others to commit actions or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear, with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing, or attempting to induce the sale, purchase, rental or lease or the listing for any of the above as detailed under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) above of any housing accommodation. 
(c)  Financing. It shall be unlawful and discriminatory housing practice for any lending institution to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, construction, improving, repairing or maintaining housing, or to discriminate against such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the housing in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this subsection shall impair the scope of effectiveness of the exceptions contained in section 10-56. 
(d)  Brokerage services. It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice to deny any person access to, or membership, or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility related to the business of selling, or renting housing, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin. 
(e)  Fair Housing Act. It shall be unlawful for any person to discriminate or to otherwise violate any provision contained in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-430). 
(Code 1963, § 8B-5; Ord. No. 29-1996, § 1, 10-8-96)  
Sec. 10-56. - Exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in section 10-55 shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting or from advertising the sale, rental or occupancy of housing which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members, provided that public funds have not been used for the purpose of construction, maintenance or for other purposes directly related to the upkeep of such property. 
(b)  Nothing in section 10-55 other than subsection (a)(7) thereof shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident in such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement title to or any rights to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; provided further, that the owner sells or rents such housing: 
(i)  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or person; and 
(ii)  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 10-55(a)(7); but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in housing containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his residence, provided that the owner sells or rents such rooms or units: 
(i)  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting housing or of any employee or agency of any broker, agent, salesperson or person; and 
(ii)  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 10-55(a)(7), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. For the purpose of subsection (a) above, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting housing if: 
a.  Such person has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any housing or any interest therein; 
b.  Such person has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of such person's own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any housing or any interest therein; or 
c.  Such person is the owner of any housing designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall preclude the seller, lessor, property owner or that person's authorized agent from setting forth reasonable rules, regulations, terms and conditions pertaining to the sale or lease or disposal of such person's property; provided such rules, regulations, terms and conditions are not based on race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin; and provided there is no conflict with the affirmative action provisions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-6; Ord. No. 29-1996, § 1, 10-8-96)  
Sec. 10-57. - Director. 
(a)  Authority and responsibility. The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be vested in the director, office of the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The director shall administer the provisions of this article and shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Receive written complaints as provided in section 10-58 relative to alleged unlawful acts as prohibited under this article. 
(2)  Upon receiving a written complaint, make such investigations as the director deems appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. 
(3)  Utilize methods of persuasion, conciliation and mediation for informal adjustment of grievances. 
(4)  Establish, administer or review programs at the request of the city council and make reports on such programs to the council. 
(5)  Bring to the attention of the city council items that may require the council's notice or action to resolve. 
(6)  Render to the city council annual written reports of activities under the provisions of this article along with such comments and recommendations as deemed appropriate. 
(7)  Cooperate with and render technical assistance to federal, state, local and other public and private agencies, or organizations and institutions which are formulating or carrying on programs to prevent or eliminate the unlawful discriminatory practices covered by the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Issue subpoenas to compel access to or the production or appearance of premises, records, documents, individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence relative to written complaint. 
(9)  Issue cease-or-desist orders to compel compliance with this article. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-7)  
Sec. 10-58. - Filing complaints. 
(a)  A person who claims that another person has committed a discriminatory housing practice against the claiming person may report the alleged offense to the director, office of the city manager, by filing a complaint within sixty (60) days after the date of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Individuals entitled to file a complaint: 
(1)  Person who claims to have been injured; or 
(2)  Person who believes that he or she will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
(3)  Both the seller/landlord and the purchasing/renting family are aggrieved and can file a complaint when a third party, acts unlawfully to prevent the sale or rental of a unit due to an individual's race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin. (i.e., a homeowner association's refusal to rent or sell a unit to a family with children; or a person refused rent/sell who is associated with another person that is handicapped that may reside or intend to reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available.) 
(b)  The director shall treat a complaint referred by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or the Attorney General of the United States under the Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, as a complaint filed under this article. 
(c)  A complaint must be filed within one (1) year after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred, in writing, verified or affirmed, on a form to be supplied by the director and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Identity of the respondent. 
(2)  Date of the alleged offense and date of filing the complaint. 
(3)  General statement of acts of the alleged offense including the basis of the discrimination in regard to race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap or national origin. 
(4)  Name and signature of complainant. 
(d)  Within ten (10) days after the filing of the complaint, the director shall transmit a copy of the same to each respondent named therein by certified mail, return receipt requested. Thereupon the respondent may file a written, verified answer to the complaint within ten (10) days of the date of receipt of the complaint from the director. 
(e)  A complaint or answer may be amended at any time when it would be fair and reasonable to do so, and the director shall furnish a copy of each amended complaint or answer to the respondent or complainant, respectively, as promptly as practicable. 
(f)  The director shall assist complainant or respondent when necessary in the preparation and filing of complaints or answers or any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-8; Ord. No. 29-1996, § 1, 10-8-96)  
Sec. 10-59. - Processing complaints. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the filing of a complaint, the director shall make such investigation as deemed appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. If the director shall deem that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred and can be resolved by conciliation, the director shall attempt to conciliate the matter by methods of initial conference and persuasion with all interested parties and such representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. 
(b)  If the parties desire to conciliate, the terms of the conciliation shall be reduced to writing in the form approved by the director and must be signed and verified by the complainant and respondent and approved by the director. The conciliation agreement is for conciliation purposes only and does not constitute an admission by any party that the law has been violated. 
(c)  If the director deems that there is not sufficient evidence to form a belief that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall take no further action with respect to the alleged offense. 
(d)  If the director, with respect to any matter which involves a violation of this article, does not dismiss the complaint and (i) fails to conciliate a complaint after the parties have in good faith attempted such conciliation, or (ii) fails to effect an informal conciliation agreement or formal consent agreement, or (iii) determines that a complaint is not susceptible of conciliation, the director shall, upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of filing the complaint, schedule a public hearing to determine the facts, such hearing to be held not more than forty-five (45) days after the date of filing the complaint. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date, the director shall serve upon all interested parties a notice of the time and place of the hearing. The respondent or his authorized counsel may file such statements or affidavits with the director prior to the hearing date as he deems necessary in support of its position. The hearing shall be open to the public. The complainant and the respondent shall appear before the director in person and may have the assistance of an attorney. They may present testimony and evidence, and the right to cross-examine witnesses shall be preserved. All testimony and evidence shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The director shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence. The director shall keep a full record of all hearings. A copy of the hearing record shall be available to any person at such costs as the director deems appropriate. 
(e)  If at any time after the filing of a complaint alleging an unlawful practice in violation of this article, the director determines that the respondent is doing or procuring to be done any act tending to render ineffectual any order the director has entered in such proceeding, the director may request the city attorney to apply to the circuit court for an order temporarily restraining the respondent's activities relating to the subject matter of the complaint, pending final disposition of the complaint, or for such other relief as is necessary for the director to carry out its duties and responsibilities. 
(f)  If the director determines that the complainant has been subjected to an unlawful discriminatory practice, the director shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist from the unlawful practice and to take such affirmative action as in the judgment of the director will carry out the purposes of this article. If the respondent fails to comply with the order, the director may take such other action to compel compliance. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-9)  
Sec. 10-60. - Enforcement. 
If the director cannot resolve the violation, the director shall provide the complainant full and complete information as to the alternatives available to him under local, state and federal law. The director shall include within the information provided to the complainant, a statement indicating that the city will provide free legal counsel to the complainant if he wishes to bring a private suit for relief in a local, state or federal court. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-10)  
Sec. 10-61. - Additional remedies. 
The procedures prescribed by this article do not constitute an administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available under other law. Further, nothing in this article shall be deemed to modify, impair or otherwise affect any right or remedy conferred by the Constitution or laws of the United States or of the state, and the provisions of this article shall be supplemental to those provided by such other laws. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-11)  
Sec. 10-62. - Untruthful complaints or testimony. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person knowingly and willfully to make false or untrue statements, accusations or allegations in a complaint or to give false testimony concerning violations of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-12)  
Sec. 10-63. - Penalty. 
This article shall not be covered by section 1-15 of this Code of Ordinances. It is the intention that violations of this article shall be resolved by the procedures provided for within this article or by application of the laws and constitution of the state and the United States. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-13)  
Sec. 10-64. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article and the application of the provisions to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1963, § 8B-14)  
ARTICLE IV. - STATE HOUSING INITIATIVE PARTNERSHIP (SHIP) PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 10-65. - Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, as published by the latest publication of the State Housing Initiative Partnership (SHIP) program in F.S. § 420.9072 and 67-37 FAC, as it may change from time to time. Such code shall be of the same force and effect as if set forth in full in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-66. - Definitions. 
Adjusted for family size means adjusted in a manner which results in an income eligibility level that is lower for households having fewer than four (4) people, or higher for households having more than four (4) people, than the base income eligibility determined as provided in [this section], based upon a formula established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Students as defined herein are to be included in the calculation of family size. 
Administrative expenditures means those expenditures directly related to implementation of the local housing assistance plans. 
Affordable means that monthly rent and utilities or mortgage payments, insurance, property taxes, utilities, and homeowner's association fees, where applicable, do not exceed thirty (30) percent of that amount which represents the percentage of the median income for households qualifying under [this section]. 
Annual gross income means the gross amount of wages, income from assets, regular case or non-cash contributions, and any other resources and benefits determined to be income by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. This is the amount of income anticipated to be received by all adults in a household during the twelve (12) months following the effective date of the determination. Anticipated income is generally determined by annualizing current income for the next twelve (12) months. 
Annual report or Form SHIP-AR/07 means a report required to be completed and submitted to the Corporation by September 15 of each year pursuant to F.S. § 420.9075(10). 
Award means a loan, grant, or subsidy funded wholly or partially by the local housing distribution. 
Catalyst means the Affordable Housing Catalyst Program as described in F.S. § 420.531. 
Committee means the affordable housing advisory committee appointed by the City of Titusville City Council to meet the objectives of the affordable housing committee created by F.S. § 420.9072. The committee shall abide by all SHIP rules pursuant to F.S. § 420.907 and will also review the established policies and procedures, ordinances, land development regulations, and adopted local government comprehensive plan, and shall recommend specific actions or initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing while protecting the ability of the property to appreciate in value. 
Debt service means the amount required in any fiscal year to pay the principal of, redemption premium, if any, and interest on bonds and any amounts required by the terms of the documents authorizing, securing, or providing liquidity for bonds necessary to maintain in effect any such liquidity or security arrangements. 
Default means the failure to make required payments on a financial loan secured by a first mortgage which leads to foreclosure and loss of property ownership. 
Deferred payment loan means funds provided to a borrower under terms that calls for repayment to be delayed for a certain length of time, until certain circumstances change, or a certain threshold is met. 
Department means the neighborhood services department. 
Eligible housing means any real and personal property located within the city or the eligibility municipality which is designated and intended for the primary purpose of providing decent, safe, and sanitary residential units that are designed to meet the standards of F.S. ch. 553, for homeownership or rental for eligible persons as designated in the local housing assistance program. Housing must be within the maximum purchase price limitations as established by the United States Department of Treasury in accordance with revenue proclamation 92-34 and must meet affordability requirements in order to qualify as eligible. 
Eligible person means one (1) or more natural persons, a family, or persons who have been determined by the city or eligible municipality to have special housing needs who have been determined to be very low-income, low-income, or moderate-income according to the adjusted gross income of the resident with adjustment made for family size. 
Eligible sponsor means a community-based organization, a private or public for profit or non-profit entity that applies for assistance under the City of Titusville Local Housing Assistance Program for the purpose of providing eligible housing for eligible persons. 
Encumbered means that deposits made to the local affordable housing trust fund have been committed by contract, purchase order, letter of commitment or award in a manner that obligates the county, eligible municipality, or interlocal entity to expend the amount upon delivery of goods, the rendering of services, or the conveyance of real property by a vendor, supplier, contractor, or owner. 
Essential service personnel means pursuant to Chapter 2006-69, Laws of Florida, persons in need of affordable housing who are employed in occupations or professions in which they are considered essential service personnel, as defined by each county and eligible municipality within its respective local housing assistance plan pursuant to F.S. § 420.9075(3)(a). 
Expended or Spent means the affordable housing activity is complete and funds deposited to the local affordable housing trust fund have been transferred from the local housing assistance trust fund account to pay for the cost of the activity. 
Extremely low-income household or ELI means one (1) or more natural persons or a family that has a total annual gross household income that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the area median income adjusted for family size for households within the metropolitan statistical area, the county, or the non-metropolitan median for the state, whichever is greatest. 
Foreclosure means the legal action by a mortgage holder to require repayment of a loan through the sale of the subject property. 
Forgivable loan means a loan with no repayment obligation if program requirements are met for a specified period of time. 
Grant means as defined in F.S. § 420.9071(12). 
Home ownership activities means the use of local affordable housing trust fund moneys for the purpose of providing owner-occupied housing. Such uses include construction, rehabilitation, purchase, and lease-purchase financing where the primary purpose is the eventual purchase of the housing by the occupant within twenty-four (24) months from initial execution of a lease agreement or within twenty-four (24) months of the applicable fiscal year, whichever occurs first, to meet the requirement of [this section]. 
Interlocal entity means an entity created pursuant to the provisions of F.S. chapter 163, Part I, for the purpose of establishing a joint local housing assistance plan pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 420.9072(5). 
Loan means loan as defined in F.S. § 420.9071(13). 
Low-income person means one (1) or more natural persons or a family, not including students, which have total annual anticipated gross income for the household that does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the median annual income for households, within the city. While occupying a rental unit, a low-income person's annual anticipated gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed one hundred forty (140) percent of eighty (80) percent of the applicable median income adjusted for family size for purposes of meeting the requirements of 67-37.007(9). 
Moderate-income person means one (1) or more natural persons or a family, not including students, which has a total annual anticipated gross income for the household that does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the median annual income for households within the city. While occupying a rental unit, a low-income person's annual anticipated gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed one hundred forty (140) percent of one hundred twenty (120) percent of the applicable median income adjusted for family size for purposes of meeting the requirements of 67-37.007(9). 
Rehabilitation means repairs or improvements which are needed for safe and sanitary habitation, correction of substantial code violations, or the creation of additional living space. 
Review committee means the committee established pursuant to F.S. § 420.9072(3)(a). 
SHIP or SHIP program means the state housing initiatives partnership program created pursuant to the State Housing Initiative Partnership Act, F.S. § 420.907.9079. 
State means the State of Florida. 
Student means a person not living with his or her parent or guardian who is eligible to be claimed by the person's parent or guardian under the Federal Income Tax Code and who is enrolled at least half time in a secondary school, vocational-technical school, community college, or university. The term does not include a person participating in a job training program approved by the city or eligible municipality. 
Sub recipient means a person or non-state organization contracted by a SHIP eligible local government and compensated with SHIP funds to provide administration of any portion of the SHIP program. 
Very-low income person means one (1) or more natural persons or a family, not including students, which have total annual anticipated gross income for the household that does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the median annual income for households, within the city. While occupying a rental unit, a low-income person's annual anticipated gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed one hundred forty (140) percent of fifty (50) percent of the applicable median income adjusted for family size for purposes of meeting the requirements of 67-37.007(9). 
Welfare transition program means a program pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 445.006. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-67. - Creation of the local housing assistance trust fund. 
(1)  The local housing assistance trust fund is hereby created and established. 
(2)  All monies received from the state pursuant to the State Housing Initiative Partnership Act and any other funds received or budgeted to provide funding for the City of Titusville Housing Assistance Program shall be deposited into the local housing assistance trust fund. Administration of the local housing assistance trust fund shall comply with Rule 67-37.007, Florida Administrative Code. 
(3)  Expenditures other than for the implementation and administration of the Local housing assistance program shall not be made from the local housing assistance trust fund. 
(4)  Amounts on deposit in the local housing assistance trust fund shall be invested as provided by law. All investment earnings shall be retained in the local housing assistance trust fund and used for the purposes thereof. 
(5)  Until utilized for the purposes thereof, monies in the local housing assistance trust fund shall be held in trust by the city solely for use pursuant to the local housing assistance program. All local housing assistance program income, including investment earnings, shall be retained in the local housing assistance trust fund and used for purposes thereof. 
(6)  The City agrees that the local housing assistance trust fund shall be separately stated as a special revenue fund in the city's audited financial statements. Copies of such audited financial statements shall be forwarded annually to the Florida Housing Finance Corporation no later than June 30 of the following fiscal year. 
(7)  Local governments which have an audit review or investigation involving SHIP funds will send the Corporation a copy of any related report within ten (10) days of the issuance of such report. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-68. - Intent and purpose of the local housing assistance program. 
(1)  The intent of the local housing assistance program is: 
(a)  Increase the availability of affordable housing units by combining local resources and cost-saving measures into a local housing partnership and using private and public funds to reduce the cost of housing; 
(b)  Promote innovative design of eligible housing that provides cost savings, flexible design options for housing and development such as the combination of architectural styles, building forms, and development requirements; and positive design features such as orientation towards the street and pedestrian access, without compromising the quality of the eligible housing; 
(c)  Promote mixed-income housing in urban, suburban, and rural areas so as to provide increased housing and economic opportunities for persons who have special housing need, very low-income, low-income, or moderate-income; and 
(d)  Build the organizational and technical capacity of community-based organizations so as to optimize the role of community-based organization in the production of affordable housing. 
(2)  The purpose of this article is to aid in achieving the intent of the local housing assistance program while providing for: 
(a)  Protection of natural resources; 
(b)  Enhancement of viability of public transit, pedestrian circulation, and nonmotorized modes of transportation; 
(c)  Community development and economics growth; and 
(d)  Strong sense of community through increased social and economic integration. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-69. - Establishment of the local housing assistance program. 
(1)  The local housing assistance program is hereby created and established. This program shall apply to the incorporated area of the City of Titusville. 
(2)  Pursuant to Resolution 14-2007, the city hereby specifically finds the cost of administering the local housing assistance program shall exceed five (5) percent of the funding received from the state pursuant to the State Housing Initiative Partnership Act, and authorizes the use of up to ten (10) percent of the SHIP funds and five (5) percent of any program income received from investment of the housing distribution received by the city in a fiscal year for administration of the housing assistance program. 
(3)  The city shall use the funds received from the state pursuant to the State Housing Initiative Partnership Act to implement the local housing assistance program. The detailed design specifications for the use of the trust fund monies will be adopted in the City of Titusville Local Housing Assistance Plan, after review of the statutory requirements and the local needs. The city council will, after giving due consideration to the recommendations of the affordable housing advisory committee, and considering the advice of the department and the comments from the public, adopt the local housing assistance plan. 
(a)  A percentage of the funds may be used by the city to implement the following locally designed strategies: 
1.  Implementation of the local housing assistance plan and incentive strategies that create or preserve affordable housing; 
2.  Supplement corporation programs, for example: the state apartment incentive loan (SAIL) program established under F.S. § 420.5087, the community workforce housing innovation pilot (CWHIP) program, and home ownership assistance program (HAP) established under F.S. § 420.5088, with the SHIP local housing distribution directed to uses within the local government jurisdiction; 
3.  Provide local match to obtain federal housing grants or programs, such as HOME, established by 24 CFR, Part 92; 
4.  Fund emergency repairs by existing service providers under weatherization programs, pursuant to F.S. §§ 409.509—409.5093. 
5.  To further the housing element of the local government comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to F.S. § 163.3184, specific to affordable housing; and 
6.  Home ownership and rental housing activities; however, at least sixty-five (65) percent of each local government's local housing distributions must be used for home ownership activities. 
(4)  The local housing assistance program shall include all other lawful objectives not previously listed if said objectives have been adopted into the local housing assistance plan in the manner provided for by F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079 and Rule 67-37, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-70. - Creation of the local housing partnership. 
(1)  The local housing assistance program shall combine City of Titusville resources and cost saving measures into a Titusville Housing Partnership by using private and public funds in order to reduce the cost of housing. 
(2)  The local housing partnership includes, but is not limited to, the City, community-based organizations, for-profit housing developers, lending institutions, providers of professional services relating to affordable housing, and service organizations working on behalf of person with special housing needs. The partnership shall be represented by members of the affordable housing advisory committee created in Section VII of this article in the implementation of the local housing assistance program. 
(3)  The local housing partnership shall implement the local housing assistance program in a manner that provides support services for housing program beneficiaries such as training to prepare persons for the responsibility of homeownership, and counseling of tenants, and the establishment of support services such as day care, health care, and transportation. Such implementation shall be consistent with this article, F.S. §§ 420-970—420.9079, and Rule 67-37, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-71. - Designation of responsibility for administration and implementation of the local housing assistance program. 
(1)  The neighborhood services department shall be responsible for implementation and administration of the local housing assistance program. 
(2)  The neighborhood services department responsibilities shall be: 
(a)  To work with the committee to: implement the incentive strategies in the local housing assistance plan (LHAP) that create or preserve affordable housing; monitor the success of the local housing assistance program; provide advice and suggestions as to whether and in what ways the local housing assistance program might be improved from year to year; and to develop proposals to initiate and modify, when necessary, the local housing assistance plan. 
(b)  To supplement Florida Housing Finance Corporation programs with the SHIP local housing distribution funds directed to uses within the local government jurisdictions; 
(c)  To provide local match to obtain federal housing grants or programs, such as HOME, established by 24 CFR, Part 92; 
(d)  To fund emergency repairs by existing service providers under weatherization programs, pursuant to F.S. §§ 409.509—409.5093; 
(e)  To further the housing element of the local government comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to F.S. § 163.3184, specific to affordable housing; and 
(f)  To coordinate with City of Titusville programs such as community loan funds, inclusionary housing programs, linkage programs, and with federal programs such as, the community development block grant (CDBG) program, home investment partnership program (HOME), low income rental housing tax credit (LIHTC) program, and section 8 rental assistance so as to maximize the production of eligible housing through the local housing assistance program. 
(3)  The total amount paid for any administrative expenses in connection with the local housing assistance program will not exceed ten (10) percent of the proceeds of the City of Titusville housing distribution and five (5) percent of any program income received from investment of the housing distribution. 
(4)  The city shall not treat as administrative expenses any costs previously borne by another funding source which could continue to be available at the time the local housing assistance plan is submitted. 
(5)  In implementing the local housing assistance program, the department shall: 
(a)  Advertise the availability of a housing assistance program in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and periodicals serving ethnic and diverse neighborhoods, at least thirty (30) days before the beginning of any application period. 
(b)  Adopt a maximum award schedule or system of awards to comply with the following criteria: 
1.  At least sixty-five (65) percent of the funds shall be reserved for homeownership for eligible persons; 
2.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the funds shall be reserved for construction, rehabilitation, or emergency repair of affordable eligible housing; 
3.  The sales price or value of new or existing eligible housing shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the median area purchase price in the area where the eligible housing is located as established by the United States Department of Treasury in accordance with subsection 3(b)2 of the United States Housing Act of 1937; 
4.  All units constructed, rehabilitated, or otherwise assisted with program funds shall be occupied by extremely low-, very low-, low-, or moderate-income persons. At least thirty (30) percent of funds must be expended for the benefit of very low-income persons and at least another thirty (30) percent by low-income persons. 
5.  The amount of monthly mortgage payments or the amount of monthly rents charged by the eligible sponsor or its designee must be affordable to eligible persons; 
6.  Loans shall be provided for periods not exceeding thirty (30) years except for deferred payment loans (DPL) or loans that extend beyond thirty (30) years which continue to provide eligible housing for eligible persons; 
7.  Eligible owner-occupied housing constructed, rehabilitated, or otherwise assisted from proceeds provided from the local housing assistance program shall be subject to subsidy recapture provisions which are provided for in the plan; 
8.  Eligible rental housing constructed, rehabilitated, or otherwise assisted from proceeds provided from the local housing assistance program shall be reserved for eligible persons for the greater of fifteen (15) years or the term of the assistance. Eligible sponsors who offer eligible rental housing for sale before fifteen (15) years or that have remaining mortgages funded under the local housing assistance program must give a first right of refusal to eligible non-profit organizations for purchase for continued occupancy by eligible persons; 
9.  The maximum sales price or value per unit and the maximum award per unit for eligible housing benefiting from awards made pursuant to the local housing assistance program shall be established in the approved local housing assistance plan; 
10.  A qualification system for applicants for awards consistent with the intent of the local housing assistance program and F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079, shall be established by the local housing partnership; 
11.  The department shall annually monitor the local housing assistance plan to determine compliance with the eligibility and affordability provisions (including the amount of subsidy) of this article, and state and federal laws; 
12.  The department shall monitor and determine tenant eligibility and the amount of subsidy pursuant to the provisions of this article, F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079, and Rule 67-37, Florida Administrative Code. 
(6)  The city, the council, the department, the partnership, and all eligible sponsors shall not discriminate in the provisions of affordable housing and loan application process of eligible persons on the basis of race, creed, religion, color, age, sex, marital status, family status, national origin, or handicap. 
(7)  The city shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Florida Housing Finance Corporation in connection with required reporting by the city of compliance with its local housing assistance program. 
(8)  Prior to receiving an award, all eligible persons or eligible sponsors shall enter into an agreement to comply with the affordable housing criteria provided under F.S. §§ 420.907—420.9079, and this article. All eligible persons or eligible sponsors shall include in the deed transferring ownership of the property to the eligible person or eligible sponsor a covenant agreeing to comply with terms of the above-described laws which covenant will run with the land or in the alternative, the agreement shall be made a part of the mortgage agreement. Failure to comply with the covenant in the mortgage shall result in the default of the mortgage with all remedies and rights for enforcement ensuring to the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-72. - Creation of the affordable housing advisory committee. 
(1)  The affordable housing advisory committee (AHAC) is hereby created and established. The members of the committee shall be appointed by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  The AHAC shall consist of eleven (11) voting members. A simple majority of the appointed voting members shall constitute a quorum. The committee may not take formal actions unless a quorum is present, but may meet to hear presentations if duly noticed. The AHAC shall include the following: 
(a)  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged in the residential home building industry in connection with affordable housing; 
(b)  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged in the banking or mortgage banking industry in connection with affordable housing; 
(c)  One (1) citizen who is a representative of those areas of labor actively engaged in home building in connection with affordable housing; 
(d)  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing; 
(e)  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as a for-profit provider of affordable housing; 
(f)  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as a non-profit provider of affordable housing; 
(g)  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as a real estate professional in connection with affordable housing; 
(h)  One (1) citizen who actively serves on the local planning agency pursuant to F.S. § 163.3174; 
(i)  One (1) citizen who resides within the jurisdiction of the local governing body making the appointments; 
(j)  One (1) citizen who represents employers within the jurisdiction; 
(k)  One (1) citizen who represents essential services personnel, as defined in the local housing assistance plan. 
(3)  Members shall serve for a two-year term and may be reappointed for subsequent terms. Vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days of the meeting at which the resignation (vacancy) is accepted. Appointments shall be made whenever the terms of appointees expire, and in accord with the regulations set forth herein. All members shall serve until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified. Each appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term and shall be made by the mayor, with approval of the majority of the city council. 
(4)  The AHAC shall comply with the government in the sunshine law, the public records law, and the special provisions regarding notice of affordable housing incentive plan considerations found in F.S. § 420.9076. Minutes of the meeting shall be kept by the department. 
(5)  An organizational meeting of the committee shall be held as soon as practical after the creation by the city council. The AHAC shall annually elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary, and such other offices as it deems necessary. The chairperson is charged with the duty of conducting meetings in a manner consistent with law. The committee shall adopt reasonable rules of procedures to govern the conduct of its business and the holding of hearings. Meetings of the committee shall be held as needed and may be called by the chairperson upon due notice. All meetings shall be open to the public, announced in advance, and shall provide for public inspection of prepared agendas in advance of all meetings. 
(6)  It is intended that members of the AHAC will be persons of knowledge, experience, judgment and background, and have personal or professional interest or experience in affordable housing. They will have the ability and desire to act in the public interest and represent, insofar as possible, the various special personal and professional interests required to make informed and equitable decisions concerning the provisions of housing which is affordable for all economic segments of the community. 
(7)  Staff, administrative and facility support for the AHAC shall be provided by the department. 
(8)  Triennially, the AHAC shall review the established policies and procedures, ordinances, land development regulations, and adopted comprehensive plan of the City of Titusville, and shall recommend specific actions or initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing while protecting the ability of the property to appreciate in value. The recommendations may include the modification or repeal of existing policies, procedures, ordinances, regulations; the creation of exceptions applicable to affordable housing, or adoption of new policies, procedures, regulations, ordinances, or plan provisions, including recommendations to amend the Titusville Comprehensive Plan and corresponding regulations, ordinances, and other policies. At a minimum, the AHAC shall submit a written report to the city council that includes recommendations on, and triennially thereafter, evaluate the implementation of affordable housing incentives in the following areas: 
(a)  The processing of approvals of development orders or permits, as defined in F.S. §§ 163.3164(7) and (8), for affordable housing projects is expedited to a greater degree than other projects; 
(b)  The modification of impact-fee requirements, including reduction or waiver of fees and alternative methods of fee payment for affordable housing; 
(c)  The allowance of flexibility in densities for affordable housing; 
(d)  The reservation of infrastructure capacity for housing for very low-income, low-income, and moderate-income persons; 
(e)  The allowance of affordable accessory residential units in residential zoning districts; 
(f)  The reduction of parking and setback requirements for affordable housing; 
(g)  The allowance of flexible lot configurations, including zero-lot-line configurations for affordable housing; 
(h)  The modification of street requirements for affordable housing; 
(i)  The establishment of a process by which the City of Titusville considers, before adoption, policies, procedures, ordinances, regulations, or plan provisions that increase the cost of housing; 
(j)  The preparation of a printed inventory of city-owned public lands suitable for affordable housing; 
(k)  The support of development near transportation hubs and major employment centers and mixed use developments. 
The AHAC recommendations may also include other affordable housing incentives identified by the committee. Local governments that receive the minimum allocation under the SHIP program shall perform the initial review but may elect to not perform the triennial review. 
(9)  The AHAC shall be cooperatively staffed by the local government department or division having authority to administer local planning or housing programs to ensure an integrated approach to the work of the committee. 
(10)  The approval by the AHAC of its local housing incentive strategies recommendations and its review of the implementation of local governments previously recommended strategies must be made by affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the AHAC taken at a public hearing. Notice of the time, date, and place of the public hearing of the AHAC to adopt final local housing incentive strategies recommendations must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice must contain a short and concise summary of the local housing incentives strategies recommendations to be considered by the AHAC. The notice must state the public place where a copy of the tentative AHAC recommendations can be obtained by interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-73. - Adoption of the affordable housing incentive plan. 
(1)  Within ninety (90) days after the date of receipt of the local housing incentive strategies recommendations from the AHAC, the city council shall adopt an amendment to its local housing assistance plan to incorporate the local housing incentive strategies it will implement within its jurisdiction. The amendment must include, at a minimum, the local housing incentive strategies required under F.S. § 420.9071(16); expedited permit process and ongoing review process. The city council must consider the strategies specified in Section VII paragraph (h)(1)-(11) as recommended by the committee. 
(2)  Upon adoption of the affordable housing incentive plan, the department shall so notify the corporation by certified mail of its adoption of an amendment of its local housing assistance plan to incorporate local housing incentives strategies. The notice shall include a copy of the approved amended plan. 
(3)  The AHAC may perform other duties at the request of the city, including: 
(a)  The provision of mentoring services to affordable housing partners including developers, banking institutions, employers, and others to identify available incentives, assist with applications for funding requests, and develop partnerships between various parties. 
(b)  The creation of best practices for the development of affordable housing in the community. 
(4)  Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services. 
(5)  Committee members shall abide by and be subject to the provisions of F.S. chapter 112, part III, pertaining to the Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 10-74. - Severability. 
If any phrase or portion of this article, or the particular application thereof, shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court, administrative agency, or other body with appropriate jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsection, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article and their application shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, § 2, 5-13-08)  
Chapter 11 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Financial matters, § 2-161 et seq.; alarms, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; qualifications for obtaining building permits, § 6-58; certification of plumbers required, § 6-147; the mayor may declare certain businesses closed during an emergency, § 8-4; access requirements for lock boxes in certain businesses, § 9-9; taxicabs, § 22-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Regulatory licenses authorized, F.S. § 166.221; occupational license taxes authorized, F.S. ch. 205; regulations regarding child care facilities, F.S. § 402.301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Handbills; permit; posting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post or distribute handbills, pamphlets, dodgers or other literature without first obtaining a permit to be issued by the city clerk upon the concurrence of the administrator. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post any show bills, handbills, notices or advertisements, or brand, write, mark or paint any signs, letters or characters upon a building, wall, fence or other property of another person, without first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property or his duly authorized agent. It shall be unlawful for any person to post such bills, notices or advertisements, or brand, write, mark or paint any signs, letters or characters upon or on any tree or telephone, telegraph, streetlights, traffic signs, other city regulatory signs or city poles. 
(c)  Signs, handbills, notes, advertising, placed upon any telephone, telegraph, power pole, tree, street light, traffic sign or other city regulatory signs, trees, utility poles unless expressly authorized by the city regulations, may be immediately removed by the city without notice. Said signs, etc., illegally placed upon public property or within rights-of-way are declared a public and private nuisance and subject to immediate removal. 
(Code 1963, §§ 20-1, 20-2; Ord. No. 16-1998, § 1, 6-9-98)  
Sec. 11-2. - Record of purchases of precious metals. 
(a)  Every person dealing in precious metals, such as gold, silver and platinum, shall keep a record in accordance with F.S. § 538.03 et seq. of all purchases from private individuals at the time of each purchase, which individuals are not themselves licensed dealers regularly engaged in the buying and selling of precious metals. The following information shall be obtained: The date of the transaction; the number which appears on the seller's driver's license or comparable identification used; the type of identification used; the name and address of the seller as it appears on the item of identification; a complete and accurate description of such property; and the signature of the seller. In the event coins are purchased in such large numbers that it is impractical to describe each coin separately, the description may consist of a general description of the various denominations of coins included together with the total weight or face value thereof. 
(b)  This record shall be made available to any law enforcement agency or officer upon request and shall be preserved for a period as prescribed in F.S. § 538.03 et seq. 
(Code 1963, § 15-30) 
State Law reference— Special reporting requirements and restrictions in the sale of certain precious metals, F.S. § 538.03 et seq.  
Secs. 11-3—11-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2006, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 11-31—11-80, was entitled "License Taxes" and derived from Code 1963, §§ 13-1—13-26; Ord. No. 28-1992, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 27, 1992; Ord. No. 32-1995, § 2, adopted Sept. 26, 1995; Ord. No. 17-1996, § 1, adopted Aug. 13, 1996; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 1, adopted Nov. 26, 1996; Ord. No. 32-1999, § 1, adopted Sept. 29, 1999; and Ord. No. 34-1999, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 28, 1999. 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Occupational license taxes, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
Sec. 11-31. - Business tax receipt required. 
(a)  Every person, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within the city is hereby required to have a current local business tax receipt and pay the required fee prior to engaging in or managing such business, profession or occupation. The local business tax receipt is required of: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) above, and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce where such local business tax receipt is not prohibited by section 8, article 1 of the United States Constitution. 
(b)  Person as referred to above means any individual firm, partnership, joint adventure, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor, administrator, receiver or other fiduciary and shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. §§ 205.022(3), 205.042.  
Sec. 11-32. - Presumption of doing business. 
For the purpose of this article, any person holding himself out to the public by sign, printed matter or otherwise, as being engaged in business or as offering services or property to the public for a consideration, shall be considered as engaging in a business, occupation or profession and shall be liable for the local business tax receipt therefore, according to the classification of the business advertised, as set forth in section 11-58. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-33. - When due. 
(a)  Every person engaged in or managing any business, occupation or profession referred to in this article, is required to procure a city local business tax receipt by purchasing same beginning July 1 of each year and shall be due and payable on September 30 of each year and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax shall be due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. 
(b)  Partial year business tax receipts. Any business, profession or occupation required to obtain a local business tax receipt under the provisions of this chapter or general law that begins business during the first half of the receipt year (October 1 through April 1) shall be required to pay the full local business tax for the applicable classification under the provisions of this chapter. Any such business, profession, or occupation that begins business on or after April 1 of the current receipt year shall be required to pay one-half (½) of the amount of local business tax for the applicable classification under the provisions of this chapter and shall expire on September 30 of the current year. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 55-2018, § 1, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 11-34. - Application, contents. 
Every person, before engaging in a new business, occupation or profession shall make application for and obtain a local business tax receipt before engaging in such business occupation or profession and shall file an application on the form prescribed by the administrator. The application for a local business tax receipt for a business shall be signed by an officer, partner, agent or the owner of the business. All local business tax receipts shall be applied for and issued in the real name of the applicant unless the applicant has qualified under the laws of the state, for the use of a fictitious name. Such local business tax receipt, if issued, shall show the real name as well as the fictitious name of the applicant. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the owner and if a firm, the names of all members of the firm and if a corporation, provide the administrator with a copy of the corporate papers with the names of all officers of the corporation. 
(2)  The location of the business. 
(3)  The full nature of the business. 
(4)  Where the local business tax receipt is based thereon. 
(5)  The value of stock carried or the number of seats, machines, employees, gasoline pumps, rooms or vehicles, etc., used, as the case may be. 
(6)  Such other pertinent information as may be prescribed by the city. 
(7)  At the time of filing the business tax receipt application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable administrative fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each application filed. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-35. - False statements in application. 
Any local business tax receipt obtained under the provisions of this article upon a misrepresentation of a material fact shall be deemed null and void, and the local business tax receipt holder who has engaged in any business under such business tax receipt shall be subject to the enforcement provision contained in section 11-58. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-36. - Determination of classification. 
In the event of a disagreement between applicant and the city on the question of proper classification of any business, occupation, or profession for local business tax receipt purposes, the administrator shall decide the proper classification, with the right of the applicant to appeal from such decision to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Board of adjustments and appeals, § 13.00 et seq., of the Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-37. - Local business tax receipt to apply to place of business or branch office. 
A local business tax receipt provided for herein shall be issued for and apply to only one (1) place of business or branch office. Any person engaged in more than one (1) business, occupation or profession at one (1) location or place of business is required in the operation of such business, etc., under the terms of this article to have a local business tax receipt for each business, occupation or profession classified under section 11-58. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.042(1)—(3).  
Sec. 11-38. - Exemption for disabled persons, widows/widowers. 
(a)  All confirmed disabled persons physically incapable of manual labor, widows/widowers with minor dependents, and persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older, with not more than one (1) employee or helper, and who use their own capital only, not in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be allowed to engage in any business or occupation without being required to pay for a local business tax receipt. The exemption provided by this section shall be allowed upon the certificate of the county physician, or other reputable physician, that the applicant claiming the exemption is disabled, the nature and extent of the disability being specified therein, and in case the exemption is claimed by a widow/widower with minor dependents or a person over sixty-five (65) years of age, proof of the right to the exemption shall be made. Any person entitled to the exemption provided by this section shall, upon application and furnishing of the necessary proof, be issued a local business tax receipt which shall have plainly stamped or written across the face of the business tax receipt the fact that it is issued under this section, and the reason for the exemption shall be written on the local business tax receipt. 
(b)  In no event under this or any other law shall any person, veteran or otherwise, be allowed any exemption whatsoever from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a local business tax receipt to sell intoxicating liquors, malt or vinous beverage. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-39. - Exemption for disabled veterans of any war or their unremarried widows/widowers. 
(a)  Any bona fide, permanent resident elector of the state who served as an officer or enlisted person during any of the periods specified in F.S. § 1.01 (14) in the armed forces of the United States national guard, United States coast guard or coast guard reserve, or any temporary members thereof, who have actually been or may hereafter be reassigned by the air force, army, navy, coast guard or marines to active duty during any war, declared or undeclared, armed conflicts, crises, etc., who was honorably discharged from the service of the United States, and who at the time of his/their application for local business tax receipt shall be disabled from performing manual labor, shall, upon sufficient identification, proof of being a permanent resident elector in the state and production of an honorable discharge from the service of the United States during the aforesaid period of time, respectively, be granted a local business tax receipt to engage in any business or occupation in the state which may be carried on mainly through the personal efforts of the business tax receipt holder as a means of livelihood and for which the local business tax receipt does not exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each without payment of any local business tax receipt otherwise provided for by law; or shall be entitled to an exemption to the extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) on any local business tax receipt to engage in any business or occupation in the city which may be carried on mainly through the personal efforts of the business tax receipt holder as a means of livelihood where local business tax receipt for such business or occupation shall be more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  This exemption shall extend to and include the right of the business tax receipt holder to operate an automobile for hire of not exceeding five-passenger capacity, including the driver, when it shall be made to appear that such automobile is bona fide owned or contracted to be purchased by the local business tax receipt holder and is being operated by the applicant as a means of livelihood and that the proper local business tax receipt for the operation of such motor vehicle for private use has been applied for and attached to such motor vehicle and the proper fees therefore paid by the business tax receipt holder. 
(c)  When any such person shall apply for a local business tax receipt to conduct any business or occupation for which the fee as fixed by law shall exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), the remainder of such local business tax in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid by the applicant. 
(d)  The administrator shall issue to such persons as may be entitled hereunder a local business tax receipt pursuant to the foregoing provisions and subject to the conditions thereof. Such local business tax receipt when issued shall be marked across the face thereof "Veterans Exempt Local Business Tax Receipt — Not Transferable." Before issuing the same, proof shall be duly made in each case that the applicant is entitled under the conditions of this law to receive the exemption provided for in this section. The proof may be made by establishing to the satisfaction of the administrator by means of a certificate of honorable discharge or a certified copy thereof that he/she is a veteran within the purview of this section and by exhibiting: 
(1)  A certificate of government-rated disability to an extent of ten (10) percent or more. 
(2)  The affidavit or testimony of a reputable physician who personally knows the applicant and who makes oath that the applicant is disabled from performing manual labor as a means of livelihood. 
(3)  The certificate of the veteran's service officer of the county in which applicant lives, duly executed under the hand and seal of the chief officer and secretary thereof, attesting the fact that the applicant is disabled and entitled to receive a local business tax receipt within the meaning and intent of this section. 
(4)  A pension certificate issued to the applicant by the United States by reason of such disability. 
(5)  Such other reasonable proof as may be required by the administrator to establish the fact that such applicant is disabled. 
(e)  All local business tax receipts issued under this section shall be in the same general form and shall expire at the same time as other local business tax receipts are fixed by law to expire. 
(f)  All local business tax receipts obtained under the provisions of this section by the commission of fraud upon any issuing authority shall be deemed null and void. Any person who has fraudulently obtained any local business tax receipt, or who has fraudulently received any transfer of a local business tax receipt issued to another, and has thereafter engaged in any business or occupation requiring a local business tax receipt under color thereof shall be subject to prosecution as for engaging in a business or occupation without having the required local business tax receipt. Such local business tax receipt shall not be issued in any county other than the county wherein the veteran is a bona fide resident citizen elector, unless such veteran applying therefore shall produce to the administrator a certificate of the tax collector of the veteran's home county to the effect that no exemption from local business tax receipt has been granted to such veteran in his home county under the authority of this section. 
(g)  In no event under this or any other law shall any person, veteran or otherwise, be allowed an exemption whatsoever from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a local business tax receipt to sell intoxicating liquors, malt and vinous beverages. 
(h)  The unremarried widow/widower of the deceased disabled veteran of any war in which the United States armed forces participated will be entitled to the same exemptions as the disabled veteran. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 41-1996, § 1, adopted November 26, 1996, reserved § 11-40. Formerly, such section pertained to charitable, religious, educational organizations exemption and derived from § 13-8(a)—(c) of the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 11-41. - Religious tenets exemption. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a local business tax receipt for practicing the religious tenets of any church. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.191.  
Sec. 11-42. - Charitable, religious, educational organizations exemption. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable institutions shall mean only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities in this state at which are provided charitable services, a reasonable percentage of which shall be without cost to those unable to pay. 
Educational institutions shall mean state tax-supported or parochial, church and nonprofit private schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, Department of Education or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. Nonprofit libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for exemption. 
Religious institutions shall mean churches and ecclesiastical or denominational organizations or established physical places of worship in this state at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly conducted and carried on, and shall also mean church cemeteries. 
(b)  Exemption. A no-fee local business tax receipt shall be required of any charitable religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other such organization when the organization makes occasional sales or engages in fund-raising projects when the projects are performed exclusively by the members thereof and when the proceeds derived from the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic and service activities of the organization. 
Any organization that would otherwise meet the criteria stated above with the exception that the fund-raising projects are performed by persons other than members of said organization may request an exemption of the local business tax receipt requirement from the city council. 
(c)  [Sponsoring organization.] The sponsoring organization can secure one (1) local business tax receipt which will cover all activities for that event except that if a carnival or circus is a part of the event, that activity will require a separate local business tax receipt per section 11-58. 
(d)  [Site plan submission required.] A site plan must be submitted to the administrator at least five (5) working days prior to the event and must contain the following: 
(1)  Location of all activity areas. 
(2)  Location of all temporary or permanent structure (i.e. tents bleachers, stage). 
(3)  Ingress, egress, internal circulation and parking. 
(4)  One (1) sign per street frontage—Thirty-two (32) square feet maximum area of sign face. Sign can be double-sided. 
(5)  All signs, displays and associated uses must be removed daily. 
(6)  Location of restroom facilities on-site. Port-a-lets are permitted. 
(7)  Any lighting and/or electrical installation shall be installed in compliance with the provisions of electric code adopted in section 6-221. 
(8)  Cleanup of the property upon expiration of the local business tax receipt shall be the responsibility of the local business tax receipt holder and property owner equally. 
(e)  [Approval required.] If the event is located on public property, appropriate approvals will be required. 
(f)  [Liability insurance required.] Proof of liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) must be provided for any event held on any public property. 
(g)  [Medical and security.] Medical and security provisions are the responsibility of the sponsoring organization and property owner. 
(h)  [Amount.] The local business tax receipt for the sponsoring organization is one hundred and five dollars ($105.00) per event. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.192.  
Sec. 11-43. - Exemption for motor vehicles. 
Vehicles used by any person holding a business tax receipt under this article for the sale and delivery of tangible personal property at either wholesale or retail from his place of business on which a local business tax receipt is paid shall not be construed to be separate places of business, and no local business tax receipt may be levied on such vehicles or the operators thereof as salesmen or otherwise, any other law to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-44. - Notice of local business tax receipt. 
It is unnecessary for the city to send out bills or notices to persons engaged in business in the city with respect to the payment or nonpayment of local business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-45. - Posting of local business tax receipt. 
(a)  Every local business tax receipt shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. The holder of such local business tax receipt shall exhibit the local business tax receipt to the city inspectors or any police officer upon request. 
(b)  Where any coin-operated machine is subject to local business licensing as provided herein, the local business tax receipt shall be displayed in a conspicuous place upon the machine. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-46. - Transfer of local business tax receipt—Location. 
A local business tax receipt may be transferred from one (1) location to another, provided that the original local business tax receipt is presented to the administrator for the approval of such transfer. The local business tax receipt holder shall pay a fee of ten (10) percent of the appropriate annual local business tax receipt fee not to exceed twenty-five ($25.00) but not less than three dollars ($3.00). 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-47. - Transfer of ownership/change of name. 
(a)  A local business tax receipt issued by the city may be transferred with the approval of the administrator, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The seller of the business shall present the local business tax receipt to the administrator with an endorsement on the reverse side thereof, assigning all right, title and interest to the purchaser. 
(2)  The purchaser shall file an application for local business tax receipt, and shall qualify in all respects as provided by law and by the ordinances of the city as an applicant for a local business tax receipt, as if he had applied for the local business tax receipt in the first instance. 
(3)  Where the local business tax receipt holder has been exempted from payment of all or any part of the local business tax receipt thereof, any such local business tax receipt shall not be transferable under this section. 
(4)  The purchaser shall show evidence of bona fide sale of the business and pay a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the appropriate annual local business tax receipt fee not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) but not less than three dollars ($3.00). 
(b)  The name of a local business tax receipt issued by the city may be changed with the approval of the administrator, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  File a complete application provided by the administrator. 
(2)  Provide evidence of the newly registered name or corporation. 
(3)  The applicant pays a change of name fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-48. - Replacing lost or destroyed local business tax receipts. 
For the purpose of replacing any mutilated, destroyed or lost local business tax receipt relating to any local business tax receipt granted, the administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to cause to be executed and delivered an appropriate duplicate local business tax receipt, upon the submission of evidence satisfactory to the development supervisor or his/her designee that the original business tax receipt was mutilated, destroyed or lost and the payment of a fee of five dollars and fifty cents ($5.50) for such duplicate. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-49. - Lease department. 
Every person leasing space or operating a lease-department in any store shall pay a local business tax receipt for the operation of each department leased according to the proper classification of the business or occupation as set forth in section 11-58. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-50. - Inspection before issuance; revocation authorized. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a new local business tax receipt or the transfer of a local business tax receipt, the city shall inspect the premises for compliance with all applicable zoning, building, fire, etc., codes and ordinances. 
(b)  The local business tax receipt of any person for the operation of any business may be revoked by the city council upon notice and hearing for violation of any ordinance of the city or law of the state. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-51. - Regulatory ordinances remain in effect. 
Unless otherwise herein specifically accepted, changed or differentiated, all qualifying or regulatory ordinances of the city applicable to or affecting any of the businesses, operations, professions, occupations or classifications covered by this chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-52. - Zoning regulations. 
(a)  No local business tax receipt shall be issued under this article for any new business, occupation or profession until the location shall have first been found consistent with any of the city's zoning regulations. 
(b)  No commercial outdoor sales or outside display of goods or products will be permitted with the following exceptions. 
(1)  Storage and sale of vehicles. 
(2)  Motor fuel sales. 
(3)  Retail display of garden supplies and products, lawn care equipment, lawn ornaments, swimming pools or such items as are not customarily sold in an enclosed building. Such display shall not be located within any required setback or displace required parking. 
(4)  Outdoor sale displays which are mobile in nature and are stored inside the store during nonbusiness hours. Location of outdoor display shall not interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Any previously local business holding a business tax receipt with an outdoor display local business tax receipt that does not meet the exceptions previously outlined shall be given one (1) year from the time of renewal of the current local business tax receipt to eliminate said display. After October 1, 1996, no outdoor display will be permitted except as noted above. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, § 60.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-53. - Interpretation of regulations. 
The city manager may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, as may be necessary or proper for the enforcement of the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-54. - Local business tax receipt year. 
The local business tax receipt year shall begin on the first day of October and end on the thirtieth day of September of each year, on which date all local business tax receipts heretofore issued shall expire. If September thirtieth falls on a weekend or holiday, the local business tax receipt shall be due on the next working day. No local business tax receipt shall be issued for more than one (1) year. After April first, a local business tax receipt for six (6) months may be issued for half of the amount of the annual local business tax receipt, except business tax receipts specifically provided as "per day" or "per week." Every person applying for a new local business tax receipt after July first will be issued a local business tax receipt which will not expire until September thirtieth of the next local business tax receipt year. This local business tax receipt will be issued at the regular annual charge for said local business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053(1).  
Sec. 11-55. - Local business tax receipt a debt. 
The amount of any local business receipt tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a debt due to the city and any person carrying on business without first having procured a local business tax receipt from the city, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such local business tax receipt recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Enforcement by code enforcement board, § 14.10 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-56. - Penalty for delinquencies. 
Whenever any local business tax receipt provided by this article or any other ordinance of the city to be paid to the city shall remain unpaid after September thirtieth, such local business tax receipt shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent for the month of October, plus an additional five-percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid; provided that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the local business tax receipt fee for the delinquent establishment. If a new business commences operation prior to obtaining a local business tax receipt and paying the required fees, a surcharge of twenty-five (25) percent will be added to all applicable fees. The penalty provided for in section 11-57 shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other penalties prescribed in this article and shall be enforced and collected in the same manner, and as a part of, the local business tax receipt affected. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-57. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person convicted of doing business without a local business tax receipt, fraudulently obtaining a local business tax receipt or violating any of the terms of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 31-66 et. Seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-58. - Schedule of local business taxes. 
The classifications in this section contain local business categories of similar kind. Rates for each classification shall apply to all categories within a class, except as otherwise noted. The assessments of local business tax receipts are increased as reflected on the attachment. 
The local business tax receipt increase shall become effective with the local business tax receipt issued beginning July 1, 2009. 
Local Business Tax Receipt Structure 
September 30, 2009 
5% 
Category 	
Advertising/design agency 	109.20 
 Billboard advertising 	
 Sign sales/rental 	
Broadcasting: radio 	273.00 
 Broadcasting: television 	
 Closed circuit television 	
Printing publication agency 	109.20 
Publishing: Magazine/newsletter 	163.80 
 Publishing: Newspaper 	
Unspecified advertising/media 	109.20 
Building contractor I 	245.70 
Building contractor II 	191.10 
Building contractor III 	136.50 
Subcontractors (all categories $109.20) 	109.20 
 Address painting 	
 Alarm contractor I 	
 Alarm contractor II 	
 Alarm installer 	
 Aluminum (SPC) 	
 Asbestos removal 	
 Cabinet-millwork (SPC) 	
 SPC carpentry 	
 SPC carpentry/metal framing 	
 Carpet and vinyl installation 	
 Communications towers—TV dish 	
 Compactor/mechanical (SPC) 	
 Concrete and masonry 	
 Concrete forming/placing (SPC) 	
 Concrete/grout pumping 	
 Drywall 	
 Electrical 	
 Electrical sign 	
 Elevator 	
 Excavating/grading 	
 Fencing (SPC) 	
 Fire sprinkler system (SPC) 	
 Gas fitter 	
 Glazing/glass 	
 Handyman repair (no construction) 	
 House moving and demolition 	
 HARV contractor class A 	
 HARV contractor class B 	109.20 
 HARV contractor class C 	
 HARV contractor mechanical 	
 Insulation and acoustic tile 	
 Landscaping 	
 Lathing/plastering 	
 Lawn sprinkler contractor 	
 Marine construction (SPC) 	
 Miscellaneous metals (SPC) 	
 Mobile home installation (SPC) 	
 Painting/waterproofing 	
 Indoor painting 	
 Paving (SPC) 	
 Plumbing contractor (local business office) 	
 SPC precast products 	
 Pressure cleaning 	
 Property management/maintenance 	
 Roofing 	
 Sealing and striping (parking) 	
 Seal coating 	
 Security installation 	
 Septic tank 	
 Sewer cleaning/drain cleaning 	
 Sheet metal 	
 SPC sign erection/painting 	
 SPC sign (outdoor only) 	
 Solar contractor class A 	
 Solar contractor class B 	
 Solar contractor class C 	
 Specialty contractor 	
 Structural steel 	
 Swimming pool/commercial 	
 Swimming pool/maintenance 	
 Swimming pool/residential 	
 Swimming pool resurfacing 	
 Tile—terrazzo—marble 	
 Tree removal/tree surgeon 	
 Truss manufacturing (SPC) 	
 Underground tank removal 	
 SPC utilities/underground 	
 Underground cable util. cont. 	
 SPC water conditioning 	
 Welding service 	
 Welding service (field) 	
 Welding service (mobile) 	
 Well drilling 	
 Unspecified contractor 	
Adult/children entertainment 	
 Operating within two (2) license categories 	1,092.00 
 Operating within three (3) license categories 	1,201.20 
Adult dancing establishment 	982.80 
Adult motel/hotel 	982.80 
Adult Bookstore 	982.80 
Adult Theater 	
 a. Having only booths, per booth 	54.60 
 b. Having only a hall or auditorium, per seat 	6.30 
 c. Having only outdoor viewing, per space 	
 d. Combination a, b, and/or c 	
Adult video rental 	982.00 
Storyteller 	109.20 
Batting cages 	109.20 
Billiards (includes first six (6) tables) 	
 Additionally, for each table over six (6) 	11.55 
Bowling (includes first twelve (12) lanes) 	109.20 
 Additionally, for each lane over twelve (12) 	27.30 
Carnival/fair 	109.20 
Circus, main attraction 	218.40 
Clown 	109.20 
Film production 	
Golf course 	218.40 
Golf course: miniature 	109.20 
Golf course: driving range 	
Indoor play area/based upon sq. ft. of floor area 	
Kiddie rides: without carnival/circus, per ride 	27.30 
Live performance, per day 	273.00 
Live performance: nonprofit, per day 	109.20 
Musician/entertainer/DJ 	
Music, non-wire 	
Recreation/amusement complex 	218.40 
Theater: indoor motion picture 	273.00 
Theater: outdoor 	
Theater: drive-in 	
Shooting range/gallery 	109.20 
Skating rink 	
Unspecified entertainment 	163.80 
Banking 	436.80 
Credit unions—No fee 	
Finance and loan company 	109.20 
Savings and loan company 	436.80 
Unspecified financial institution 	
ATM off-premises 	109.20 
 (1) Each category in this class 	109.20 
 (2) Additionally, per employee over ten (10) 	4.20 
  Bottling works 	
  Ice factory 	
  Industrial plant 	
  Laboratory 	
  Machine Shop 	
  Manufacturing firm 	
  Research and development agency 	
 (1) Each category in this class 	109.20 
 (2) Additionally, per employee over ten (10) 	4.20 
  Salvage yard/recycling facility 	
  Welding shop/ten (10) employees or less 	
  Unspecified industrial 	
Flea market 	
 (1) Minimum fee 	109.20 
  Plus per stall beginning w/stall no. 1 	33.60 
  Arts/crafts fair 	
  Farmers' market 	
  Flea market 	
  Seafood market *charged as retail 	
  Junk dealer 	
  Meat market *charged as retail 	
Mobile vendors (includes one (1) vehicle) 	109.20 
 Each additional vehicle 	16.80 
Seasonal sales vendor (includes one (1) vehicle) 	88.20 
 Each additional vehicle 	16.80 
Special events vendor (includes one (1) vehicle) 	54.60 
 Each additional vehicle 	16.80 
Solicitor (each) 	22.05 
Unspecified market 	109.20 
Unspecified outdoor sales 	
Lodging 
 Nursing home 	
 Adult living facility (seven (7) or more) 	
 Group homes 	
Apartments and other rental units 	
 A minimum fee which includes first five (5) units 	54.60 
 Plus for each unit over five (5) units 	4.20 
Campgrounds/RV parks 	
 A minimum fee which includes first five (5) spaces 	54.60 
 Plus for each space over five (5) 	4.20 
Hotels and motels 	
 A minimum fee which includes first five (5) units 	54.60 
 Plus for each unit over five (5) units 	4.20 
Mobile homes 	
 A minimum fee which includes first five (5) mobile homes 	54.60 
 Plus for each mobile home over five (5) 	4.20 
Rooming and boardinghouses/bed and breakfast 	
 A minimum fee which includes first five (5) units 	54.60 
 Plus for each room over five (5) 	4.20 
Unspecified lodging 	136.50 
Mercantile 
Pawnshop 	273.00 
Retail sales 	
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
 Additionally, when hosting temporary vendors, (for periods longer than two (2) weeks) 	256.60 
 Additionally, per fifteen thousand (15,000) sq. ft. of outside display 	7.35 
Aircraft brokerage 	109.20 
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
  Aircraft dealer: new 	
  Aircraft dealer: used 	
  Apparel and accessory stores 	
  Automotive body shop 	
  Automotive dealer: new 	
  Automotive dealer: used 	
Automotive parts/mobile 	109.20 
Automotive repair/mobile 	109.20 
Automotive renting/leasing 	109.20 
Automotive service leasing 	109.20 
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
  Boat dealer: new 	
  Boat dealer: used 	
  Building materials and supply chg'd by sq. ft. 	
  Consignment shop 	
Convenience stores (includes four (4) gas nozzles) 	109.20 
 Additionally, per gas nozzle over four (4) 	16.80 
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
  Craft store 	
  Equipment sales 	
  Food stores 	
  Furniture and furnishings 	
  Garden supply 	
Gasoline service station (inc. four (4) gas nozzles) 	109.20 
 Additionally, per gas nozzle over four (4) 	16.80 
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
  General merchandise stores 	
  Hardware store 	
  Lease department 	
  Mobile home/portable building dealer 	
  Retail distributor 	
  Sporting goods 	
  Weapons dealer 	
  Unspecified retail sales 	
Wholesale sales (all categories) 	
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
 Additionally, when hosting temporary vendors 	257.25 
 Additionally, per fifteen thousand (15,000) sq. ft. of outside display 	7.35 
 First three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area 	109.20 
 Each additional three thousand (3,000) square feet, add 	16.80 
  Bottled water distributor 	
  Construction material 	
  Electrical goods 	
  Equipment and supplies sales 	
  Furniture and home furnishing 	
  Machinery, equipment and supplies 	
  Metals and minerals 	
  Motor vehicle parts and supplies 	
  Petroleum products distributor 	
  Unspecified wholesale sales 	
Professional (includes office and one (1) qualifier) 	109.20 
 For each partner, professional or associate 	81.90 
  Accountant 	
  Acupuncturist 	
  Agent 	
  Architect 	
  Architect/landscape 	
  Attorney 	
  Auctioneer 	
  Auction house 	
  Board of realtors 	
  Bonding agency 	
  Business investments 	
  Check cashing company 	
  Chiropractor 	
  Chiropodist/podiatrist 	
  Commercial artist 	
  Commodities broker 	
  Computer programmer 	
  Computer consultant 	
  Consultant/engineer 	
  Consultant/marine surveyors 	109.20 
  Consultant 	
  Consulting agency 	
  Counseling service 	
  Credit bureau 	
  Credit counseling agency 	
  Dentist 	
  Dental assistant 	
  Dental hygienist 	
  Detective agency 	
  Engineer PE 	
  Engineer associate 	
  Engineer asbestos consult, EA 	
  Engineering business EB 	
  Ethical hypnotist (Dr.) 	
  Hypnotist 	
  Financial planner 	
  Funeral home 	
  Hearing aid specialist 	
  Home health care 	
  Home medical services 	
  Insurance adjuster 	
  Insurance agent/independent 	
  Insurance agent 	
  Insurance company 	
  Interior decorating service 	
  Interior designer 	
  Investment broker 	
  Investments and securities 	
  Land surveyor LS 	
  Land surveyor business LB 	
  Mental health center 	
  Mental health counselor 	
  Modeling agency 	
  Mortgage agency 	
  Mortgage banker 	
  Mortgage broker (agents excluded) 	
  Naturopath 	
  Nurse midwife 	
  Nurse practitioner 	
  Ophthalmologist 	
  Oculist/optometrist 	
  Optician 	
  Pest control 	
  Physical therapist 	
  Physician 	
  Physician/anesthesia 	
  Private investigator 	
  Private investigator agency 	
  Psychiatrist 	
  Psychologist 	
  Real estate appraiser 	
  Real estate development 	
  Real estate broker 	109.20 
  Rehabilitation clinic 	
  Security agency 	
  Speech pathologist 	
  Stockbroker 	
  Therapist/occupational 	
  Title insurance company 	
  Travel agent 	
  Veterinarian 	
  Water flow testing 	
  Yacht broker 	
  X-ray service 	
  Unspecified professional 	
Nightclubs 
Where alcoholic beverages are served and where floor shows or other forms of entertainment or dancing are provided for guests 	245.70 
Rave club 	262.50 
 Beer and wine establishment only!!! 	245.70 
Restaurant 
Cafes and public eating places, where food is served in connection with or separate from other business: 	
 1. Capacity one (1) to fifty (50) persons 	109.20 
 2. Capacity fifty-one (51) to one hundred (100) persons. 	163.80 
 3. Capacity over one-hundred (100) persons 	218.40 
 4. Carry-out facility (no inside seating) 	109.20 
 5. Where alcoholic beverages are served (added) 	
 6. Where there is live entertainment (added) 	
Bakery 	109.20 
Service business 
 Airport services (all categories) 	109.20 
  Aircraft cleaning/detailing 	
  Aircraft instrument repair 	
  Aircraft rental 	
  Aircraft repair 	
  Aircraft repair/mobile 	
  Aircraft fuel sales 	
  Aviation equipment repair 	
  Aircraft banner advertising 	
  Aircraft charter service 	
  Aircraft fixed base operator 	
  Flight instructor/private 	
  Flight instruction school 	
  Skydiving/parachuting 	
  Parachute rigger 	
  Unspecified airport services 	
 Automotive services (all categories) 	109.20 
  Alarm/stereo installation 	
  Alarm/stereo installation (mobile) 	
  Automotive body and paint shop 	
  Automobile parking lot 	
  Automotive appraisal service 	
  Automotive body repair 	
  Automotive parts mobile 	
  Automotive repair 	
  Automotive repair/mobile 	
  Automotive repair/lease dept. 	
  Automotive road service 	
  Automotive servicing 	
  Automotive servicing (mobile) 	
  Automotive detailing and related services 	
  Auto detailing and related services/mobile 	
  Car wash 	
  Glass replacement 	
  Glass and window tinting 	
  Glass and window tinting (mobile) 	
  Heavy equipment repair 	
  Heavy equipment repair/mobile 	
  Automotive road service 	
  Towing and wrecking service 	
  Towing and wrecking service/mobile 	
  Automotive renting and leasing 	
  Glass and window tinting 	
  Glass and window tinting/mobile 	
  Unspecified automotive service 	
 Marine services (all categories) 	109.20 
  Boats for hire: small 	
  Boat repair 	
  Boat storage 	
  Boat cleaning/detailing 	
  Boat charter services 	
  Fishing services 	
  Marine engine repair 	
  Marine equipment repair 	
  Marine equipment repair (mobile) 	
  River boat cruises 	
  Yacht delivery 	
  Watercraft rental 	
  Unspecified marine service 	
 Other transportation service 	
  Bus terminal/local office 	109.20 
  Railroad company 	273.00 
  Shuttle service 	109.20 
  Vehicle for hire: Taxi 	
  Vehicle for hire: Limousine 	
  Vehicle for hire: Horse-drawn vehicle or carriage 	
 Personal service ($109.20 except as noted) 	109.20 
  Adult day care center 	
  Adult sitter 	
  Alarm installer—no electric 	
  Alarm servicing 	
  Animal boarding 	
  Appointment setter 	
  Artist 	
  Artist/commercial 	
  Artist/design 	
  Artist/freelance 	
  Art broker 	
  Art studio 	
  Astrologer 	163.80 
  Auditor 	109.20 
  Barbershop (includes ancillary sales) 	54.60 
   Additionally, per chair over one (1) 	16.80 
  Barter service 	109.20 
  Beauty shop (includes ancillary sales) 	54.60 
   Additionally, per chair over one (1) 	16.80 
  Bookkeeping service/tax service 	54.60 
  Calling service 	109.20 
  Carpet/upholstery cleaning 	
  Catering service 	
  Charter service 	
  Clairvoyant 	163.80 
  Cleaners, launderer, storage over one (1) employee 	109.20 
  Pick-up station only with one (1) employee 	54.80 
  Clown 	109.20 
  Consulting srv elect survdesign 	
  Child-care centers/day care 	
  Drapery making service 	
  Duct cleaning 	
  Electrolysis 	
  Electronic surveillance consultant 	
  Funeral home/embalmer 	
  Employment/engineering service 	
  Engineering services 	
  Energy auditing/repair service 	
  Escort/dating service 	163.80 
  Exercise/massage service 	109.20 
  Fire equipment dealer 	
  Fortune teller 	163.80 
  Freelance writer 	109.20 
  Guide service 	
  Gunsmith 	
  Health club 	
  Home cleaning service 	54.60 
  Home party product representative 	109.20 
  House-sitting service 	109.20 
  Information broker 	
  Lecturer 	
  Liquidation sales dealer 	
  Material broker 	
  Lawn maintenance 	54.60 
  Lawn maintenance (mobile) 	
  Lawn mower repair (mobile) 	109.20 
  Lawn mower repair 	
  Lawn spray 	
  Linen supply/uniform service 	109.20 
   Additionally, per pick-up and delivery vehicle 	16.80 
  Locksmith 	109.20 
  Message delivery 	
  Motivational programming 	
  Moving and storage 	
  Moving company 	
  Nail salon (includes ancillary sales) 	109.20 
   Additionally, per chair over one (1) 	16.80 
  Quality inspection service 	109.20 
  Painting/freelance 	
  Palmist 	163.80 
  Paste-up artist 	109.20 
  Personal shopper 	
  Animal grooming 	
  Pet sitting service 	
  Photofinishing 	
  Photographer freelance 	
  Photographer/video service 	
  Photography studio 	
  Private instructor 	
  Private school 	
  Property management—maintenance 	
  Public stenographer 	
  Resume writing 	
  Rust removal service 	
  Seamstress/tailor 	
  Self-service laundry 	
  Service machine distributor 	
  Sheetmetal fabricator 	
  Spa 	
  Talent agent 	
  Tanning salon 	
  Tattoo/body piercing 	
  Taxidermist 	
  Telegraph equipment facsimile, handwrtr. 	
  Tool sharpening 	
  Tool sharpening service (mobile) 	
  Translator 	
  Tutoring service 	
  Typing service 	109.20 
  Video productions 	
  Upholstery service 	
  Wake-up service 	
  Weight loss center 	
  Wrecker service 	
  Towing/wrecker service (mobile) 	
  Wallpaper hanger 	
  Video/promotional 	
  Unspecified personal service 	
 Repair services (all categories) 	109.20 
  Appliance repair 	
  Appliance repair/mobile 	
  Appliance repair/commercial 	
  Appliance servicing 	
  Appliance servicing (mobile) 	
  Bicycle repair 	
  Canvas installation/repair 	
  Clock repair 	
  Communications equipment repair 	
  Communications leasing service 	
  Computer servicing 	
  Design repair 	
  Electrical appliance 	
  Electronic repair 	
  Electronic repair (mobile) 	
  Furniture installer 	
  Furniture repair and reupholstering 	
  Golf club repair 	
  Heavy equipment repair 	
  Heavy equipment repair (mobile) 	
  Hydraulic repair 	
  Lawn mower repair (mobile) 	
  Jewelry repair 	
  Lawn mower repair 	
  Mobile home repair service 	
  Mold and fixture inst./repair 	
  Musical instrument repair 	
  Office machine repair 	
  Oxygen tank repair 	
  Radio and television repair 	
  Rod and reel repair 	
  Screen enclosure repair 	
  Sewing machine repair 	
  Shoe/boot repair 	
  Small appliance repair 	
  Special installation and maintenance 	
  Tool repair 	
  Typewriter repair (mobile) 	
  Unspecified repair service 	
 Business services (all categories) 	109.20 
  Abstract and title 	
  Addressing, mailing, duplicating service 	
  Advertising agency 	
  Graphic design 	
  Advertising media 	
  Ambulance service 	
  Answering service 	
  Appraisal agency 	
  Armored car 	
  Athletic event promoter 	
  Audio engineering and management 	
  Billing office 	
  Branch business office 	
  Business management agency 	
  Business office 	
  Charter bus service 	
  Chef 	
  Chef (mobile) 	
  Cleaning/resealing decks 	
  Cleaning/chemical roof treatment 	
  Collection agency 	
  Communications/telephone service 	
  Complaint service 	
  Computer data bank agency 	
  Computer services 	
  Computer services/sales representative 	
  Computer services—lease department 	
  Computer software club 	
  Concrete molding installation 	
  Concrete pumping 	
  Consultant 	
  Copy center 	
  Corporate headquarters 	
  Court reporting 	
  Courier/delivery 	
  Counselor/nutritional 	
  Craft fabrication 	
  Customer service agency 	
  Dance studio 	
  Data processing center 	
  Drafting 	
  Diagnostic ultra-sound—mobile 	
  Employment agency 	
  Environmental construction company 	
  Express company 	
  Farrier (horseshoeing) 	
  Fire equipment dealer 	
  Fire equipment repair 	
  Freight consignment agency 	
  Garage door service 	
  Health service 	
  Import/export service 	
  Inspection service 	109.20 
  Interior decorating service 	
  Janitorial/commercial 	
  Job placement 	
  Lawn spray service 	
  Local business office/specialty supply 	
  Mail order agency 	
  Management consultant 	
  Medical consultant 	
  Medical laboratory services 	
  Marketing distributor 	
  Microfilm service 	
  Notary public 	
  Overhead cable installation contractor 	
  Packing/shipping service 	
  Paralegal 	
  Parking lot cleaning 	
  Patrol agency 	
  Piano tuner 	
  Pipe insulation/installation 	
  Precious metals/purchaser 	
  Printing or publication 	
  Private club 	
  Process server 	
  Project management 	
  Property presentation specialist 	
  Public stenographer 	
  Publisher 	
  Railroad tracks maintenance and inspections 	
  Reducing salon/club 	
  Rental agency 	
  Rental agency/billboards 	
  Rental agency/video 	
  Rental/lease agency 	
  Rental office 	
  Repossession agency 	
  Sales product distributor 	
  Sales office 	
  Sales representative 	
  Secretarial transcribing service 	
  Secretarial/word-processing 	
   (Performed as home business) 	
  Service machine distributor 	
  Service and repair 	
  Security consultant 	
  Special installation and maintenance 	
  Storage warehouse under three thousand (3,000) sq. ft. 	109.20 
   Per three thousand (3,000) sq. ft. 	16.80 
  Studio professional 	109.20 
  Tank cleaning 	
  Tax preparation/bookkeeping 	
  Telephone line comm. installer 	109.20 
  Telegraph agency 	
  Taxidermist 	
  Transporting terminal agency 	
  Tourist agency 	
  Truck/trailer rental agency 	
  Truck brokerage 	
  Truck delivery service 	
  Warehouse distributor 	
  Wardrobe advertising 	
  Window cleaning 	
  Window tinting 	
  Writing service/freelance 	
  Unspecified business service 	
Coin-operated service machines 	
 Distributor owner (includes one (1)—twenty (20) machines) 	38.85 
  Per machine over twenty (20) 	2.00 
 Electric vending machine, each 	6.30 
 Laundry machine, not located at coin-op, each 	
 Non-electric vending machine, each 	3.15 
Amusement machines 	
 Distributor-owner, per year 	191.10 
 Operator, per machine 	16.80 
Utilities 
 Cable television 	
 Cellular towers 	273.00 
 Electric company 	
 Natural gas company 	
 Telephone company 	
 Telephone installation 	
 Unspecified utility 	
 
(Ord. No. 97-2006, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 13-2015, § 1, 4-14-15) 
Cross reference— Certificate of competency required before issuance of a business tax receipt for certain contractors, § 11-176; business tax receipts for indoor and outdoor motion picture theaters required, § 11-272; business tax receipts for taxicabs required, § 22-29. 
_____ 
Secs. 11-59—11-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADULT BOOKSTORES, ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS AND ADULT MOTELS AND HOTELS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 24-2009, adopted June 9, 2009, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III consisted of §§ 11-81—11-125, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the 1963 Code; and Ord. No. 47-1990, adopted Nov. 13, 1990. 
Cross reference— Certain conduct prohibited in alcoholic beverage establishments, § 4-5; participation in lewd exposure, sexual intercourse or perversion prohibited at certain motion picture theaters, § 11-278; admission of minors to adult establishments and exposing them to sell of certain materials prohibited, § 12-15; display of pornographic material in establishments where juveniles permitted restricted, § 12-16; public display of periodicals, books, etc., with lewd covers restricted, § 12-17; sale or exhibition to minors of indecent publications, pictures or articles prohibited, § 12-18; topless performers, waitresses, etc., obscene manner, prohibited, § 12-20; certain physical contact for compensation prohibited, § 12-21; zoning regulations, § 59-1 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847. 
 
Sec. 11-81. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters and adult motels and hotels so as to lessen the concentration of such establishments and their proximity to each other and to other stated establishments which would otherwise work a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas and could contribute to the blighting and downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore shall mean an establishment which sells or rents adult material, unless the adult material is accessible only by employees and either the gross income from the sale and/or rental of adult material comprises less than ten (10) percent of the gross income from the sale and/or rental of goods and/or services at the establishment, or the individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental comprises less than twenty-five (25) percent of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in any of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter. It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this article regarding operating an adult bookstore without an adult entertainment business tax receipt if the alleged violator shows that the adult material is accessible only by employees and either the gross income from the sale and/or rental of adult material comprises less than ten (10) percent of the gross income from the sale and/or rental of goods and/or services at the establishment, or the individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental comprise less than twenty-five (25) percent of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in any of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter. 
Adult dancing establishment shall mean an establishment where employees display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, regardless of whether the employees actually engage in dancing. 
Adult entertainment establishment shall mean an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motel and hotel, or an adult dancing establishment. 
Adult materials shall mean any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matters, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations or recordings, novelties and devices, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel or hotel shall mean a place where motion pictures are shown in rooms designed primarily for lodging, which motion pictures have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities. 
Adult motion picture booth shall mean an area within an adult motion picture theater designed for or used for the viewing by one (1) or two (2) persons of motion pictures which have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities. 
Adult motion picture theater shall mean a place where motion pictures are shown, or a section, department, or part of any business set aside for the showing of motion pictures, which has as its principal purpose the offering for viewing to adults of motion pictures which have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities. 
Business tax receipt shall mean a regulatory business tax receipt under the provisions of this article for the operation of an adult bookstore or a regulatory business tax receipt for the operation of an adult motion picture theater or a regulatory business tax receipt for the operation of an adult motel or hotel. 
Department shall mean the department of the city that is responsible for granting, denying and renewing business tax receipts. 
Interested party shall mean any person which is an applicant for a business tax receipt or who is an employee of an applicant for a business tax receipt, any person who is a partner in a partnership which is an applicant for a business tax receipt, and any person which is an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation which is an applicant for a business tax receipt. 
Principal stockholder shall mean any person who owns or controls legally or beneficially twenty-five (25) percent or more of a corporation's outstanding stock. In addition, if a principal stockholder of a corporation (referred to herein as corporation A) is a principal stockholder of another corporation (referred to herein as corporation B), the officers, directors and principal stockholders of corporation B shall be considered principal stockholders of corporation A. If a corporation is registered with the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission or is registered pursuant to F.S. ch. 517, and the corporation's stock is for sale to the general public, such corporation shall be considered not to have any principal stockholders. 
Specified anatomically areas shall mean: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals or pubic region. 
b.  Cleavage of the human buttocks. 
c.  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act shall mean: 
(1)  A criminal violation of this Code. 
(2)  Any felony. 
(3)  An offense under F.S. ch. 794 regarding sexual battery. 
(4)  An offense under F.S. ch. 796 regarding prostitution. 
(5)  An offense under F.S. ch. 800 regarding lewdness or indecent exposure. 
(6)  An offense under F.S. ch. 826 regarding bigamy or incest. 
(7)  An offense under F.S. ch. 847 regarding obscene literature or profanity. 
(8)  An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than Florida, or under an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Specified sexual activity shall mean: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(2)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-83. - Responsibilities of department. 
Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this article is vested in the department. The department is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling adult entertainment business tax receipts (adult bookstore, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels and hotels, adult dancing establishments) for proposed or existing adult entertainment establishments. The police department is responsible for verifying information contained on an application pursuant to this section and sections 11-84 through 11-90 for inspecting any proposed establishment, any establishment with a business tax receipt or any establishment without a business tax receipt in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with the applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth in this article, and for enforcing applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth in this article. The building department is responsible for inspecting any proposed establishment for which a business tax receipt is being applied for or any establishment that holds a business tax receipt in order to ascertain whether it complies with or is complying with this article and all other applicable building codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in this city. The fire and rescue division is responsible for inspecting any proposed establishment for which a business tax receipt is being applied for or any establishment that holds a business tax receipt in order to ascertain whether it complies with or is complying with this article and all applicable fire codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city. The county health department is responsible for any proposed establishment for which a business tax receipt is being applied for or any establishment that holds a business tax receipt in order to ascertain whether it complies with or is complying with this article and all applicable health codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city. The planning department is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed establishment for which a business tax receipt is being applied for complies with all locational requirements of this article, applicable portions of this article, all applicable zoning regulations in effect in the city, and whether an establishment that holds a business tax receipt is complying with this article and all applicable zoning regulations, and land use laws in effect in the city. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-84. - Adult entertainment business tax receipt required; classifications. 
(a)  Requirement. No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to operate without having been first granted an adult entertainment business tax receipt by the department under this article. 
(b)  Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment business tax receipts referred to in this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(3)  Adult dancing establishment; or 
(4)  Adult motels and hotels. 
(c)  Single classification of business tax receipt. An adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to one (1) classification of business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-85. - Application for business tax receipt. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall file with the department a sworn business tax receipt application on a standard application form supplied by the department. 
(b)  Contents. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is eighteen (18) years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited and, if in existence, a copy of the partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, the establishment's fictitious name and the county of registration under F.S. § 865.09. 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section has had a previous business tax receipt under this article suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the business tax receipt was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose business tax receipt under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the business tax receipt was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section holds any other business tax receipt under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other establishments that hold an active business tax receipt. 
(6)  The single classification of business tax receipt for which the applicant is filing. 
(7)  The location of the proposed establishment, including a legal description of the property site, and a legal street address. 
(8)  The names of the employees for the proposed establishment, if known, or, if presently unknown, a statement to that effect. 
(9)  The applicant's mailing address, residential address and residential telephone number, if any. 
(10)  A site plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment, including, but not limited to: 
a.  All property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of the buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts and driveways. 
b.  All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures. 
c.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size. 
(11)  A recent photograph of the applicant. 
(12)  Either the applicant's driver's license number or his state or federally issued identification card number. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-86. - Application fee. 
Each application for a business tax receipt under this article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). If the application for a business tax receipt is approved and a business tax receipt is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual business tax receipt fee required for the first year pursuant to section 11-92. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-87. - Incomplete application. 
If the department determines or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for a proposed establishment, he shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a business tax receipt under section 11-90 shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-88. - Consent. 
By applying for a business tax receipt under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the department of its respective responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-89. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the department and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the department shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police department, the building department, the fire and rescue division, the county health department and the zoning department. Each department shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed establishment in accordance with its responsibilities summarized at section 11-83. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, it shall so state its reasons. 
(b)  A department shall disapprove of an application if it finds that the proposed establishment will be in violation of any provision of this article or of any building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the department. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-90. - Business tax receipt issuance; denial. 
(a)  Time period for granting or denying business tax receipt. The department shall grant or deny an application for a business tax receipt under this article within fourteen (14) days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the fourteenth day, the applicant may be permitted to begin operating the establishment for which a business tax receipt is sought, unless and until the department notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason for that denial. 
(b)  Granting of application for business tax receipt. If each of the departments has approved of the application, the department shall grant the application, notify the applicant of the granting, and issue the business tax receipt to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual business tax receipt fee provided in section 11-92, with credit as provided in section 11-86. 
(c)  Denial of application for business tax receipt. The application for a business tax receipt under this article may be denied as follows: 
(1)  The department shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Any of the departments, excluding the police department, has disapproved of the application. 
b.  The application contains material false information. 
c.  The applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 11-85(b)(1) has a business tax receipt under this Code which has been suspended or revoked. 
d.  The granting of the application would violate a state or federal statute or ordinance, an order from a court of law, or a deed restriction which effectively prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment establishment business tax receipt. 
(2)  If the department denies the application, he shall notify the applicant of the denial, and state the reason for the denial. 
(3)  If a person applies for a business tax receipt at a particular location within a period of nine (9) months from the date of denial of a previous application for a business tax receipt at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which will probably lead to a different decision regarding the former reason for denial, the application shall be rejected. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-91. - Contents of business tax receipt; term; renewals; expiration; cancellation. 
(a)  Contents. An adult entertainment business tax receipt shall state on its face the name of the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification of the business tax receipt, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Term. All business tax receipts issued under this article shall be annual business tax receipts which shall commence running on October 1, and shall expire on September 31 of the following year on which date the business tax receipt shall have been paid for. If a business tax receipt is issued after October 1, but by March 31 of the following year, the applicant shall pay the appropriate business tax receipt fee. If a business tax receipt is issued after March 31, but by October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half of the appropriate business tax receipt fee. 
(c)  Renewals. Business tax receipts shall be renewed annually. Subject to other provisions of this article, a business tax receipt holder under this article shall be entitled to a renewal of his annual business tax receipt from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1 by presenting the business tax receipt for the previous year and by paying the appropriate business tax receipt fee. 
(d)  Expiration. A business tax receipt that is not renewed under this article by October 1 of each year shall expire. An expired business tax receipt may be renewed by November 30 of the same year upon presentment of an affidavit stating that no adult entertainment activity has taken place at the establishment subsequent to expiration, upon payment of a penalty of ten (10) percent of the appropriate business tax receipt fee for the month of October, or fraction thereof, and an additional penalty of five (5) percent of the appropriate business tax receipt fee for the month of November, or fraction thereof. 
(e)  Cancellation. All expired business tax receipts not renewed by November 30 shall be cancelled summarily by the department. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-92. - Annual business tax receipt fees; levy of; regulatory in nature. 
(a)  Levy of business tax receipt fees. There are hereby levied the following annual business tax receipt fees under this article for an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)  An establishment having a business tax receipt for only an adult bookstore, nine hundred eighty-two dollars and eighty cents ($982.80). 
(2)  An establishment having a business tax receipt for only an adult theater, as follows: 
a.  Having only adult booths, fifty-four dollars and sixty cents ($54.60) for each booth; or, 
b.  Having only a hall or auditorium, six dollars and thirty cents ($6.30) for each seat; or, 
c.  Having only an area outdoors designed to permit viewing by customers seated in vehicles, six dollars and thirty cents ($6.30) for each parking space; or, 
d.  Having a combination of a, b and/or c above, the cumulative business tax receipt fee applicable to each, nine hundred eighty-two dollars and eighty cents ($982.80) or, 
e.  Adult motel, nine hundred eighty-two dollars and eighty cents ($982.80); 
(3)  An establishment having a business tax receipt for only an adult dancing establishment, nine hundred eighty-two dollars and eighty cents ($982.80). 
(4)  An establishment having a business tax receipt for two (2) classifications, one thousand ninety-two dollars ($1,092.00). 
(5)  An establishment having a business tax receipt for three (3) classifications, one thousand two hundred and one dollars and twenty cents ($1,201.20). 
(b)  Business tax receipt fees are regulatory in nature. The annual business tax receipt fees collected under this article are declared to be regulatory fees which are collected for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult entertainment establishments under this article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to and not in lieu of the business tax receipt fees imposed by other sections of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-93. - Records and reports; consent by business tax receipt holder. 
(a)  Records and reports. Each business tax receipt holder shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the department to implement this article and to carry out its purpose. Whenever the information required by or provided under section 11-85 has changed, the business tax receipt holder shall promptly provide the department with the changed information. 
(b)  Consent. By holding a business tax receipt under this article, the business tax receipt holder shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the department of their respective responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-94. - Transfer of business tax receipt. 
(a)  Requirements for transfer. A business tax receipt holder under this article shall not transfer his business tax receipt to another person, and thereby surrender possession, control and operation of the establishment that holds a business tax receipt to such other person, unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  Obtains an amendment to the business tax receipt from the department which provides that he is not the business tax receipt holder, which amendment may be obtained only if he has completed and properly filed an application with the department setting forth the information called for under subsections 11-85(b)(1)—(5), (9) and (11), and the application has been granted by the department after approval by the police department. 
(2)  In the event he has purchased the establishment that holds a business tax receipt from the business tax receipt holder, adduces satisfactory proof that the sale was bona fide. 
(3)  Pays a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the appropriate annual business tax receipt fee. 
(b)  Effect of suspension or revocation procedures. No business tax receipt may be transferred pursuant to subsection (a) of this section when the department has notified the business tax receipt holder that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the business tax receipt holder. 
(c)  No transfer to different location. A business tax receipt holder shall not transfer his business tax receipt to another location. 
(d)  Attempted improper transfer void; business tax receipt abandoned. Any attempted transfer of a business tax receipt either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the business tax receipt shall be deemed abandoned and shall automatically revert to the department. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-95. - Changing the name of establishment. 
No business tax receipt holder may change the name of an adult entertainment establishment unless and until he satisfies each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Gives the department thirty (30) days' notice in writing of the proposed name change. 
(2)  Pays the department a ten (10) dollar change of name fee. 
(3)  Complies with F.S. § 865.09. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-96. - Suspension of business tax receipt. 
(a)  Violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation. In the event a department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that an adult entertainment establishment that holds a business tax receipt is operating in violation of a building, fires, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, contrary to the respective general requirements of this article, the department shall promptly notify the business tax receipt holder of the violation and shall allow the business tax receipt holder a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the business tax receipt holder fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the department shall forthwith suspend the business tax receipt, and shall notify the business tax receipt holder of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the provision in question has been corrected. 
(b)  Illegal transfer. If the department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a business tax receipt holder engaged in a business tax receipt transfer contrary to this section, he shall forthwith suspend the business tax receipt, and notify the business tax receipt holder of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the department is satisfied that the requirements of this section have been met. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of this article. Violations of this article shall result in the following: 
(1)  In the event three (3) or more violations of this article occur at an adult entertainment establishment within a two-year period, and convictions result from at least three (3) violations, the department shall, upon the date of the third conviction, suspend the business tax receipt, and notify the business tax receipt holder of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of thirty (30) days. 
(2)  In the event one (1) or more violations of this article occur at the establishment within a period of two (2) years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the business tax receipt was suspended for thirty (30) days under subsection (c)(1) above, but not including any time during which the business tax receipt was suspended for thirty (30) days, and a conviction results from one (1) or more of the violations, the department shall, upon the date of the first conviction, suspend the business tax receipt again, and notify the business tax receipt holder of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of ninety (90) days. 
(3)  In the event one (1) or more violations of this article occur within a period of two (2) years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the business tax receipt was suspended for ninety (90) days under subsection (c)(2) above, but not including any time during which the business tax receipt was suspended for ninety (90) days and a conviction results from one (1) or more of the violations, the department shall, upon the date of the first conviction, suspend the business tax receipt again, and notify the business tax receipt holder of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(4)  The transfer or renewal of a business tax receipt pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsections (c)(1)—(3) above. 
(d)  Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall begin five (5) days after the date the department mails the notice of suspension to the business tax receipt holder or on the date the business tax receipt holder delivers his business tax receipt to the department, whichever happens first. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-97. - Revocation of business tax receipt. 
(a)  False information. In the event the department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a business tax receipt was granted based upon false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, he shall forthwith revoke the business tax receipt and notify the business tax receipt holder of the revocation. 
(b)  Convictions for violations of this article. Violations of this article shall result in the following: 
(1)  In the event one (1) or more violations of this article occur at an adult entertainment establishment which has had a business tax receipt suspended for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days pursuant to this article, and the violations occur within a period of two (2) years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the business tax receipt was suspended for one hundred eighty (180) days, the department shall forthwith revoke the business tax receipt, and notify the business tax receipt holder of the revocation. 
(2)  The transfer or renewal of a business tax receipt pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsection (b)(1) above. 
(c)  Effect of revocation. If a business tax receipt is revoked, the business tax receipt holder shall not be allowed to obtain another adult entertainment business tax receipt for a period of ten (10) years, and no business tax receipt shall be issued again to any other person for the location upon which the adult entertainment establishment was situated. 
(d)  Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect five (5) days after the date the department mails the notice of revocation to the business tax receipt holder or on the date the business tax receipt holder delivers his business tax receipt to the department, whichever happens first. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-98. - Records for employees. 
(a)  The business tax receipt holder of an adult entertainment establishment is responsible for keeping a record of all employees who are currently employed by the establishment, and of all former employees who were employed by the establishment during the preceding one-year period. The record shall contain the current or former employee's full legal name, including any aliases, his date of birth, his residential address, his residential telephone number (if any), his driver's license number or his state or federally issued identification card number, and a recent photograph of the current or former employee. 
(b)  The original records required by subsection (a) above, or true and exact photocopies thereof, shall be kept at the establishment at all times. 
(c)  Any operator of the establishment shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original records or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(d)  Any operator of the establishment shall, upon request by a law enforcement officer, make available for inspection the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof, while the establishment is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-99. - Adult bookstores. 
No person shall own, operate, manage or work at any adult bookstore unless the following requirements are observed therein: 
(1)  All materials, devices and novelties shall be so displayed that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the premises that holds a business tax receipt. 
(2)  If recordings are offered for sale and customers may listen to them while on the premises that holds a business tax receipt, soundproof booths or rooms shall be available for use by customers who desire to listen, and each such booth or room shall have: 
a.  One (1) clear window, facing the major portion of the premises that holds a business tax receipt, covering not less than one-fourth (¼) of the wall area into which the window is set, which window shall not be covered or obscured in any manner while the booth or room is in use. 
b.  Sufficient chairs or couches to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the booth or room at one (1) time. 
c.  The number of persons who may occupy the booth or room at one (1) time clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room, and only that number of persons shall be permitted inside the booth or room at one (1) time. 
d.  The door or doors opening into the booth or room incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened so that it or they will freely open from either side. 
e.  All areas where a patron or customer is to be positioned visible from a continuous main aisle and not obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-100. - Adult motion picture theaters. 
No person shall own, operate, manage or work at any adult motion picture theater unless the following requirements are observed therein: 
(1)  Each adult motion picture booth shall be open or have a rectangular-shaped entranceway not less than two (2) feet wide nor less than six (6) feet high. 
(2)  Each adult motion picture booth shall have sufficient seats or couches to accommodate the maximum number of persons expected to use the booth. The maximum number of persons who may occupy a booth shall be stated on or near the entranceway, and only that number shall be permitted to be in a booth at one (1) time. 
(3)  All areas where a patron or customer is to be positioned must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(4)  An adult motion picture theater having both adult motion picture booths and a hall or auditorium shall conform to the special requirements for both facilities. 
(5)  In addition to the sanitary facilities otherwise required, there shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
(6)  An adult motion picture theater designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the premises that holds a business tax receipt so screened, that the projected film material may not be seen from any public right-of-way or residential property. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-101. - Distance requirements; waiver. 
(a)  No adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult motel or hotel shall be located within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius, property line to property line, of any other of the aforementioned establishments or within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, property line to property line, of any establishment selling beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises; hotels, or motels; public lodging houses; massage parlors; churches, schools, kindergartens, pawnshops, pool or billiard halls, public buildings, public parks, dwellings or property zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, GU, R-2, R-3, RMH1, RMH2, RR, RE, OR. 
(b)  The city council may waive the seven-hundred-fifty-foot restriction if it finds: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intention of this article will be observed. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a skid row. 
(3)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to any adopted neighborhood redevelopment plan or land use plan nor contrary to any downtown redevelopment program. 
(4)  That all applicable regulations of this article will be observed. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Zoning, Ch. 59 et seq. of the Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-102. - Notice of activity. 
Immediately inside the entrance to any adult bookstore or adult motion picture theater, there shall be posted a well-lighted sign which shall read as follows: 
NOTICE 
THIS ESTABLISHMENT OFFERS MATERIAL OR ENTERTAINMENT HAVING SEXUAL CONTENT. SUCH MATERIALS OR ENTERTAINMENT ARE FOR ADULTS ONLY. IF THIS OR NUDITY WOULD OFFEND YOU, DO NOT ENTER. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-103. - Adult dancing establishments. 
No person shall own, operate, manage, work or perform at any adult dancing establishment unless the following requirements are observed therein: 
(1)  Persons engaged in displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas are prohibited from dancing or simulating sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, or other person on the premises of an adult dancing establishment. 
(2)  No person in an adult dancing establishment shall engage in the display or exposition of specified anatomical areas except while the person is positioned at least three (3) feet from another person. 
(3)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an adult dancing establishment shall suffer or permit the construction, maintenance or use of areas partitioned or screened from public view that are designed to be occupied or are commonly occupied alone or together by any such person or persons on the premises of such establishment for private performances involving the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  No person on the premises of an adult dancing establishment shall be permitted to use or to be present in areas partitioned or screened from public view that are designed to be occupied together or alone by any person or persons on the premises of such establishment for the display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  Nothing in this article pertaining to adult dancing establishments shall be construed to permit or authorize any acts or activities therein that are prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-104. - Prohibitions, violations, penalty. 
(a)  Operation of establishment without valid adult entertainment business tax receipt. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment where the person knows or should know: 
(1)  That the establishment does not have an adult entertainment business tax receipt for any applicable classification. 
(2)  That the establishment has a business tax receipt which is under suspension. 
(3)  That the establishment has a business tax receipt which has been revoked or cancelled. 
(4)  That the establishment has a business tax receipt which has expired. 
(b)  Operation of establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)  Which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of the Code. 
(2)  While the entrance or exit of the establishment is locked when a person other than an employee is inside the establishment. 
(c)  Allowing employee to engage in prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for an operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it holds a business tax receipt under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer or allow any employee to: 
(1)  Engage in a lap dance with a person at the establishment. 
(2)  Contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in a lap dance with a person at the establishment. 
(3)  Engage in any specified sexual activity at the establishment. 
(4)  Where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale or consumed, display or expose at the establishment less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, less than completely and opaquely covered cleavage of the human buttocks, less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of the human female breast, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(5)  Display or expose at the establishment less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, less than completely and opaquely covered cleavage of the human buttocks, less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of the human female breast, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, unless such employee is continuously positioned away from any person other than another employee, and unless such employee is in an area as described in the code. 
(6)  Display or expose any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the establishment, including with another employee. 
(7)  Engage in a private performance unless such employee is in an area which complies with the special requirements of this article. 
(8)  While engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, intentionally touch any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee. 
(9)  Intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, at any point below the waist and above the knee of the person, or to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female person. 
(d)  Minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it holds a business tax receipt under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow: 
(1)  Admittance to the establishment of a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the establishment. 
(3)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the establishment. 
(4)  A person to work at the establishment as an employee who is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(e)  Working at establishment which does not have valid adult entertainment business tax receipt. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment that he knows or should know does not hold a business tax receipt under this article, or which has a business tax receipt which is under suspension, has been revoked or cancelled, or has expired. 
(f)  Violations subject to criminal prosecution. Whoever violates any provision of this article may be prosecuted and punished as provided in section 1-15 and may be prosecuted through the city code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Secs. 11-105—11-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; qualifications for obtaining building permits, § 6-58; certification of plumbers required, § 6-147; use of master journeyman's name prohibited, § 6-148; license required for gas installations, § 6-175(c); classification of electrical workers, § 6-203; swimming pool contractors qualifications, § 18-3. 
State Law reference— Contractors and contracting, F.S. ch. 489. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board shall mean the City of Titusville Code Enforcement Board. 
Certificate of competency shall mean that instrument which is issued to an individual upon passage of a standard examination required by this article or required by the building official verifying the passage of the standard examination. 
Certificate of compliance shall mean that instrument which authorizes an individual, firm or corporation to engage in subcontracting in a category as specified in section 11-126, specialized contractor classifications. Entities which hold a certificate of compliance may subcontract work covered by the certificate of compliance from residential, building, general or owner contractors, but may not themselves subcontract any work to any other person except work covered by the certificate of compliance and then only to a person who also possesses a current certificate of compliance issued by the city for all work being subcontracted. A certificate of compliance does not qualify the holder to obtain permits for construction. 
Certificate of proficiency shall mean that instrument which is issued to an individual upon passage of a standard examination required by this article or required by the building official verifying the passage of the standard examination. 
Contracting shall mean engaging in business as a contractor. 
Contractor shall mean a person who in any capacity undertakes, or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or accepts an order or contract either on a fixed sum, cost plus a percentage, or a fixed fee, or any combination thereof, or for any other type of compensation, or submits a bid or does himself, or by others, to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building or other structure, to excavate, or commence any project, development or improvement or do any other part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding, or other structures or works in connection therewith or the incorporation of labor or materials therein. Contractors include specialty contractors and contractors in the following categories: 
(1)  General contractors (Class I) are those whose services are unlimited. 
(2)  Building contractors (Class II) are those whose services are limited to construction of commercial buildings and single or multiple-dwelling residential buildings, neither to exceed three (3) stories in height, and accessory remodeling, repair or improvement of any size building if the services do not affect the structural members of the building. 
(3)  Residential building contractors (Class III) are those whose services are limited to construction remodeling, repair or improvement of one-, two- or three-family unit residences not exceeding two (2) stories in height and accessory use structures in connection therewith. 
(4)  Class A air conditioning contractor (HARV unlimited) means any person whose services are unlimited in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge and skill to perform the following: Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and ventilating, including duct work in connection with a complete system only to the extent such duct work is performed by the contractor necessary to make complete an air distribution system, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems, and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment systems, and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith; also piping, insulation of pipes, vessels and ducts, pressure and process piping, pneumatic control piping, and installation of a condensate drain from an air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system, all in such a manner as to comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable thereto. The scope of work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum or natural gas fuel lines within buildings, potable waterlines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters, and electrical power wiring. 
(5)  Class B air conditioning contractor (HARV unlimited) means any person whose services are limited to twenty-five (25) tons cooling and five hundred thousand (500,000) btu heating (in any one (1) system) in the execution of contracts requiring the experience, knowledge and skill to perform the following: Install, maintain and repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and ventilation, including duct work in connection with a complete system only to the extent such duct work is performed by the contractor necessary to make complete an air distribution system being installed under this classification; also piping, insulation of pipes, vessels and ducts, and installation of a condensate drain from any air conditioning unit to an existing safe waste or other approved manner as to comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable thereto. 
(6)  Class C air conditioning contractor (HARV refrigeration) means any person whose business is limited to the servicing of air conditioning, heating or refrigeration systems, including duct alterations in connection with those systems they are servicing. Service is herein defined as maintenance service and replacement of certain minor components of an air conditioning/refrigeration system of up to twenty-five (25) tons and a heating system not to exceed two hundred thousand (200,000) btu straight heating. Minor components shall include sections of refrigeration tubing and recharging, solenoid and relays, thermostats, belts, blower motors and minor alterations of duct systems not to exceed ten (10) percent of the total duct system. Service work shall not include repairs. Repairs are herein defined as the replacement of major component items such as blower assemblies, condensation units, compressors, compressor motors and major alterations to duct systems. Exception: No examination, registration or certification is required under this part for the sales, service or installation of package heating or air conditioning units (window-type units) with no ducts or remote controls (maximum of three (3) tons, thirty-six thousand (36,000) btu in capacity). 
(7)  Mechanical contractor (HARV mechanical) means any person whose services are unlimited in the execution of contracts requiring the knowledge, experience and skill to perform the following: Install, maintain, repair, fabricate, alter, extend or design, when not prohibited by law, central air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and ventilating including duct work in connection with a complete system only to the extent such duct work is performed by the contractor necessary to make complete an air distribution system, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems, lift station equipment and piping and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith; also piping, gasoline tanks and pump installations and piping for same, air piping, vacuum line piping, oxygen lines, nitrous oxide piping, ink and chemical lines, fuel transmission lines and installation of existing safe waste or other approved disposal other than a direct connection to a sanitary system, all in such a manner as to comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws, and regulations applicable thereto. The scope of work for such contractor shall also include any excavation work incidental thereto, but shall not include any work such as liquefied petroleum or natural gas fuel lines within buildings, potable waterlines or connections thereto, sanitary sewer lines, swimming pool piping and filters and electrical power wiring. 
(8)  Master electrician shall mean a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to plan, layout and supervise the installation of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power, and who is qualified under the provisions of this article. 
(9)  Journeyman electrician shall mean a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to install electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for light, heat or power and who is qualified under the terms and provisions of this article. He shall be capable of doing electrical work according to the plans and specifications furnished to him and in accordance with the rules and regulations governing wiring installations within the city's jurisdiction. 
(10)  Master plumber shall mean a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to plan, layout and supervise the installation of plumbing equipment, apparatus or equipment or other related work according to the standards of the Standard Plumbing Code. 
(11)  Journeyman plumber shall mean a person who possesses the necessary qualifications, training and technical knowledge to install plumbing fixtures and apparatus or equipment, who is qualified under the terms and provisions of this article. He shall be capable of doing plumbing work according to the plans and specifications furnished to him and in accordance with the rules and regulations governing plumbing installations within the city. 
(12)  Commercial pool contractor or "Class A" pool contractor means any person whose scope of work involves but is not limited to the construction, repair, water treatment and servicing of all swimming pools, both public or private or otherwise, and used for therapy, swimming or other use. This work shall include but not be limited to layout, excavation, operation of construction pumps for dewatering purposes, steelwork, installation of light niches, pouring of floors, guniting, fiberglassing, installation of tile and coping, installation of all perimeter and filter piping, installation of all filter equipment and chemical feeders of any type, plastering of the interior, pouring of decks, construction of equipment rooms or housing for pool equipment, and the installation of package pool heaters. However, the scope of work of such contractor shall not include direct connections to a sanitary sewer system or to potable water lines. 
(13)  Sheet metal contractor means one whose services are unlimited in the sheet metal trade and who has the experience, knowledge and skill necessary for the manufacture, fabrication, assembling, handling, erection, installation, dismantling, conditioning, adjustment, alteration, repair, servicing and design, when not prohibited by law, or ferrous or nonferrous metal work of U.S. No. 10 gauge or its equivalent or lighter gauge and other materials used in lieu thereof; and air handling systems including the setting of air handling equipment and reinforcement of the same and including the balancing of air handling systems. 
(14)  Roofing contractor means one whose services are unlimited in the roofing trade and who has the experience, knowledge and skill to install, maintain, repair, alter, extend or design when not prohibited by law, and use materials and items used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all kinds of roofing and waterproofing, all in such manner as to comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable thereto. 
(15)  Residential pool contractor or "Class B" pool contractor means any person whose scope of work involves but is not limited to the construction, repair, water treatment and servicing of all residential swimming pools used for therapy, swimming or other use. This work shall include but not be limited to layout, excavation, operation of construction pumps for dewatering purposes, steelwork, installation of light niches, pouring of floors, guniting, fiberglassing, installation of tile and coping, installation of all perimeter and filter piping, installation of all filter equipment and chemical feeders of any type, plastering of the interior, pouring of decks, installation of housing for pool equipment and the installation of package pool heaters. However, the scope of work of such contractor shall not include direct connections to a sanitary sewer system or to potable water lines. 
(16)  Swimming pool servicing contractor or "Class C" pool contractors are those contractors whose scope of work involves the servicing, repair, water treatment and maintenance of all swimming pools, both public and private. They shall be permitted to make any necessary piping and repairs, to replace and repair all existing equipment, or to install new additional equipment as necessary. Their scope of work shall include the reinstallation of tile and coping; repair and replacing of all piping, filter equipment, and chemical feeders of any type; replastering; repouring of decks; and the reinstalling or addition of pool heaters. 
Engage in business shall mean doing a trade of any owner or any tenant of land, water or of a building or any part thereof, or for any person in possession of or in charge of the same or any part thereof, or entering into a contract with such owner, tenant or person for the doing of a trade. 
Firm shall include a sole proprietorship, partnership, association, corporation, agency or any other type of business organization. 
Owner shall mean any person who owns property either individually, jointly or by an estate by the entirety with another person. When the provisions of this article provide for the issuance of a building permit to an owner, and the title to the property upon which the building permit is issued shall be held other than individually but within the limitations of this definition, such other person holding title together with the applicant shall join in the application for such permit. Ownership in this definition shall be fee simple ownership and nothing herein contained shall require a mortgagee or other lien holder to join in such application. 
Specialty contractor shall mean a contractor whose operations consist of the performances of construction work requiring special skills, and whose principal contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades and crafts. The following classifications shall show proof of at least one (1) year's experience, except as otherwise stated herein, in their selected field of construction and meet the requirements as hereinafter provided. Specialty contractors shall be classified as, but not limited to, one (1) of the following crafts: 
(1)  Aluminum: Qualified to fabricate, erect and install screen enclosures with metal-supporting members, in whole or part self-supporting and shall include any work dealing with the use of aluminum, piece work or any work related thereto. The scope of the work shall include footings and slabs, on grade only, in connection with the overall project. 
(2)  Carpentry: Qualified to build, install or repair nonstructural wooden items such as cabinets, trim, doors, windows, window and door frames, molding or any other wooden item or member which is not a structural part of the building or structure. Structural work may be performed if first an outstanding permit for such work is obtained by contractor holding proper certificate of competency. Nonstructural part of the building or structure may include formwork for concrete placement. 
(3)  Communications towers: Qualified to fabricate and erect communications towers in accordance with approved engineering drawings in such a manner as to comply with all applicable codes, laws and industry standards. Permits will be required in all cases for towers in excess of thirty-five (35) feet, height to be measured from grade as defined in chapter II of the Standard Building Code. 
(4)  Concrete and masonry: Qualified to construct forms and framework for the casting and shaping of concrete, including but not limited to columns, beams, decks and window frames, to place and erect reinforcing steel and miscellaneous embedded steel and to pour, place and finish concrete, including terrazzo. This category shall include the cutting and laying of all masonry items including, but not limited to brick, block, clay products, rough and cut stone, structural glass, decorative block and veneer block all installed in accordance with applicable codes and industry recommendations and standards. 
(5)  Elevators: See F.S. ch. 399 as defined therein. 
(6)  Fencing: Qualified to fabricate, assemble, erect and install fences of masonry, chain link, concrete, wood and other fence materials in such manner that an acceptable fence can be erected, complying with applicable regulations, including zoning regulations. 
(7)  Fire sprinkler systems: Applicant must show proof of certification by state fire marshal's office as a prerequisite to application submittal. Qualified to install, maintain, repair, alter or extend all piping for fire sprinkler systems, including the connection to the water service outlet provided solely for fire sprinkler systems. Installation of a fire sprinkler in laundry and waste chutes, or garbage rooms, shall not constitute a system which would permit the installation of standpipes in conjunction therewith. The system must be approved and accepted by the building department and the fire department. 
(8)  Gas fitter (bottled or liquefied petroleum gas): Such competency shall have as a prerequisite that the individual hold a certificate from the state fire marshal's office prior to submittal of application. Applicant shall be qualified to install, maintain, repair, alter or extend fuel gas piping or appliances involving bottled or liquefied petroleum gas. 
(9)  Gas fitter (natural gas): Qualified to install, maintain, repair, alter or extend fuel gas piping or appliances involving natural gas. 
(10)  House moving and demolition: Limited to the loading, moving and unloading of structures and qualified to demolish frame or block structures not exceeding two (2) stories in height. Anything to be demolished over two (2) stories must show proof of H.H. Block examination passage. 
(11)  Marine construction: Qualified as a Class I or II building contractor as defined by state and local regulations. 
(12)  Mobile homes: Qualified to install mobile homes to meet the state standards or any other applicable federal laws. This classification shall include no work for which state registration or for which an examination is required as stated in previous sections of this article, but shall include the installation of slab, tiedowns, etc. Permits may be obtained for installation by owners or agents of the mobile home site. 
(13)  Painting and waterproofing: Qualified to clean, caulk and size surfaces in preparation for and to apply paint and related liquid or viscous products thereon by brush, roller or spray methods in such a manner that under an agreed specification, satisfactory painting and waterproofing can be accomplished. 
(14)  Paving: Qualified to construct roads, airport runways and aprons, parking lots, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, property line walls, storm drainage facilities and to perform the excavating, clearing and grading incidental thereto. 
(15)  Sign erection: Qualified to paint or otherwise apply or erect outside displays of character, letters, illustrations or ornamentations. The work of sign contractor shall include the installation of panels, facing, frame, structure, movable or fixed, freestanding or attached to a building or other structure which is to be used for sign purposes or erection. Any electrical work involved must be accomplished by a licensed electrician. 
(16)  Solar contractor: A person who possesses the requisite qualifications, training and technical knowledge and who is qualified in accordance with this article: 
a.  Class A. Qualified to fabricate, extend, alter and install any and all solar components and appurtenances thereto. This would include water, other known volatile liquids and gases being utilized as the vehicle for thermal transfer and would not be limited to a heating classification. Having a minimum of two (2) years' experience in plumbing or mechanical with an additional one (1) year's experience in supervisory capacity; however, applicant may substitute a maximum of one-third required time in a related electric or structural field. 
b.  Class B. Qualified to utilize only water as a thermal transfer medium. Limited to the thermal transfer components and storage tank installation. Having a minimum of two (2) years' experience in plumbing or mechanical with a portion of these two (2) years, not to exceed fifty (50) percent, in an electrical or structural field. A minimum of one (1) year's experience in supervisory capacity in mechanical or plumbing is required. 
c.  Class C. Qualified to install solar components and storage tanks which use nonpotable supplies. Limited to the installation of solar components on or at grade level and minor repairs and system alterations without increased structural and system alterations without increased structural loading on other existing systems. Having a minimum of two (2) years' experience in plumbing or mechanical fields. No supervisory experience is required. 
(17)  Tile, terrazzo and marble: Qualified to mix, place, screed, grind, polish and finish terrazzo applied to surfaces erected and provided by others. Also qualified to erect, attach, apply and embed tile or concrete, clay or any other materials, none of which exceeds three-fourths inch in thickness to floors or walls and shall include tile veneer not exceeding three-fourths inch thickness to the exterior of buildings. 
(18)  Underground fuel tank: Qualified to install underground storage tanks concrete or other surfaces and piping as required to facilitate tanks' use wherein it is not governed or limited by other ordinances or state laws. Shall also include the placement of equipment, ballasting, tiedowns, earth backfill. Electrical work shall be a part of the project contract and such work shall be performed by a properly licensed electrical contractor. 
(19)  Underground utilities: Qualified to excavate, construct, install, repair or alter pipelines, such as water and gas transmission and distribution lines, storm and sanitary sewerage lines, force main outfalls, and pumping facilities incidental to the collection or installation of pipeline products including the equipment and piping installation and placing within a structure which is constructed for the purpose of pumping or processing such pipeline products. An underground utilities contractor may construct or install junction boxes, manholes, inlets, valves and similar components, in such a manner as to comply with all plans, specifications, codes, laws and regulations applicable. The work of the underground utilities contractor shall be considered to stop at a point not more than five (5) feet from the intersection of right-of-way and private property. The scope of work of such a contractor does not include the installation of chilled water lines or related work incidental thereto. Passage of an H. H. Block examination in this category is a prerequisite to issuance of the competency card. 
Specialized contractor shall mean a contractor whose operations consist of the performance of a trade which requires technical knowledge and skills gained through experience. Specialized contractors are issued a certificate of compliance in accordance with these definitions and section 11-195. Specialized contractor classifications include, but are not limited to, the following defined categories: 
(1)  Alarm installers: Qualified to install low voltage wiring systems for fire or security alarm systems. System voltage is limited to fifty (50) volts AC/DC. No direct wiring into existing load centers or junction boxes is authorized. 
(2)  Carpeting and vinyl installation: Qualified to install semipermanent floor coverings of fabric, vinyl, linoleum or wood, not including ceramic tile or stone work. 
(3)  Drywall: Qualified to install gypsum drywall products to studs, joists and suspended ceiling channels and to fabricate and install metal accessories and all necessary trim in connection therewith including metal studs, runners, hangers, channels, drywall metal suspensions accessories, and prefabricated ceiling materials, provided that any plaster work or troweled material, application of block or wood partitions shall not be a part of metal stud framing. 
(4)  Excavating and grading: Qualified to make excavations, to obtain or remove materials such as rock, gravel or sand, to construct or excavate canals, lakes, levees, roadways, including land cleaning, filling, and grading. An excavating and grading specialized contractor may do the work of a land clearing and grubbing contractor, including landscaping. 
(5)  Glass and glazing: Qualified to install and attach windows of any type, fixed or movable, and swinging or building walls or columns holding or supporting mullions or horizontal bars which in turn are attached to building walls or columns erected by others, including the cutting and installation of glass and shall also include metal accessories and prefabricated glass, metal or plastic curtain walls or panels and tinting. The scope of work shall include the fabrication and installation of garage and industrial doors and shower and tub enclosure doors and metal facias, storefront awnings or canopies. 
(6)  Insulation and acoustic tile: Qualified to fabricate, install and apply thermal acoustic or fire-retardant acoustic material to walls, floors, ceilings or within such walls, floors or ceiling, by mechanical or adhesive method in such a manner to comply with applicable codes and industry recommendations and standards. 
(7)  Landscaping: Qualified to perform the placement of sod, shrubbery, bushes, trees and ornamental plantings and independent ornamental structures, e.g. fountains, birdbaths, decorative statuary. Any plumbing connections shall be made by a licensed master plumber. Placement of recirculating and/or single direction fountains shall fall under the scope of work of a lawn sprinkling specialized contractor, or master plumber contractor (if potable water is utilized). 
(8)  Lathing and plastering: Qualified to apply and affix wood, gypsum or metal lath or any other product prepared or manufactured, including the placing of metal studs and runners to which lath is to be applied, to provide hangers, channels and other mechanical suspension work for the support of lath or acoustical tile or other prefabricated ceiling materials, including the channel iron work for the support of metal or other fire-resistive lath on wall, ceilings or soffits, or for solid plaster partitions, and to coat surfaces with a mixture of sand or other aggregate, gypsum, plastering, Portland cement or quicklime and water or any combination of such materials as to create a permanent surface coating and which coatings are usually applied with a plasterer's trowel or by pneumatic pressure on any surface which offers a mechanical key for the support of such coating or to which the coating will adhere by suction. The scope of work shall not include the erection of wood stud or masonry walls. Such contractor may perform the work of a drywall contractor. 
(9)  Lawnsprinkler: Qualified to install irrigation systems for residential, commercial, and agricultural lawns and gardens. Classification does not include connections to potable water, which must be accomplished by a master plumber, nor well drilling which is a separate category. 
(10)  Painting/waterproofing/sandblasting: Qualified to clean, sandblast, pressure clean, caulk and size surfaces in preparation for and to apply paint and related liquid or viscous products thereon by brush, roller or spray methods in such a manner that under an agreed specification, satisfactory painting and waterproofing can be accomplished. 
(11)  Property management and maintenance: Qualified to make minor, nonstructural repairs such as to repair nonbearing frames, repair floors, doors and locks, caulk and make necessary painting repairs, patch and stucco repairs, provided, however, that the scope of the work shall not include plumbing, electrical, mechanical, roofing, or structural work of any kind. 
(12)  Sewer cleaner: To remove the cleanout plug for the purpose of cleaning and/or removal of blockage causing stoppage in building drains and sewers. Not included within the definition of sewer cleaning is work included with the definition of plumbing as defined in section 6-141. 
(13)  Tile, terrazzo and marble: Qualified to mix, place, screed, grind, polish and finish terrazzo, tile or marble applied to surfaces erected and provided by others. Also qualified to erect, attach, apply and embed tile or concrete, clay or any other materials to floors or walls and shall include tile veneer not exceeding three-fourths-inch thickness to the exterior of buildings. 
(14)  Tree removal/tree surgeon: Qualified to prune, trim, cut down, and transplant trees, remove tree root systems and stumps, cable, fill cavities, brace and support damaged trees, and treat trees for various bacteriological or fungal diseases, as long as such treatment does not require the use of controlled toxic substances. Permits for tree removal may be issued to persons in this category. 
(15)  Well drilling: Qualified to drill water supply or drainage wells, install and maintain and repair pumps incidental to a private swimming pool, not to include pumps, filters and chlorinators incidental to such pools. A well-drilling specialized contractor may install lawn sprinkler systems and make connection of such lawn sprinkler piping, but he shall not make a connection to sanitary or storm sewers. A well-drilling contractor shall, when engaged in the well-drilling business, provide and maintain the necessary equipment in proper and sanitary condition. A prerequisite to the issuance of this certificate shall be the submittal of a current state well driller's license. 
Subcontractor shall mean one who contracts with a contractor to perform a portion of the contractor's work. 
Trade shall include, but shall not be limited to construction, repair, removal of buildings, plumbing work, electrical work, mechanical work, engineering construction work and any similar occupation connected with the construction industry. 
Qualifying agent shall mean any person who has made application; been examined, where required, and approved to qualify as a contractor. He may qualify as a contractor himself, another individual, a firm or a corporation, and in addition to other responsibilities, shall perform all necessary supervision for the contractor. 
(Code 1963, § 5-45; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 2, 6-27-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-127. - Proof of examination passage. 
For the purposes of this article, all of the contractor classifications as defined in section 11-126 shall show proof of passage of H. H. Block examination for their particular classification when applying for a competency card and shall adhere to F.S. ch. 489, if applicable, pertaining to state registration. In addition, they must show proof of two (2) years' experience in their classification prior to issuance of a certificate of competency. 
(Code 1963, § 5-45)  
Sec. 11-128. - Previously licensed contractors. 
(a)  Any person holding a current certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency issued by the board of contractor examiners or the board of electrical examiners or the board of plumbing examiners or the building trades board shall not be required to obtain a new certificate of proficiency or competency as a result of the repeal of the building trades board. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall affect those contractors who currently hold a certificate of competency in a particular classification as previously defined in this chapter of the Code of Ordinances, and such persons shall be authorized to continue to act as contractors within the scope and limitations as previously defined. Provided, however, that the certificate of competency is not revoked or suspended in accordance with this division. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to exempt a person currently licensed from the requirement of obtaining a certificate of proficiency or competency if such current license is abandoned or a new type of license is sought. 
(d)  The building official shall review the existing licensed contractors as to classification and shall recommend reclassification of contractors in accordance with provisions of this division. 
(Code 1963, § 5-64; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 3, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-129. - Prosecution; penalties. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, all violations of this article shall be prosecuted through the municipal code enforcement board of the city or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any person who may himself or by his agent or any holder of a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance or certificate of proficiency who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this division and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 5-62)  
Sec. 11-130. - Prohibited acts and omissions. 
It shall be unlawful for any contractor or any partner, officer, director or qualifying agent of such a contractor to commit any one (1) or more of the following acts or omissions: 
(1)  To do work outside of the scope of work for which the contractor is authorized to perform. 
(2)  Abandon without legal excuse a construction project or operation in which the contractor is engaged or under contract as a contractor. 
(3)  Divert funds or property received for the execution or completion of a specific construction project or operation or for a specific purpose to any other use whatsoever. 
(4)  To depart from or disregard in any material respect the plans or specifications of a construction job without the consent of the owner or his duly authorized representative and the building official, as defined by the Standard Building Code adopted in section 6-101. 
(5)  Disregard or violate any county or municipal ordinance or state law pertaining to the contractor's business or employee or regulating his work or providing safety and health regulations in the construction trades or for construction work. 
(6)  Misrepresent any material fact in an application or supporting papers to obtain a certificate required by this article. 
(7)  Failing to fulfill his contractual obligations, including but not limited to the payment of all creditors for materials furnished or work or services performed. 
(8)  Intentionally evading or violating any of the provisions of this article, which may be evidenced by but not limited to one (1) or more of the following acts: 
a.  Aiding or abetting any person not holding a certificate of competency, to evade or violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Allowing a certificate to be used by an unauthorized person. 
c.  Obtaining a permit for any work in which the certificate holder does not actually supervise, direct, and control the construction or installation covered by such permit. 
d.  Subcontracting any work to any person not holding a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance for work involved in the subcontract. 
(9)  Do any fraudulent act as a certificate holder by which another is substantially injured. 
(Code 1963, § 5-63)  
Secs. 11-131—11-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-1995, § 4, adopted June 27, 1995, changed the name of this division from "building trades board" to "building official." 
Cross reference— Provisions regarding the appointment, removal, and resignation requirements, § 2-51 et seq.; travel expenses, § 2-131 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-141. - Examination of contractors; delegation of authority. 
(a)  There is hereby delegated to the city building official the duty of examining and periodically reviewing contractors, as to their qualifications, including proof of financial responsibility, to engage in the business of contracting in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Hearings before the building official pursuant to this part shall be held monthly at such time and place as the building official may designate. The building official shall prescribe such rules of procedure and as shall be necessary to carry into execution and operation the powers and duties delegated hereunder. 
(Code 1963, § 5-48; Ord. No. 6-1995, § 1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 5, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-142. - Powers and duties of building official. 
(a)  The building official shall have jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to the examination and issuance of certificates of proficiency and of certificates of competency and certificates of compliance and financial responsibility of all contractors who engage in the business of contracting and specialty contracting within the city. 
(b)  The building official shall have the power to determine the qualifications of applicants for the various classes of certificates of competency and certificates of compliance; to hold hearings to determine if a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance or of any contractor, subcontractor, or specialty contractor or specialized contractor should be suspended for violation of a city ordinance and to fix the length of the time for such suspension or to revoke the certificate of competency or certificate of compliance under the provisions of this article, or to request an investigation of any complaints made against the licensed contractor and determine whether administrative action shall be taken against the contractor or specialty contractor or direct the investigator to file a complaint for prosecution for the violation against the contractor or specialty contractor; and to call upon members of the industry for advice and assistance. It shall be the duty of the building official to annually review all related building codes and to make recommendations for any lawful amendments or changes thereto. 
(c)  Testing requirements and experience requirements for all classifications of contractors will be reviewed annually by the building official for recommendations and suggested changes to council. 
(d)  Definitions of contractor, specialty contractor, and specialized contractor categories may only be changed by council action. 
(e)  The building official shall have the authority to review applications for certificates of compliance categories. Applicants denied a certificate of compliance by the building official may appeal within thirty (30) days of the denial by notarized letter to the city council. 
(f)  The building official shall keep a permanent record of those persons applying for certificates of compliance as long as such certificates are renewed biannually in accordance with section 11-178. 
(g)  The building official may, upon his own motion, or upon a sworn complaint, in writing, of any person, investigate the charges against any contractor holding a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance under the provisions of this article or any person who purports to be a contractor. 
(Code 1963, § 5-49; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 6, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-1995, § 7, adopted June 27, 1995, repealed former § 11-143, which pertained to the executive secretary.  
Secs. 11-144—11-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXAMINATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-1995, § 8, adopted June 27, 1995, repealed former div. 3, §§ 11-156—11-165, which pertained to enforcement. Section 9 of said ordinance renumbered former div. 4, §§ 11-176—11-182, as div. 3, 11-156—11-161. 
 
Sec. 11-156. - Scope; standard. 
(a)  The building official shall prescribe the type of examination or degree of experience, the knowledge of building, safety, health and lien laws of the city, county, state and federal governments as may be applicable, and the knowledge of rudimentary administrative principles of the contracting business for the attainment of a certificate of competency in the classification of contractor desired. Until changed by the city council, the H.H. Block proctored examination will be the standard as criteria for the issuance of certificates of competency for all contractors except specialty contractors and specialized contractors. 
(b)  In the event an examination is not available through the H.H. Block proctored examination, the building official shall have the authority to prescribe any standard examination which meets equivalent criteria as required in city ordinances and state law for the category indicated. Proof of passage of a proctored examination shall be prerequisite to the issuance of a certificate of proficiency for the tested categories specified in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 5-51(a); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 9, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-157. - Conduct generally, reciprocity. 
Examinations shall be held at a place, date, and hour to be set by the building official. The examination fees shall be sufficient to cover the costs involved by the building official to administer such examination. As long as the H. H. Block proctored examination is used by the building official as the standard examination, the building official will recognize the passage by any contractor of such examination for the purposes of this article, if such examination is given under the administration of a municipality or county using the H. H. Block examination as the standard criteria. 
(Code 1963, § 5-51(b); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 9, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-158. - Recognition of licenses issued under statute. 
If the applicant is a holder of a current valid certificate of certification from the Florida Construction Industry Licensing Board, as authorized by F.S. ch. 489, the board shall recognize such certificate as meeting the certificate of proficiency and certificate of competency requirements of this Code of Ordinances and no additional examination or requirements shall be imposed; however, the building official may impose the posting of a bond as a condition of issuance of a permit as set forth in section 106.2 of the Standard Building Code. 
(Code 1963, § 5-51(b); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 9, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-159. - Notices. 
(a)  Notice of the next regular examination shall be given by the executive secretary of the building official to all who make application to take such examination. 
(b)  The executive secretary shall notify each applicant in writing whether he has passed the examination and shall automatically issue a certificate of proficiency upon successful passage of such examination. 
(Code 1963, § 5-51(c), (d); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 9, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-160. - Qualification to apply. 
Any individual may apply for a certificate of competency whether he holds a certificate of proficiency or not but the attainment of a certificate of proficiency is a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of competency as provided in section 11-178. 
(Code 1963, § 5-51(e); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 9, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-161. - Filing by licensee or holder of certificate of proficiency. 
Each licensee shall keep on file with the city at all times the names and addresses of the persons in the employment of the licensee who hold certificates of proficiency and all projects upon which the licensee is issued a building permit shall be placed under the supervision and control of such a person. The licensee shall notify the city within five (5) days of the termination of the employment of such person by the licensee. 
(Code 1963, § 5-61; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 9, 6-27-95)  
Secs. 11-162—11-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, adopted June 27, 1995, renumbered former div. 5 as div. 4. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 11-176. - Certificate of competency—Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business or to act in the capacity of a contractor or subcontractor under this article within the city without having made application for and been issued a current certificate of competency as required by this article. Proof of issuance of a certificate of competency shall be required prior to issuance of an occupational license when required by section 11-58. 
(b)  All contractors requiring state registration shall possess as a prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of competency a minimum of two (2) years' experience within the classification for which application is made. Contractors in the heading of specialty or specialized contractors shall require one (1) year's experience. 
(c)  The building official may authorize the executive secretary to enter into reciprocal agreements to and issue certificates of competency. The executive secretary shall grant certificates of competency by reciprocity only from those counties and municipalities where the applicant has successfully passed with a grade of seventy-five (75) percent or more, a written examination prepared, graded and proctored by H. H. Block and Associates. Such application shall be accompanied by a financial statement, written affidavit that the applicant will not engage in any work which is not within the scope of the certificate of competency for which the application is made, and will comply with all regulations applicable to the certificate of competency from which application is made. 
(d)  Holders of current certificates of competency may sign building permits to construct work contracted for by a partnership, corporation, business trust or other legally organized association only if the certificate holder is a partner, officer or agent with full-time employment in the partnership, corporation, business trust or other legally organized association. 
(e)  Any person holding a city competency card or compliance certificate or certification at state level may designate one agent to obtain permits for work under the supervision of the qualifier. The agent must be a member or employee of the firm, partnership, or corporation which the card or certificate holder is qualifying and the form of designation must be a notarized letter. The letter may designate an agent for a specified job location and separate authorization letters would be required for any additional permits not in connection with the listed job. The letter may designate an agent for an extended time, not exceeding the biennial competency card or certificate of compliance renewal date of September thirtieth of each odd-numbered year. Letters of authorization of this type will allow the named individual authority to act in the contractor's name for all permits during the time frame specified. Only one (1) person shall be listed on this type of authorization. 
(Code 1963, § 5-46; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-177. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Any person required or desiring to be qualified as a contractor, shall make application on a form prescribed by the building official. The application shall be retained by the building official together with all supporting papers. The building official shall obtain a written credit report in regard to the application and shall make such additional investigation as may be directed by the building official. Should the applicant be a firm or corporation, the application shall be executed by the president or one legally qualified to act for the firm or corporation and shall show his authority to so act on the application. 
(b)  The application for a certificate of competency shall contain: 
(1)  Name, residence address and phone number, and business address and phone number of applicant. 
(2)  Determination of whether individual, partnership or corporation. If partnership or corporation, names of partners and corporate officers. If the applicant is a corporation, there must be furnished a certified copy of the incorporation and a letter from the secretary of the state that such corporation is in a current status with the secretary of state, including the appointment of a resident agent to receive service of process. 
(3)  A sworn financial statement of the applicant and an agreement authorizing the building official to obtain from any source dealing with the applicant even though confidential, such additional information concerning the applicant's financial condition as the building official deems necessary. A sworn financial statement will not be required of an applicant who has a current certificate of competency with the city for at least three (3) years from the date of the application. An applicant shall be required to disclose any substantial change in his financial statement if a substantial change has occurred. This provision for waiving the financial statement shall control over any section in this chapter to the contrary. 
(4)  A list of all businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant or in which the applicant has had an interest of any kind during the past five (5) years, and the addresses of these businesses. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, fraud, or moral turpitude or felony during the past five (5) years, and that he is not presently charged with committing a felony or misdemeanor involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude. If this is not the case, applicant shall attach a sheet to the application specifying the details of the conviction or charges. 
(6)  Shall list on the application any schooling or work experience the applicant has had along with dates of such schooling or work experience. 
(7)  Shall state on the application whether or not the applicant has ever declared bankruptcy, or had bankruptcy declared against him and the outcome, if any. 
(8)  Attached to the application shall be the following documents in addition to those required under the previous sections of this article: 
a.  Letter from a licensed insurance agent or agency showing the applicant's insurability for the following policies of insurance: 
1.  Worker's compensation insurance as required by law. 
2.  Public liability insurance in at least the policy limits commonly known as one hundred thousand dollars-three hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00-$300,000.00), and property damage coverage with limits and liability of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for all categories requiring an examination. All other categories will require fifty thousand dollars-one hundred thousand dollars ($50,000.00-$100,000.00) liability and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) property damage. 
b.  Certificate of passage of H.H. Block proctored examination for the following classifications: 
General contractor. 
Residential contractor. 
Building contractor. 
Class A, B, C-H.A.R.V. contractors. 
Roofing contractor. 
Sheet metal contractor. 
Commercial swimming pool contractor. 
Residential swimming pool contractor. 
Swimming pool servicing contractor. 
Mechanical contractor. 
Master electrician. 
Master plumber. 
Underground utilities contractor. 
Journeyman electrician. 
Journeyman plumber. 
(Code 1963, § 5-53(A); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-178. - Same—Issuance, expiration, renewal. 
(a)  The building official shall issue a certificate of competency when it is determined that the applicant is qualified under this division and has met the following requirements: 
(1)  That the financial statement of the applicant and the city's investigation of such financial statement and applicant's credit record show that the applicant is financially able to engage in the contracting business for which the license is requested. 
(2)  That the applicant and each member of the firm and each holder of a certificate of proficiency possesses a reputation for honesty, integrity and has a good character. The lack of honesty, integrity or good character may be established by competent evidence that: 
a.  Applicant or others aforementioned have committed an act within the past five (5) years involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit and lack of integrity whereby the contractor has been benefited or whereby some injury has been sustained by another. 
b.  Applicant or others aforementioned or another firm in which the applicant or others aforementioned were interested has in the past five (5) years refused to pay valid bills of at least three (3) different persons or firms or has been adjudged a bankrupt. 
c.  Applicant or others aforementioned have been convicted of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude, or felony during the past five (5) years. 
(3)  That the applicant is insured by a responsible insurance company for the previously stated policy limits in section 11-192(b)(8)a. 
(4)  That the applicant or one (1) of its officers or employees is a holder of a valid certificate of proficiency for the class of license desired. 
a.  A certificate of competency shall expire biennially on September thirtieth. Failure to renew the certificate during September of the renewal year shall cause the certificate to become inoperative, and it is unlawful thereafter for any person to engage, to offer to engage, or hold himself out as engaging in contracting under the certificate unless the certificate is restored or reissued. 
b.  A certificate of competency which is inoperative because of failure to renew shall be restored on payment of the proper renewal fee if the application for restoration is made within ninety (90) days after September thirtieth of the renewal year. If the application for restoration is not made within the ninety-day period, the fee for restoration will be a fifty-dollar penalty in addition to the proper renewal fee; except for journeymen, the fee will be a ten-dollar penalty in addition to the proper renewal fee. The building official shall require reexamination of the applicant if the certificate has lapsed for more than two (2) years. 
c.  A person who holds a valid certificate of competency from the building official may go on an inactive status during which time he shall not engage in contracting, but maintain his certificate on an inactive basis upon payment of the required fee during the inactive period. An inactive certificate of competency which is invalid because of failure to renew shall be restored on payment of the proper renewal fee, if the application for restoration is made within ninety (90) days after September thirtieth of the renewal year. If the application for restoration is not made within the ninety-day period, the fee for restoration will be a fifty-dollar penalty in addition to the proper renewal fee; except for journeymen, the fee will be a ten-dollar penalty in addition to the proper renewal fee. In addition, the building official shall require reexamination of the applicant if the certificate has lapsed more than two (2) years. 
(Code 1963, § 5-54; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-179. - Certificate of compliance—Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to act in the capacity of a specialized contractor, as defined in section 11-126, within the city, without having made application for, been issued and possessing a current certificate of compliance as required by this article. 
(b)  An employee of a person who holds a current certificate of compliance is not required to possess a certificate of compliance to perform specialized contractor work only if the work is performed under the employer's supervision and if the specific type of work being performed is the type of work for which the employer's certificate of compliance was issued. 
(Code 1963, § 5-46.1; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-180. - Same—Application. 
Any person required or desiring to be qualified as a specialized contractor shall make application on a form prescribed by the building official. The application shall be retained by the building official together with all supporting papers. Should the applicant be a firm or corporation, the application shall be executed by the president or one legally qualified to act for the firm or corporation and shall show his authority to so act on the application. The application for a certificate of compliance shall contain: 
(1)  Name, residence address and phone number and business name, phone number, and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Determination of whether individual, partnership or corporation. If partnership or corporation, names of partners and corporate officers. If the applicant is a corporation, there must be furnished a certified copy of the incorporation and a letter from the secretary of the state that such corporation is in a current status with the secretary of state, including the appointment of a resident agent to receive service of process. 
(3)  A list of all businesses owned, operated or managed by applicant or in which the applicant has had any interest of any kind during the past five (5) years and the addresses of these businesses. 
(4)  A statement stating that the applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, fraud, or moral turpitude or felony during the past five (5) years and that he is not presently charged with committing a felony or misdemeanor involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude. If this is not the case, the applicant shall attach a sheet to the application specifying the details of the conviction or charges. 
(5)  Shall list on the application any schooling or work experience applicant has had along with dates of work experience and schooling. The applicant shall demonstrate a minimum of two (2) years' experience in the particular field for which he is applying, with twelve (12) months of such experience in a supervisory position. 
(6)  Shall state on the application whether or not the applicant has ever declared bankruptcy or had bankruptcy declared against him and the outcome, if any. 
(7)  Attached to the application shall be the following documents in addition to those required under the previous sections of this article: 
a.  For all categories of work previously noted in section 11-126, specialized contractors, with the exception of excavating/grading and tree removal/surgeons, a certificate of public liability and property damage insurance in at least the policy limits commonly known as fifty thousand dollars-one hundred thousand dollars ($50,000.00-$100,000.00) liability and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) property damage. 
b.  For the categories of tree removal/surgeons and excavating/grading as indicated under section 11-126, specialized contractors, a certificate of public liability and property damage insurance in at least the policy limits commonly known as one hundred thousand dollars-three hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00-$300,000.00) liability and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage. 
c.  Worker's compensation insurance certificate when applicable. 
d.  Two (2) notarized letters of work experience from previous customers or employers in the field for which applicant is applying. The letters should state the applicant's expertise and performance in the field for which he is applying. 
(Code 1963, § 5-53(B); Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-181. - Same—Issuance, expiration, renewal. 
(a)  The building official shall authorize the executive secretary to issue a certificate of compliance when it is determined that the applicant is qualified under this article and has met the following requirements: 
(1)  That the applicant and each member of the firm and each holder of a certificate of proficiency possesses a reputation for honesty, integrity and has a good character. The lack of honesty, integrity or good character are as previously noted under section 11-178(a)(2). 
(2)  That the applicant is insured by a responsible insurance company for the previously stated policy limits in section 11-180(7). 
(3)  That the applicant holds the required previous experience for the classification being applied for. 
(b)  The renewal of the certificate of compliance and failure to renew, fees, renewal date, inactive status, etc., shall be as referenced in sections 11-177 and 11-178. 
(Code 1963, § 5-54.1; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-182. - Business organizations. 
(a)  When an individual proposes to do business in his own name, a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance, when granted, shall be issued only to that individual. 
(b)  If the applicant proposing to engage in contracting is a partnership, corporation, business trust or other legal entity, the application shall state the name of the partnership and of its partners, or the name of the corporation and of its officers and directors, or the name of the business trust and its trustees, or the name of such other legal entity and its members, and furnish evidence of statutory compliance if a fictitious name is used. Such application shall also show that the person applying for the examination is legally qualified to act for the business organization in all matters connected with its contracting business; and that he has authority to supervise construction undertaken by such business organization. The certificate of competency or certificate of compliance, when issued upon application of a business organization, shall be in the name of such business organization and the name of the qualifying individual shall be noted thereon. 
(c)  At least one (1) officer or supervising employee of the business organization shall be qualified under this article in order for the business organization to hold a current certificate of competency or certificate of compliance in the category of business conducted for which the officer or supervising officer or supervising employee is qualified. If any individual so qualified on behalf of such business organization ceases to be affiliated with such business organization, he and the organization shall inform the building official within thirty (30) days from whence the change occurs. In addition, if such individual is the only qualified individual affiliated with the business organization, the business organization shall have a period of sixty (60) days from the termination of the individual's affiliation with the business organization to qualify another person under the provisions of this article, failing which the certificate of the business organization shall be subject to revocation by the building official. During the above-mentioned sixty-day period, no permits shall be issued to such business organization until a qualified individual is approved by the building official for such company. 
(d)  Any contractor issued a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance as herein provided shall place on any and all vehicles utilized by such contractor in his business in the city, his competency card number, or his licensed business name and telephone number, stenciled in one-inch letters in a contrasting color on each side of the vehicle from the back of the driver's side forward. State registered or state certified contractors must display their registration numbers on any and all advertisements/signs per state law. 
(Code 1963, § 5-52; Ord. No. 29-1993, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-183. - Suspension and revocation of certificate. 
The building official may suspend or revoke or refuse to renew a contractor's certificate of competency or certificate of compliance if it is found that the contractor: 
(1)  Fails to maintain at all times with the insurance company, authorized to do business in the state, the limits of insurance required by this division. 
(2)  Contractor and/or licensee or the holder of the certificate of proficiency has committed an act since the issuance of the original certificate of competency or compliance involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or lack of integrity, whereby the contractor or the holder of the certificate of proficiency has been benefited or whereby some injury has been sustained by another. 
(3)  Contractor and/or licensee or the holder of the certificate of proficiency has since the issuance of the original certificate of competency or compliance refused to pay valid bills of at least three (3) different persons or firms. 
(4)  Contractor and/or licensee or the holder of the certificate of proficiency has since the issuance of the original certificate of competency or compliance been convicted of the commission of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude or a felony. 
(5)  That the original license was obtained through nondisclosure, misstatement or misrepresentation of a material fact. 
(6)  That the licensee no longer has an employee or partner in the licensee's business who holds a certificate of proficiency required for the class and type of license held by the licensee. 
(7)  That the licensee has allowed another person to use his license as prohibited by section 11-186. 
(8)  That the licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, building code or regulation. 
(9)  Contractor and/or licensee or the holder of the certificate of proficiency has, since the issuance of the original certificate of competency or compliance, within any twelve-month period, refused to correct or satisfy three (3) or more valid complaints from customers relating to the performance of work by the contractor. Alternatively, contractor and/or licensee has failed to remedy or satisfy five (5) or more valid complaints (from customers) during any three-year period. The customer's complaints must be filed with the city to constitute a complaint within the terms of this section. In order to constitute a valid complaint, information or evidence must be produced which would show that the contractor and/or licensee or holder of the certificate of proficiency has failed and refused to honor a contractual provision or failed or refused to honor any warranty or representation relating to work to be performed by a contractor. 
(Code 1963, § 5-55; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-184. - Procedure for revocation or suspension of certificate of competency and certificate of compliance. 
(a)  The building official, for good cause, may, upon his own motion, or shall upon a sworn complaint in writing of any person, investigate or cause to be investigated, the charges against any person or any holder of a certificate of competency or compliance. Upon the failure of such contractor to keep in force the insurance policy required in this article, the building official take appropriate action, as provided herein. 
(b)  The building official, upon completion of such investigation, shall decide if a prima facie showing of a violation of this article exists, and if so, shall take one (1) or both of the following actions: 
(1)  Send by certified mail a letter to the certificate of competency or certificate of compliance holder or holders at their last known address, as shown by the building official's records, setting out the name of the complainant, the alleged offense and the approximate time of the commission, and the section of this article alleged to be violated, and notifying them to appear before the building official at a time and place fixed, not sooner than twenty (20) days from the mailing of the certified letter, advising that they may be represented by an attorney, and that they should bring with them all original documents and other data that may be pertinent to the case and that they will be given the opportunity to present such witnesses and evidence as they deem appropriate. 
(2)  Refer the matter to the state attorney's office for appropriate action. 
(c)  The administrative hearing provided for above shall be open to the public. 
(d)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(e)  The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the building official finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(f)  Each party shall have the following rights: To call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witnesses regardless of which party first called him to testify; and to rebut the evidence against him. The procedure to be utilized shall be substantially in accordance with F.S. ch. 120. 
(g)  A decision shall be made within five (5) days after the close of the hearing. The decision shall be one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Not guilty. 
(2)  Suspension of the certificate of competency, stating time. 
(3)  Revocation of the certificate, naming the effective date. 
(4)  Official letter of reprimand to become a part of the certificate holder's permanent record. 
(h)  The building official may, at its discretion, assess all, or any part, of the direct costs of the administrative hearing upon any contractor found guilty of a violation of this chapter. The assessment, if any, will be required to be paid prior to any reinstatement of the certificate of competency or certificate of compliance. Costs of the hearing shall be as determined by the city finance department from direct billing and man-hours expended. 
(Code 1963, § 5-56; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-185. - Appeals. 
Any applicant for a certificate of competency or certificate of compliance that is denied a certificate by the building official may appeal to the city council and any contractor that has had his certificate of competency or certificate of compliance suspended, revoked or reprimanded by the building official may appeal to the city council. Any such appeal must be taken within twenty (20) days of denial, suspension, revocation or reprimand, or otherwise shall be barred. 
(Code 1963, § 5-57; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-186. - Use of contractor's name by another. 
No contractor shall allow his name to be used by any person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or for the purpose of doing any work under his occupational license or certificate of competency or certificate of compliance. Violation of this section shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a certificate of competency, certificate of compliance and an occupational license. 
(Code 1963, § 5-58; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-187. - Credit report fees. 
In addition to the occupational license fee required in section 11-58 and the examination fee, the building official may establish a fee schedule to cover the cost of obtaining the credit reports outlined in this article. 
(Code 1963, § 5-60; Ord. No. 18-1995, § 10, 6-27-95)  
Secs. 11-188—11-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT OF UNLICENSED CONTRACTOR ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 11-201. - Definitions. 
(a)  Advertise shall mean to tell about, communicate, inform, advise, in or through any public or private manner or form, including, but not limited to, through newspaper(s), handbill(s) or flyer(s), business card(s), magazine(s), telephone directory(ies), radio, television, telephone solicitation, and/or conversation. 
(b)  Board shall mean the City of Titusville Municipal Code Enforcement Board, as established by the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Certificate means a certificate of competency issued by the state department of processional regulation or the building official of the city. 
(d)  Certification means the act of obtaining or holding a certificate of competency from the state department of profession regulation or the building official of the city. 
(e)  Certified contractor means any contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the board or the state department of professional regulation or the building official of the city. 
(f)  Code enforcement officer shall mean a person as defined in F.S. ch. 162, and authorized by the city to enforce this division. 
(g)  Contractor shall mean and refer to any person who undertakes to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by others, construct, repair, alter, remodel, add to, subtract from, demolish, move, or improve any building or structure, including related improvements to real estate, for others, or for resale to others, or who undertakes or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself, or by or through others, engages in a trade or occupation regulated by this division, Code of Ordinances section 11-126 et seq., or F.S. ch. 489. 
(h)  Licensed means possessing the certificates required pursuant to F.S. ch. 489, parts I and II, and/or city Code of Ordinances (and the successor statutes and ordinances to the above as they may be amended from time to time). It may also mean not having an appropriate occupational license. 
(i)  Qualifying agent means a person as defined in F.S. § 489.105(4), (5), and section 11-126 of the Code of Ordinances (and as may be amended from time to time). 
(j)  Registered contractor means any contractor who has registered with the state department of professional regulation pursuant to fulfilling the competency requirements of the building official. 
(k)  Repeat violation shall mean a recurring violation of a provision of this division by a violator whom the municipal code enforcement board has previously found to have violated the same provision, or a violator against whom penalties were assessed for the same provision, within five (5) years prior to the violation. 
(l)  Serve shall mean providing to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the police department, or other law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer; or by leaving the notice at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or by including the hearing date on the citation. In addition, "serve" may also include service by publication or posting as follows: 
(1)  a. 
Such notice shall be published once during each week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four (4) publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the code enforcement board is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50, for legal and official advertisements. 
b.  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in chapter 50, sections 50-41 and 50-51. 
(2)  a. 
In lieu of publication as described in paragraph (1), such notice may be posted for at least ten (10) days in at least two (2) locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be City Hall; 
b.  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(3)  Notice of publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (l). 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-202. - Enforcement authority delegated to code enforcement board. 
The municipal code enforcement board, herein referred to as "the board," is delegated the authority to enforce the provisions of this division as it relates to individuals acting in the capacity of contractors who are unlicensed or inadequately licensed to perform the classification of work in which they are engaged in the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-203. - Powers of the code enforcement board. 
In addition to all other powers which the board currently has through the provisions of F.S. ch. 162, local ordinance, or otherwise, with regard to enforcement of this division the board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena evidence, alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. (Subpoenas may be served by the police department or any other duly authorized person). 
(3)  Take testimony under oath. 
(4)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violator into compliance. 
(5)  Give notices of hearings and conduct hearings on charges of a violation of the provisions of this division. 
(6)  Impose disciplinary penalties against persons found by the board to have violated any provision of this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-204. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person cited for a violation of the provisions of this division is deemed to be charged with a noncriminal infraction. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person, individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, or other entity to: 
(1)  Falsely hold himself or a business organization out as a licensee, certificate holder, or registrant; 
(2)  Falsely impersonate a certificate holder or registrant; 
(3)  Present as his own the certificate or registration of another; 
(4)  Give false or forged evidence to the building official or his designee or a member thereof for the purpose of obtaining a certificate or registration; 
(5)  Use or attempt to use a certificate or registration which has been suspended or revoked; 
(6)  Engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor or advertise himself or a business organization as available to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor without being duly registered or certified; 
(7)  Operate a business organization engaged in contracting after sixty (60) days following the termination of its only qualifying agent without designating another primary qualifying agent; 
(8)  Commence or perform work for which a building permit is required pursuant to an adopted state minimum building code without such building permit being in effect; or 
(9)  Willfully or deliberately disregard or violate any municipal or county ordinance relating to uncertified or unregistered contractors. 
(c)  It shall be violation of this division for any uncertified or unregistered person associated with a contracting firm qualified by a licensee under state law, or county or municipal ordinance, to: 
(1)  Conceal or cause to be concealed, or assist in concealing, from the primary qualifying agent, any material activities or information about the contracting firm; 
(2)  Exclude or facilitate the exclusion of any aspect of the contracting firm's financial or other business activities form the primary qualifying agent; or 
(3)  Knowingly cause any part of the contracting firm's activities, financial or otherwise, to be conducted without the primary qualifying agents supervision; or 
(4)  Assist or participate with any certificate holder or registrant in the violation of any provision of state law, or county or municipal ordinance. 
(d)  Any person cited for violating the provisions of this section shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day, per violation. Any person cited for violating any provision of this section for which he had previously been cited in accordance herewith shall be accrued a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, per violation. 
(e)  Criminal sanctions for violations of this section as set forth in F.S. § 489.127(2)(a)—(d), as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-205. - Investigation. 
It shall be the duty of the building department to expeditiously investigate complaints and initiate enforcement proceedings against the unlicensed and inadequately licensed contractors, and persons who knowingly assist said contractors, to the extent that such persons violating the provisions of this division. No members of the board shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-206. - Enforcement. 
The building official, with the concurrence of the city manager and the code enforcement board, may designate one or more of the city's code enforcement officers, as defined in F.S. ch. 162, to enforce the provisions of this division and F.S. §§ 489.127(1) and 489.132(1), against persons who engage in activity for which a municipal certificate of competency or license or certification or registration is required. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-207. - Citations—Who may issue. 
A code enforcement officer designated pursuant to this division shall issue a citation for any violation of section 11-204 or F.S. §§ 489.127(1) or 489.132(1), whenever, based upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that such a violation has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-208. - Same—Form. 
A citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be in a form prescribed by the city council and shall state: 
(1)  The time, place and date of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The time and date of the violation. 
(4)  A brief description of the violation and the facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The name of the code enforcement officer. 
(6)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or contest the citation. 
(7)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the action. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-209. - Same—Refusal to sign. 
Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer commits a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-210. - Prehearing procedure. 
(a)  The act for which the citation is issued shall be ceased upon receipt of the citation. The person charged with the violation shall elect either to correct the violation and to pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the citation or, within ten (10) days of receipt of the citation, exclusive of weekends and legal holidays, request an administrative hearing before the code enforcement board to appeal the issuance of the citation by the code enforcement officer. 
(1)  Failure of a violator to appeal the decision of the code enforcement officer within the time period set forth herein shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing. A waiver of the right to an administrative hearing shall be deemed an admission of the violation and penalties may be imposed accordingly. 
(2)  If the person issued the citation, or his designated representative, shows that the citation is invalid or that the violation has been corrected prior to appearing before the code enforcement board, the code enforcement board may dismiss the citation unless the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(b)  Upon written notification by the code enforcement officer that a violator had not contested the citation or paid the civil penalty within the timeframe allowed on the citation, or if a violation has not been corrected within the timeframe set forth on the notice of violation, the code enforcement board shall enter an order ordering the violator to pay the civil penalty set forth on the citation or notice of violation, and a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of such order. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-211. - Notice. 
Any person who is the subject of proceedings before the board shall be provided with timely notice of such proceedings in the following manner: 
(1)  All notices shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the police department, or other law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer; or by leaving the notice at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or by including the hearing date on the citation. 
(2)  In addition to providing notice as described above, at the option of the code enforcement board notice also may be served by publication or posting in accordance with the provisions contained in F.S. § 162.12. 
(3)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to had deliver or mail notice, as provided in subsection (1) of this section, together with proof of publication or posting, as provided in subsection (2) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this chapter have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-212. - Hearings. 
Hearings shall be held before the municipal code enforcement board, and such hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of F.S. §§ 162.07 and 162.08. 
(1)  Hearings shall be held, generally, at the board's regular meeting. Also, the chairman of the board may call a special hearing of the code enforcement board upon request of the code enforcement officer or at such other times as may be necessary, as determined by written notice by at least four (4) regular members of the board. 
(2)  Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the board and all hearings and other proceedings shall be open to the public. 
(3)  The city council shall provide a hearing room, and clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(4)  The board shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The board shall take testimony from the code enforcement officer and the alleged violator, and from any other person whose testimony the board deems necessary. The board shall hear all relevant and competent evidence material to the issues and shall have the power to continue the hearing as, in its judgment, may be necessary and proper. Alleged violators and complainants shall have the right to appear personally or by counsel and to give testimony and present witnesses, in person or through their attorneys. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall issue findings of fact based on evidence of record, and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted herein. The findings shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that the votes of at least four (4) members present and duly empowered to vote as to a particular action are required in order for the action to be official. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that additional penalties may be imposed if the order is not complied with by such date. 
(6)  If the board finds that a violation exists, the board may order the violator to pay a civil penalty of not less than the amount set forth on the citation or may increase the fine up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation. In determining the amount of the penalty, the board shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation. 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation. 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(7)  Each day a willful, knowing violation continues shall constitute a separate offense under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-213. - Collection and recovery of civil penalties; liens. 
(a)  The city council shall provide the appropriate guidelines and procedures for the administration, record keeping, reporting and accountability of penalties assessed under this division. 
(b)  The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil penalties. 
(c)  A certified copy of an order imposing a civil penalty against an uncertified contractor may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against any real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgement by the sheriffs of this state, including a levy against personal property; however, such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgement is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, article X of the state constitution. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-214. - Scope of authority of code enforcement officer. 
The authority granted herein or in F.S. § 489.127, does not authorize or permit a code enforcement officer to perform any function or duty of a law enforcement officer other than a function or duty that is authorized in this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-215. - Appeal. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the code enforcement board to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the enforcement board. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Sec. 11-216. - Provisions contained herein are supplemental. 
Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the city from enforcing the provisions of this division or of F.S. §§ 489.127(1) and 489.132(1), by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 18-1995, § 11, 6-27-95)  
Secs. 11-217—11-226. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL PHYSICAL CONTACT ESTABLISHMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Massage practice, F.S. ch. 480. 
 
Sec. 11-227. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Body tissues shall include only the following areas of the body commonly referred to as chest, back, waist, hips, buttocks, pubic area, sexual organs, groin, stomach or thighs. 
Breast shall mean a nude female breast, including the nipple or the pigmented portion adjacent thereto otherwise defined as the areola. 
Commercial contact, called by whatever name, shall mean the manipulation, washing or touching for compensation of a person's unclothed body tissues directly by another person or indirectly by such other person using any instrument, thing, substance or device. 
Commercial physical contact establishment, herein sometimes referred to as "establishment," called by whatever name, shall mean a place where commercial contact is offered or actually takes place, or a part of any business set aside as a place for commercial contact to take place. 
Department shall mean and refer to the building department of the city. 
Interested party shall mean any person who is a permittee or is an applicant for a permit, or who is an employee of a permittee or an applicant for a permit, or who is an independent contractor who works in the applicant's establishment or who is a partner in a partnership which is a permittee or an applicant for a license, or is a person who is an officer or director of a corporation which is a permittee or an applicant for a permit. 
Patron shall mean any person who receives commercial contact under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
Permit shall mean a regulatory permit under the provisions of this article for the operation of an establishment. 
Specified criminal act shall mean any felony or soliciting for prostitution, pandering, prostitution, keeping a house of ill fame, lewd and lascivious behavior, sale or possession of a controlled substance or narcotic. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-228. - Regulatory permit required; application; investigation required; contents of application; fee. 
(a)  An annual regulatory permit shall be required for each commercial physical contact establishment. 
(b)  No permit for an establishment shall be issued until an application is made to the department which shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the applicant has complied with this chapter and all other requirements of this Code and state law. Each application must be accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to cover the cost of investigation and administration. Each application must be sworn to and state the name, address and date of birth of the applicant, or if a partnership, the names, addresses and dates of birth of the persons who constitute such partnership, or if a corporation, the names, addresses and dates of birth of its directors and officers. Each application must also include the names, addresses and dates of birth of all present employees of the establishment and all independent contractors performing services with the establishment. There shall be a statement as to whether any interested party of the applicant has been convicted within five (5) years of the date of application of any specified criminal act and if so, the name of such interested party, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the crime for which the interested party was convicted. No application shall be processed by the department unless such application complies with all the requirements as stated hereunder. 
(c)  If an incomplete application, or an application not accompanied by the fee as herein required, is received by the department, the department shall send a notice of intent to deny permit to the applicant with an explanation of the material and/or fee necessary to make the application complete. Such notice shall include a statement that if a completed application and/or required fee is not submitted or if an appeal to city council of the determination by the division that such application is incomplete is not submitted within ten (10) days of receipt by applicant of such notice, the application shall be finally denied. If the applicant does not return a properly completed application and/or required fee or does not file a notice of appeal as designated in such notice within ten (10) days of receipt by applicant of notice therefor, the department shall notify the applicant of final denial of the permit application. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violation of section 11-237 for the operation of a particular establishment if such person has applied for a permit hereunder for such establishment and such permit application is pending. A permit application shall be considered to be pending, if such application has been submitted by the applicant, no permit has been issued pursuant thereto, and no final denial of such permit has been received by the applicant. 
(e)  Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any occupational licenses or other permits or licenses required under this Code. 
(f)  The department shall review the completed application within thirty (30) days and either approve, approve subject to conditions or deny such application. Any appeal from the action of the department shall be processed in accordance with section 11-233. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-2)  
Sec. 11-229. - Continuing duty to update application. 
Applicants for a permit required by this article and any person who has been issued a permit under this article are under a continuing duty to update the information contained in the application submitted for a permit, and shall, within thirty (30) days of any change in such information, notify the department in writing of such changes. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-2.1)  
Sec. 11-230. - Permit not to be issued without specific authorization following conviction for certain crimes. 
The department shall not grant a permit or a renewal of a permit to operate an establishment under this article to any applicant if an interested party thereof has been convicted of a specified criminal act and such conviction is final and not on appeal within five (5) years of the date of application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond upon a charge of a specified criminal act. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-3)  
Sec. 11-231. - Permit not to be issued without specific authorization to certain persons, etc., after revocation. 
The department shall not grant without specific authorization from city council a permit to operate an establishment under this article to a person if such person was the permittee, or was an interested party of the permittee of an establishment at the time such permit was revoked under the provisions hereof. The department shall not grant without specific authorization from city council a permit to operate an establishment to a partnership if any partner thereof was a permittee, or was an interested party of the permittee of an establishment at the time such permit was revoked under the provisions hereof. The department shall not grant without specific authorization from the city council a permit to operate an establishment to a corporation if any officer or director thereof was a permittee, or was an interested party of the permittee of an establishment at the time such permit was revoked under the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-4)  
Sec. 11-232. - Issuance of permit; term; renewal. 
If the department determines that the applicant for a permit under this article is not ineligible to be issued a permit without specific authorization from city council as provided herein, a regulatory permit shall be issued to be effective for one (1) year from the date of issuance. A permit shall be renewed upon the approval of the department after an application for renewal has been duly submitted together with a renewal application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In order for the department to grant a renewal without specific authorization from city council, the application for renewal and the investigation thereon must show that the applicant is not ineligible under the provisions hereof for the issuance of a permit without specific authorization from city council. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-5)  
Sec. 11-233. - Appeal from action of department. 
(a)  If the department determines that it may not issue a permit to the applicant under the provisions of this article, without specific authorization from city council, or under the provisions of section 11-228 relating to incomplete application or applications not accompanied by the required fee, the department shall notify the applicant of the department's intention to deny the permit. Such notice shall include a copy of this article and the reason for the denial of the permit. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the department's determination to deny the permit to the city council by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal within ten (10) days of receipt by applicant of notice of intent to deny. 
(b)  If an applicant appeals a determination by the department to deny a permit based on failure to submit a properly completed application or for failure to submit the required fee, city council, within fifteen (15) days of such appeal, shall hold a public hearing to determine whether such application is sufficiently complete to comply with the requirements of section 11-228 and/or the required fee was submitted with such application. If city council determines that such application is sufficiently complete to comply with the requirements of section 11-228, and the required fee was submitted therewith, city council shall direct the department to process such application. If city council shall determine that such application is not sufficiently complete to comply with the requirements of section 11-228, or that the required fee was not submitted therewith, city council shall direct the department to issue a notice of final denial of such application for permit; provided, however, if city council finds that the defects in the application or the failure to pay the required fee were the result of excusable neglect or inadvertence on the part of the applicant, city council may grant the applicant a specific time period in which to submit a properly completed application and/or submit the required fee. 
(c)  If an applicant appeals a determination by the department to deny a permit based on any grounds other than an incomplete application or failure to submit the required fee, city council, within fifteen (15) days of such appeal, shall hold a public hearing to determine whether issuance or renewal of the permit would be detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare. In determining whether issuance or renewal of the permit would be detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare, city council shall consider whether the factor which caused the department to not issue a permit without specific authorization from city council are related to the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of the establishment for which a permit application is made or the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of any other establishment and if such factor evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such establishment's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby. If city council determines that a factor which caused the department not to issue a permit without specific authorization from city council is related to the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of the establishment for which a permit application is made or the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of any other establishment and that such factor evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare or such establishment's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, city council shall direct the department to issue a notice of final denial of such application for permit. In the event an application is finally denied, applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial to the court having jurisdiction of such matters under the constitution and laws of the state. If the city council determines that none of the factors which caused the department not to issue a permit without specific authorization from city council is related both to the use or operation, by the applicant or an interested party thereof, of the establishment for which a permit application is made or the use or operation by the applicant or an interested party thereof of any other establishment and that such factor does not evidence a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such establishment's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, the city council shall direct the department to issue a permit to such applicant forthwith. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-6)  
Sec. 11-234. - Authority to revoke permits; grounds for revocation. 
The city council, by majority vote of those present, after a hearing as provided in section 11-235, is hereby authorized to revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article of any permittee under any one (1) or more of the following circumstances if the city council makes an affirmative finding that the continued operation of the permitted premises would be detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare: 
(1)  Permittee is convicted of a specified criminal act. 
(2)  If the permittee is a partnership, if any partner thereof is convicted of a specified criminal act. 
(3)  If the permittee is a corporation, if any officer or director is convicted of a specified criminal act. 
(4)  A nuisance as defined in F.S. § 823.05 is maintained on the permitted premises. 
(5)  Permittee or any employee of permittee engages in or permits on the permitted premises disorderly or indecent conduct as defined by those portions of state law held constitutional by applicable case law. 
(6)  Permittee fails to comply with the fire prevention ordinances of the city after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the permitted premises. 
(7)  Permittee fails to comply with any provision of the health ordinances of the city, the county or the state after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the permitted premises. 
(8)  Permittee fails to comply with any provision of the city building code, the city electrical code, the city mechanical code, or the city plumbing code after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the permitted premises. 
(9)  Any employee of permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal act committed by the employee on the permitted premises while employed by the permittee. 
(10)  Permittee fails to comply with any provisions of this article after reasonable notice or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances on the permitted premises. 
(11)  Permittee furnishes incorrect or incomplete information on its application for permit or application for renewal of permit. 
(12)  Permittee fails to comply with the occupational license ordinances for the city after reasonable notice shall have been given to the permittee to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances related to the permitted premises. 
(13)  Permittee fails to furnish notification of changes in application information as required by section 11-229. 
(14)  Any person who has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the last ten (10) years becomes an interested party of the commercial physical contact establishment holding a permit under this article. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-7)  
Sec. 11-235. - Notice of hearing concerning permit revocation. 
Whenever the city council shall find any of the conditions enumerated in section 11-234 hereof to exist, it shall notify the permittee that city council shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the continued operation of the permitted premises is detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare. In determining whether the continued operation of the permitted premises is detrimental to the public health, morals, safety and welfare, city council shall consider whether the conditions enumerated in section 11-234 which are found to exist are related to the use or operation by the permittee or an interested party thereof of the permitted premises and if such conditions evidence a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such permittee's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby. If city council determines that a condition enumerated in section 11-234 does exist as to a permitted premises and that such condition relates to the use or operation by the permittee or of an interested party thereof of the permitted premises and that such condition evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such permittee's patrons or employees or of persons residing or doing business nearby, city council shall revoke the permit of the permittee. If city council determines that no conditions enumerated in section 11-234 exist as to a permitted premises, or that no such existing condition relates to the use or operation by the permittee or an interested party thereof of the permitted premises, or that no such existing condition evidences a flagrant disregard for the health, morals, safety or welfare of such permittee's patrons or employees, or of persons residing or doing business nearby, city council shall not revoke the permit of the permittee. Such hearing is to be held at a time and place to be specified in the notice and at a time not less than ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice. Such notice shall also list with specificity the acts or occurrence concerning which the hearing will be held. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-8)  
Sec. 11-236. - Unlawful to perform commercial contact except in establishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, or offer to perform, commercial contact unless such commercial contact shall take place in an establishment permitted under this article. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-9)  
Sec. 11-237. - Certain prerequisites for commercial contact prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, request or require any other person to manipulate, wash or touch directly or indirectly using any instrument, thing, substance or device, the body tissues of any person as a prerequisite to or requirement for the giving of commercial contact. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-10)  
Sec. 11-238. - List of services available required. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee or any interested party thereof to operate an establishment for any person to perform commercial contact on any patron in an establishment, unless a list of services available in the establishment, described in readily understandable language, and the costs of such services is posted in an open and conspicuous place in such establishment. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or any interested party thereof to advertise or state that any service other than those posted is available, or to offer to perform, or to perform any service other than those posted. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-11)  
Sec. 11-239. - Towels and linens required. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee or any interested party thereof to operate an establishment or for any person to perform commercial contact on any patron in an establishment, unless clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens are provided for each patron, with no common use of towels or linens or reuse of towels or linens without relaundering permitted; provided, however, that heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is used only for one (1) patron, then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-12)  
Sec. 11-240. - Dress of person performing commercial contact. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform commercial contact on any patron unless such person shall be wearing a clean outer garment in the nature of a surgical gown. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform commercial contact on any patron unless the pubic area and buttocks of such person, and breasts of such person, if the person is a female, are covered by a nontransparent covering. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-13)  
Sec. 11-241. - Advertising restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee or any interested party thereof to exhibit, place, publish or distribute or cause to be exhibited, placed, published or distributed any advertising matter or signage that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services posted as required under section 11-238, or that employees or other persons performing commercial contact at the establishment are dressed in any manner other than the dress as required under section 11-240. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-14)  
Sec. 11-242. - Establishments open for inspection. 
Each establishment shall be open for inspection by police officers during all hours such establishment is open for business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-15)  
Sec. 11-243. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following classes of persons are exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Persons licensed as masseuses or masseurs or apprentice masseuses or masseurs pursuant to F.S. ch. 480. 
(2)  Persons authorized by state law to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropody, naturopathy or podiatry, or persons holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under state law. 
(3)  Registered nurses under state law. 
(4)  Barbers duly licensed under state law. 
(5)  Cosmetologists duly licensed under state law. 
(6)  Persons performing services in any licensed hospital, nursing home or sanitarium. 
(7)  Coaches and athletic trainers employed by, or on behalf of, any professional or Olympic amateur athletic team, or any bona fide state, county or private school. 
(8)  Physical therapists duly licensed under state law. 
(9)  Instructors in programs sponsored by governmental entities or corporations not for profit under state law. 
(b)  Any exemption granted under this section is effective only to the extent that the bona fide practice of the profession or business of the person exempted overlaps into the field comprehended by this article and exemptions under this section are only for those activities which are performed in the course of the bona fide practice of the business or profession of the person exempted. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-16)  
Sec. 11-244. - Issuance of permit not to permit acts otherwise unlawful. 
The issuance of a permit under this article shall not be construed as permitting, licensing or allowing the commission of any act or acts otherwise prohibited or made unlawful by valid city or county ordinance, or state or federal law. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-17)  
Sec. 11-245. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No commercial physical contact establishments shall be located within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius, property line to property line, of any other of the aforementioned establishments or within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, property line to property line, or any establishment selling beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises; hotels, or motels; adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motel or hotel; public lodging houses; a public building, public park; a dwelling; churches; schools; kindergartens; pawnshops; pool or billiard halls, or property zoned R-1a, R-1b, R-1c, GU, R-2, R-3, RMH1, RMH2, RR, RE, OR, by the zoning regulations of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II of this Code. 
(b)  The city council may waive the seven-hundred-fifty-foot restriction if it finds: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intention of this article will be observed. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a skid row. 
(3)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to any adopted neighborhood redevelopment plan or land use plan nor contrary to any downtown redevelopment program. 
(4)  That all applicable regulations of this article will be observed. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-20) 
Cross reference— Zoning regulations, § 60.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-246. - Penalty. 
Any person committing an act made unlawful by the provisions of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-18)  
Sec. 11-247. - Rebuttable presumption. 
For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article and in prosecution thereof, it shall be rebuttably presumed that any place which is the subject of a validly issued regulatory permit is a commercial physical contact establishment. 
(Code 1963, § 6B-19)  
Secs. 11-248—11-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MOTION PICTURE THEATERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Outdoor theaters, F.S. ch. 555. 
 
Sec. 11-271. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "motion picture theater" shall mean a building or area utilized for the purpose of projecting pictures or drawings on a screen, and to which persons are admitted for an assessed charge. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-1; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 3, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-272. - Business tax receipt. 
All indoor and outdoor motion picture theaters shall be required to purchase all business tax receipts as required in section 11-58. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-3; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 3, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Schedule of local business taxes, § 11-58.  
Sec. 11-273. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1, of Ord. No. 9-2016, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed § 11-273, which pertained to lighting, and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 11-274. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 9-2016, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed § 11-274, which pertained to seating, and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 11-275. - Ushering. 
Every owner or operator of indoor motion picture theaters shall be required to have in their employ an usher. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-6)  
Sec. 11-276. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 9-2016, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed § 11-276, which pertained to food, and derived from the 1963 Code.  
Sec. 11-277. - Alcoholic beverages. 
A motion picture theater may sell alcoholic beverages in connection with a state issued license, subject to compliance with other laws, city Code of Ordinances and all land development regulations. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-8; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 3, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 9-2016, § 4, 7-12-16) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 11-278. - Participation in lewd exposure, sexual intercourse or perversion. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to expose or exhibit his sexual organs in any motion picture theater or to expose his person in such place, or to go or be naked in such place; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit exposure of such organs by the person in any place provided or set apart for such purpose, such as a restroom. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to commit any unnatural and lascivious act with another person or any simulated or actual acts of sexual intercourse or perversion in any motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any owner or operator to knowingly permit or allow within any motion picture theater any conduct or acts described in this section. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-9) 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment, § 11-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, F.S. § 800.03; obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 11-279. - Prohibiting the hiring of persons under seventeen. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator, owner, manager, employee or agent of a motion picture theater to hire any person under the age of seventeen (17) to work in any indoor or outdoor motion picture theater where the films shown contain scenes of "nudity," "sexual conduct," "sexual excitement" or "sadomasochistic abuse." 
(b)  Nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement and sadomasochistic abuse are defined as follows: 
(1)  Nudity shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering or any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(2)  Sexual conduct shall mean acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person be female, breast, or any act of conduct which constitutes the commission of the abominable and detestable crime against nature or suggests that such crime is being or will be committed. 
(3)  Sexual excitement shall mean the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(4)  Sadomasochistic abuse shall mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask, or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-10) 
State Law reference— Employment of minors in motion picture theaters, F.S. § 450.132.  
Sec. 11-280. - Prohibiting the showing of obscene pictures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly show any film, picture or motion picture film of any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, indecent, immoral or sadistic act or conduct. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly show any film, picture or motion picture film which depicts either sexual intercourse or simulated sexual intercourse while the male or female genital organs or naked buttocks are exposed to view; or the fondling or kissing of male or female genital organs where such organs are exposed to view. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, proof that a person was guilty of knowingly showing a film, picture or motion picture film may be shown by facts and circumstances from which it may be fairly inferred that he had knowledge of the contents or character of the film, picture, or motion picture film being shown or by showing that he had knowledge of facts and circumstances as would put a man of ordinary intelligence and caution on inquiry as to such contents or character. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the test of whether or not the material is obscene is whether to the average person applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme as a whole appeals to prurient interests. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-11) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 11-281. - Regulations concerning outdoor theaters. 
(a)  Permanent buildings, including but not limited to ticket booths, projection booths and concession stands shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. 
(b)  The movie screen shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line. 
(c)  All parking spaces and sound equipment shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line. 
(d)  There shall be sufficient lot size and footage upon a public street to ensure safety in ingress and egress from the property and safety in traffic control within the property. 
(e)  The movie screen shall be so located, constructed, shielded or fenced to prevent the movies shown thereon from being visible from any public street or highway or surrounding residential properties. The term "surrounding residential properties" means contiguous properties upon which actual residential structure or buildings exist or surrounding properties zoned a residential land use classification under the zoning regulations adopted by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-12) 
State Law reference— Outdoor theaters, F.S. ch. 555.  
Sec. 11-282. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The administrator, as defined in Volume II, Land Development Regulations of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances, shall enforce the provisions contained in this article. The police of the city shall have concurrent responsibility in enforcing sections 11-278 through 11-280. 
(b)  Upon receipt of information and upon verification by the administrator that any provision of this article is being violated, the administrator shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation indicating the provision being violated, and shall order the necessary steps to abate such violation. The administrator shall have the power to order the discontinuance of the use of land, water or building, or the discontinuance of any work being done. 
(c)  The administrator and any inspector under his direction in the performance of their functions and duties under the provisions of this article may enter upon any land, building or structure and make examination as determined necessary. 
(d)  In addition to other remedies, the administrator through the city attorney may institute any appropriate action or procedure to insure compliance with any provisions of this article, including injunctive relief. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-13; Ord. No. 9-2016, § 5, 7-12-16)  
Sec. 11-283. - Appeal from decision of building official. 
Appeals arising under the enforcement of this article may be taken to the board of adjustments and appeals by any person, official bureau or agent of any person or public body affected by any decision of the building official. Such appeals should be made within thirty (30) days after a decision by the building official, by filing in writing with the building official a notice of appeal, and specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall transmit to the board of adjustments and appeals all material constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-14)  
Sec. 11-284. - Variance. 
The board of adjustment and appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear any and all applications for variances from the provisions of this article and variances may be granted in accordance with the grounds set forth in section 27.00 of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II of this Code when appropriate. 
(Code 1963, § 13C-15)  
Secs. 11-285—11-306. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONVENIENCE STORES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt regulations regarding convenience store security, F.S. § 812.171 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-307. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "convenience business" means any place of business that is engaged in the retail sale of groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and that is open for business at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The term "convenience business" does not include: 
(1)  A business which is solely or primarily a restaurant. 
(2)  A business that always has at least five (5) employees on the premises after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(3)  A business that has at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of retail floor space. 
The term "convenience business" does not include any business in which the owner and members of his family work in the business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 50-1990, § 1(5-91), 11-27-90; Ord. No. 7-1993, § 1, 2-9-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-308. - Convenience business security. 
(a)  Every convenience business shall be equipped with the following security devices and standards: 
(1)  A security camera system capable of recording and retrieving an image to assist in offender identification and apprehension. 
(2)  A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts. 
(3)  A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of at least two (2) foot-candles per square foot at eighteen (18) inches above the surface. 
(4)  A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash register contains fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. 
(5)  Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view from outside the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register and sales transaction area. 
(6)  Height markers at the entrance of the convenience business which display height measures. 
(7)  A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times after 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  A convenience business shall not have window tinting that reduces exterior or interior view in a normal line of sight. 
(c)  Every convenience business shall be equipped with a silent alarm to law enforcement or a private security agency, unless application for an exemption is made to and granted by the attorney general, as provided for in F.S. § 812.173(3). 
(d)  If a murder, robbery, sexual battery, aggravated assault, aggravated battery, or kidnapping or false imprisonment, as those crimes are identified and defined by Florida Statutes, occurs or has occurred at a convenience business since July 1, 1989, and arises out of the operation of the convenience business, that convenience business shall implement at least one (1) of the following security measures: 
(1)  Provide at least two (2) employees on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Install for use by employees at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m., a security safety enclosure of transparent polycarbonate or other material that meets at least one (1) of the following minimum standards: 
a.  American Society for Testing Materials Standard D3935 (classification PC110 B 3 0800700) and that has a thickness of at least 0.375 inches and has an impact strength of at least two hundred (200) foot pounds; or 
b.  Underwriters Laboratory Standard UL 752 for medium power small arms (level one), Bullet Resisting Equipment. 
(3)  Provide a security guard on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(4)  Lock the business premises throughout the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., and only transact business through an indirect pass-through trough, trapdoor or window; or 
(5)  Close the business at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, any convenience business that by law implemented any of the security measures set forth in subsections (d)(1) through (5) and has maintained said measures as required by the department of legal affairs without any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) for a period of no less than twenty-four (24) months immediately preceding the filing of a notice of exemption, may file with the department a notice of exemption from these enhanced security measures. In no event shall this exemption be interpreted to preclude full compliance with the security measures set forth in subsection (d) should any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) cause subsection (d) to be statutorily applicable. As of December 31, 1992, the department of legal affairs will provide notice to any convenience business to which a subsection (d) incident has previously occurred. In no event shall the city incur any liability for the regulation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 50-1990, § 1(5-92), 11-27-90; Ord. No. 7-1993, § 2, 2-9-93)  
Sec. 11-309. - Training of employees. 
Each convenience store shall comply with the provision of F.S. § 812.174 and show proof to the city of its compliance. 
(Ord. No. 50-1990, § 1(5-93), 11-27-90) 
State Law reference— Convenience store security training requirements, F.S. § 812.174.  
Sec. 11-310. - Enforcement; civil fine. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced in accordance with F.S. § 812.175. 
(Ord. No. 50-1990, § 1(5-94), 11-27-90; Ord. No. 7-1993, § 3, 2-9-93) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 31-66—31-69, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 11-311—11-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MOBILE VENDORS, SPECIAL EVENT VENDORS, SEASONAL SALES 
 
Sec. 11-331. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Business tax receipt shall mean a business tax receipt issued by the city in accordance with section 11-31 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Mobile vendor shall mean a person, corporation, company or business that sells or offers for sale goods, wares, merchandise, beverages or foodstuffs of any kind or nature whatsoever from a vehicle capable of movement. 
Moving vehicle shall mean, for the purpose of this section, a motor vehicle, bicycle, cart, wagon or similar vehicle used for displaying, storing or transporting articles for sale by mobile vendor and containing the appropriate appurtenances for such display, storage and transport. 
(Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-332. - Mobile vendors. 
(a)  Business tax receipt required. It shall be unlawful for any mobile vendor to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a business tax receipt in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Off-loading prohibited. No business tax receipt shall be required by this article of any person for the privilege of engaging in the selling of farm, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural or tropical fish farm products or products manufactured therefrom, except intoxicating liquors, wine or beer, when such products were grown or produced by such person in the state. No off-loading of any merchandise from mobile vehicles will be permitted. 
(c)  [Signed sworn application.] Applicants for a business tax receipt under this section shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by a partner, if a partnership, and by an authorized officer or agent if a corporation, with the administrator, showing: 
(1)  The name of the persons having the management or supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city. 
(2)  The local address or addresses of such persons while engaged in such business. 
(3)  The permanent addresses of such persons. 
(4)  The capacity in which such persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise). 
(5)  The name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any. 
(6)  If a corporation, under the laws of the state it is incorporated. 
(7)  The places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, the dates during which the business shall be conducted and, if located on private property, written authorization from the property owner for the use of the property and a site plan. 
(8)  A mailing address at which notice of any city information pertinent to any business tax receipt under the section shall be considered received and binding upon the applicant on the fifth day after first class mail is posted to said address. 
(9)  A description of the business, including specification of the goods/services offered for sale and, if a mobile vendor, a description of the vehicle to be used in the business. 
(10)  If edibles are offered for sale, a written acknowledgment from the appropriate state or county agency that the business is licensed in conformity with applicable health codes, which acknowledgment shall have been issued. 
(11)  A site plan must be submitted showing the general location of the vehicle relative to streets, sidewalks, property boundaries and similar permanent businesses. 
(12)  No business tax receipt shall be issued for any person pleading no contest of being convicted of theft, consumer fraud, deceptive trade practices or sexual battery within the last five (5) years. 
(13)  One (1) sign per street frontage—Thirty-two (32) square feet maximum area of sign face. Sign can be double-sided. 
(14)  All signs, displays and associated uses must be removed daily. 
(15)  Cleanup of the property upon expiration of the business tax receipt shall be the responsibility of the business tax receipt holder and property owner equally. 
(16)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the administrator may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(d)  Zoning districts. Mobile vendors may be permitted within the CM, SMU, CC, RC and M-1 zoning districts except no business tax receipt will be issued within the downtown mixed use land use designation. (NOTE: See Future Land Use Map for official areas designated as downtown mixed use.) In general, this area encompasses Washington Avenue from Buffalo Road to the southern boundary of Titusville High School; Garden Street from North William Avenue to the F.E.C. Railroad tracks; and along South Street from the water tower to the railroad tracks. Within PID zoning districts mobile vendor lunch wagons shall be permitted. 
(e)  Distance requirements. No mobile vendor shall locate within five hundred (500) feet, as measured from the property line, of any lawful permanent business which sells the same goods during the hours of operation of said business. 
(f)  Business tax receipt fee. A mobile vendor's business tax receipt is a flat fee of one hundred and nine dollars and twenty cents ($109.20) for each merchant, including one (1) vehicle; for the second and each additional vehicle, sixteen dollars and eighty cents ($16.80) each. This fee is renewable per the timelines specified in section 11-54. Specifically excluded from this classification is any such store which has an established place of business in the City of Titusville holding a business tax receipt or any mobile vendor whose proceeds are used exclusively for charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic and service organizations. 
(g)  Exemption. Farm, aquacultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural, and tropical fish farm products are required to obtain a no-fee business tax receipt for the privilege of engaging in the selling of farm, aquacultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural, or tropical fish farm products, or products manufactured herefrom, except intoxicating liquors, wine, or beer, when such products were grown or produced by such natural person in the state. 
(h)  Wholesale business tax receipt. A wholesale farmer's produce market shall have the right to pay a business tax receipt fee of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a business tax receipt that will entitle the market's stall tenants to engage in the selling of agricultural and horticultural products therein, in lieu of such tenants being required to obtain individual local business tax receipts to so engage. (F.S. Section 205.064) 
(i)  Transfer of business tax receipt. A business tax receipt may be transferred to another owner provided all rules are followed as prescribed in section 11-47, change of ownership/change of name. 
(j)  Certification. Written certification of where and by whom the farm, aquacultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural, and tropical fish farm products are grown is required by the administrator. 
(k)  Hours of operation. The hours and days of operation shall be the choice of the vendor, but cannot exceed five (5) days per week and must be specified on the application. Hours of operation shall be from sunup to sundown only. Vehicles must be removed from site during non-operational hours. 
(l)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the city will review the application to determine compliance with the requirements; and if the application meets the code, a business tax receipt will be issued. Failure to meet the code will cause a business tax receipt to be denied. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(D)(2)(g), (3)(a), (M)(2); Ord. No. 32-1995, § 5, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 24-2009, adopted June 9, 2009, redesignated § 11-331 as § 11-332.  
Secs. 11-333, 11-334. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 41-1996, § 2, adopted November 12, 1996, reserved §§ 11-333, 11-334. Formerly, such sections pertained to license required, exemption, mobile and seasonal vendors' license—Application and derived from §§ 13-26(M)(1), 13-26(M)(3), 13-26(D)(2)(g) of the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 32-1995, §§ 6—8, 9-26-95.  
Sec. 11-335. - Records. 
The administrator shall keep a full record in its office of all business tax receipts issued. Such record shall contain the number of the business tax receipts, the date the business tax receipt was issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the business tax receipt fee paid, the expiration date of the business tax receipt, the place where the business may be carried on under such business tax receipt, and the name of the persons authorized to carry on the business. No business tax receipt shall be issued unless proof of compliance with the land development regulations is shown. 
(Ord. No. 1963, § 13-26(M)(4); Ord. No. 32-1995, § 9, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09))  
Sec. 11-336. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 41-1996, § 2, adopted November 12, 1996, reserved § 11-336. Formerly, such section pertained to fees and derived from § 13-26(D)(2)(c)—(g), (3)(c), (M)(8), (9) of the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 32-1995, § 10, 9-26-95.  
Secs. 11-337, 11-338. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 32-1995, § 11, adopted Sept. 26, 1995, repealed § 11-337, which pertained to bond. Section 12 of said ordinance repealed § 11-338, which pertained to service of process.  
Sec. 11-339. - Exhibition of business tax receipt. 
(a)  The business tax receipts issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously on the mobile vehicle or at the place of business. In the event that the applicant maintains more than one (1) vehicle, a separate, original business tax receipt shall be prominently displayed on each vehicle. (Photocopies will not be accepted.) 
(b)  Each vendor of vegetables, fruits, seafood or nursery products or a rolling store shall maintain upon each vehicle, while in operation, a business tax receipt and the holder of each business tax receipt or agent thereof shall exhibit it to the city code inspector or any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(D)(2)(f), (g)(1), (M)(7); Ord. No. 32-1995, § 13, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 1, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-340. - Special events vendor. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Special events vendor. A person, corporation, company or business that sells or offers for sale, goods, wares, merchandise, beverages or food-stuffs of any kind or nature whatsoever at special events as described in paragraph (b) below. 
(b)  Location. For the purposes of this article, special events vendors will be permitted in the CBD, CM, SMU, CC, RC and M-1 districts. Examples of such events include, but are not limited to, space launches, parades, etc. Events not listed above may be approved by the planning department on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Business tax receipt required. It shall be unlawful for a special events vendor to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a business tax receipt in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Process and requirements. An application shall be filled out with the following information provided: 
(1)  The name of the persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city. 
(2)  The local address or addresses of such persons while engaged in such business. 
(3)  The permanent addresses of such persons. 
(4)  The capacity in which such persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise). 
(5)  The name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any. 
(6)  If a corporation, provide a copy of the corporate papers. 
(7)  The places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, the dates during which the business shall be conducted and, if located on private property, written authorization from the property owner for the use of the property. 
(8)  A mailing address at which notice of any city information pertinent to any business tax receipt under the section shall be considered received binding upon the applicant on the fifth day after first class mail is posted to said address. 
(9)  A description of the business, including specification of the goods/services offered for sale and, if a mobile vendor, a description of the vehicle to be used in the business. 
(10)  If edibles are offered for sale, a written acknowledgment from the appropriate state or county agency that the business is licensed in conformity with applicable health codes, which acknowledgment shall have been issued within thirty (30) days prior to the date of application. 
(11)  No business tax receipt will be issued to any person who has been convicted or pled no contest to any crime of theft, consumer fraud, any deceptive practice or sexual battery, within the last five (5) years. 
(12)  A site plan must be submitted showing the general location of the vehicle relative to streets, sidewalks, property boundaries and similar permanent businesses. 
(13)  Signage—One (1) sign per street frontage—Thirty-two (32) square feet maximum area of sign face. Sign can be double-sided. 
(14)  All signs, displays and associated uses must be removed daily. 
(15)  Cleanup of the property upon expiration of the business tax receipt shall be the responsibility of the business tax receipt holder and property owner equally. 
(16)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person, method or plan of doing such business as the administrator may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(d)  Business tax receipt fee. The special events vendor's business tax receipt is a flat fee of fifty-four dollars and sixty cents ($54.60) for each merchant, including one (1) vehicle; for the second and each additional vehicle, sixteen dollars and eighty cents ($16.80) each. This fee is good for each seasonal event only. 
(e)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  The hours and days of operation shall be limited to forty-eight (48) hours prior to and twenty-four (24) hours following each special event. 
(2)  May not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(f)  Review of application. After receipt of the application and fee, the city will review the application and determine if the applicant meets the requirements and, if so, issue the business tax receipt. Any person not meeting the requirements will be denied the business tax receipt. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(15); Ord. No. 32-1995, § 14, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-341. - Seasonal sales vendor. 
(a)  Definition. "Seasonal sales vendor" shall mean outside sales vendors who are marketing a product traditionally associated with the following holidays: Valentine's, Fourth of July, Halloween, Thanksgiving and Christmas. 
(b)  Business tax receipt requirements. It shall be unlawful for a seasonal sales vendor to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a business tax receipt in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Business tax receipt requirements. Business tax receipts will be issued for the following time periods: 
(1)  Forty-five (45) days prior to January 1. 
(2)  Thirty (30) days prior to February 14, July 4, December 25 and October 31. 
(d)  Hours of operation. May not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(e)  Location. Season sales vendors may be permitted within the CM, SMU, CC, RC and M-1 zoning districts except no business tax receipt will be issued within the downtown mixed use land use designation (NOTE: See Future Land Use Map for official areas designated as downtown mixed use.) In general, this area encompasses Washington Avenue from Buffalo Road to the southern boundary of Titusville High School; Garden Street from North William Avenue to the F.E.C. Railroad tracks; and along South Street from the water tower to the railroad tracks. 
(f)  Application and requirements. An application shall be filled out with the following information provided: 
(1)  The name of the persons having the management or supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city. 
(2)  The local address or addresses of such persons while engaged in such business. 
(3)  The permanent address of such persons. 
(4)  The capacity in which such persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise). 
(5)  The name and address of the person for whom the account the business will be carried on, if any. 
(6)  If a corporation, provide a copy of corporate papers. 
(7)  The places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, the dates during which the business shall be conducted and, if located on private property, written authorization from the property owner for the use of the property and a site plan as required by section 11-340 and section 11-341. 
(8)  A mailing address at which notice of any city information pertinent to any business tax receipt under the section shall be considered received and binding upon the applicant on the fifth day after first class mail is posted to said address. 
(9)  A description of the business, including specification of the goods/services offered for sale and, if a mobile vendor, a description of the vehicle to be used in the business. 
(10)  If edibles are offered for sale, a written acknowledgment from the appropriate state or county agency that the business is licensed in conformity with applicable health codes, which acknowledgment shall have been issued. 
(11)  A site plan must be submitted showing the general location of the vehicle relative to streets, sidewalks, property boundaries and similar permanent businesses. 
(12)  Location of restroom facilities. Port-a-lets are permitted. 
(13)  No business tax receipt will be issued to any person who has been convicted or pled no contest to any crime of theft, consumer fraud, any deceptive practice or sexual battery, within the last five (5) years. 
(14)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the administrator may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(g)  Business tax receipt fee. A seasonal sales business tax receipt is a flat fee of eighty-eight dollars and twenty cents ($88.20) for each merchant, including one (1) vehicle; for second and each additional vehicle sixteen dollars and eighty cents ($16.80) each. This fee is for each seasonal holiday. 
(h)  [Nontransferable.] No business tax receipt issued under this article shall be transferable. 
(i)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All pyrotechnic items sold must be approved under state law and the items and location must be approved by the city fire marshal. 
(2)  All tents require a building permit and an inspection by the city fire marshal before a business tax receipt can be issued. 
(3)  Signage—One (1) sign per street frontage—Thirty-two (32) square feet maximum area of sign face. Sign can be double-sided. 
(4)  All signs, displays and associated uses must be removed daily. 
(5)  Any lighting and/or electrical installation shall be installed in compliance with the provisions of electric code adopted in section 6-221. 
(6)  Cleanup of the property upon expiration of the business tax receipt shall be the responsibility of the business tax receipt holder and property owner equally. 
(j)  Application review. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the application will be reviewed, and if all the requirements are met, the business tax receipt will be issued. If some of the requirements are not met, the business tax receipt will be denied. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(D)(3)(d); Ord. No. 32-1995, § 15, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Zoning districts, § 60.00, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-342. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 32-1995, § 16, adopted Sept. 26, 1995, repealed § 11-342, which pertained to vegetable, fruit, seafood or nursery product vendors or rolling stores.  
Sec. 11-343. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No business tax receipt holder under this article, nor anyone in his behalf shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any loud-speaking, radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such business tax receipt holder proposes to sell. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(10); Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— General performance requirements, § 50.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 11-344. - Records. 
The administrator shall keep a record of all such business tax receipts and of such complaints and violations. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(12); Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-345. - Revocation of business tax receipt. 
(a)  The business tax receipt issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the administrator after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for business tax receipt. 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Any plea of no contest or conviction for theft, consumer fraud, deceptive trade practices or sexual battery. 
(5)  Conducting the business that holds a business tax receipt under this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a business tax receipt shall be given and shall comply with current code enforcement regulations specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the business tax receipt holder, at his last known address, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(13); Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 4, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-346. - Appeal. 
Said aggrieved person shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to file with the city clerk's office to be heard by the city council at the next available council meeting. The council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided in section 11-345 for notice of hearing on revocation. The order of the city council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(14); Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 11-347. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the code enforcement supervisor or his/her designee of the city to examine all places of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions of this article to determine if this article has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(11); Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 11-348. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished pursuant to section 31-66. 
(Code 1963, § 13-26(M)(16); ; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 2, 11-12-96) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 11-349—11-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 
 
Sec. 11-371. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall mean any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street within the corporate limits of the city, or any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, who uses a telephone located within the city, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting in advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person, who for himself, or for another person hires, leases, uses, occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, house trailer, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery other than a seasonal sales vendor or fruit, vegetable, seafood and nursery products vendor. 
(Code 1963, § 21-2; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-372. - Business tax receipt required. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a business tax receipt therefore in compliance with the provisions of this article. Any permanent business in the City of Titusville wishing to engage in door-or-door sales shall be required to obtain a business tax receipt pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1963, § 21-1; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-373. - Application. 
(a)  Applicants for a business tax receipt under this article must file with the administrator a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the administrator, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  A passport-sized photograph. 
(5)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with the credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(6)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(7)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, is manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has pled no contest or [been] convicted of any crime involving theft, consumer fraud, deceptive trade practices or sexual battery, within the last five (5) years. 
(9)  The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where applicant, within the six (6) months next preceding the date of such application, conducted a business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted. 
(10)  At the time of filing an application for a permit, the applicant shall present a valid driver's license, if having one (1) issued, or another valid form of identification. 
(11)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting at the Titusville Police Department, pay the costs thereof, and verification of fingerprinting shall be provided by the applicant at the time of filing the application. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the city to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1963, § 21-3; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 19-2003, § 1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 28-2009A, § 1, 8-25-09)  
Sec. 11-374. - Investigation; issuance or denial of business tax receipt; contents. 
Upon receipt of an application for a business tax receipt required by this article, the administrator shall have five (5) working days to conduct an investigation through the police department, building department and the better business council of the Titusville Area Chamber of Commerce of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as they deem necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(1)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the application will be disapproved and no business tax receipt will be issued. 
(2)  A business tax receipt will not be issued if it is determined that an applicant has: 
(a)  Been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a crime against the laws of this state or any other state, the United States, or violated ordinances of this city or any other city or county in this state or any other state involving moral turpitude, theft, consumer fraud, deceptive trade practices, fraudulent or dishonest dealing, sexual battery, the illegal sale of a controlled substance, or been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provisions of F.S. §§ 501.021 through 501.055 or any successor thereto, and/or this article. 
(b)  Attempted to obtain a business tax receipt by fraud, false statement, misrepresentation or failure to truthfully answer any question in the application. 
(3)  If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the business tax receipt will be issued. Such business tax receipt shall show the name, address and photograph of the business tax receipt holder, the date of issuance and the length of time the business tax receipt shall be operative, as well as the business tax receipt number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The administrator shall keep a permanent record of all business tax receipts issued. 
(4)  The applicant shall pay an annual business tax receipt fee of twenty-two dollars and five cents ($22.05) for each solicitor. Any renewal of such business tax receipt may be granted, provided the business tax receipt has not been revoked, upon payment of the twenty-two dollars and five cents ($22.05) fee. 
(5)  No applicant, or individual acting on behalf of a corporate applicant or an applicant organization, shall receive a business tax receipt allowing solicitation for more than a total of sixty (60) days per allocation for business tax receipt. If applicant desires to apply for an additional permit, an applicant may do so and its duration of the new permit may not exceed sixty (60) days. No applicant shall receive a permit allowing solicitation for more than one hundred twenty (120) total calendar days in any fiscal calendar year. 
(6)  No more than four (4) solicitors may solicit at any one (1) time. 
(7)  No business tax receipt shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or other impersonal entity, but each individual person engaging in the business of peddling, canvassing, or soliciting within the city shall be required to have a business tax receipt whether acting for themselves or as an agent of another. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser, or solicitor to engage in the business of peddling, canvassing, or soliciting within the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. during eastern daylight saving time nor between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. during eastern standard time. 
(9)  Solicitors, peddlers, and canvassers are prohibited from soliciting, peddling, and canvassing on premises in areas where a notice stating "No Trespassing," "No Solicitors", "No Soliciting", or words of a similar meaning, is posted in plain view. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to engage in peddling, canvassing, or soliciting without direct supervision by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age. Direct supervision means the supervising person shall at all times have the minor in sight and shall in no event be more than one hundred (100) feet away from the minor. 
(Code 1963, § 21-4; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 19-2003, § 1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 28-2009A, § 1, 8-25-09)  
Sec. 11-375. - Appeals from denial or revocation. 
Said aggrieved person shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of denial or revocation of the business tax receipt to file an appeal with the administrator to be heard by the city council at the next available council meeting. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal. The notice of hearing shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall also advise the vendor of the right to be heard, of the right to be represented by counsel, and of the right to present sworn testimony on the vendor's behalf. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1963, § 21-5; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 19-2003, § 1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 28-2009A, § 1, 8-25-09)  
Sec. 11-376. - Revocation. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the license department for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a crime against the laws of this state or any other state, the United States, or violated ordinances of this city or any other city or county in this state or any other state involving moral turpitude, theft, consumer fraud, deceptive trade practices, fraudulent or dishonest dealing, sexual battery, the illegal sale of a controlled substance, or been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of F.S. §§ 501.021 through 501.055 or any successor thereto and/or this article. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling, soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1963, § 21-6; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 28-2009A, § 1, 8-25-09)  
Sec. 11-377. - Records. 
The chief of police shall report to the administrator all convictions for violation of this article and the administrator shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Code 1963, § 21-7; Ord. No. 41-1996, § 3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 19-2003, § 1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-378. - Exhibition of business tax receipt. 
Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their business tax receipt at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1963, § 21-8; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-379. - Solicitation on right-of-way. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Road right-of-way. The land in which the state, county, or municipality owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for use as a transportation facility to include streets, sidewalks, alleys, appurtenant drainage structures and facilities. 
Solicitation. Any activity taking place on a state, county, or municipal right-of-way within the city wherein an individual or individuals are intentionally intermingling with motor vehicle traffic for the purpose of obtaining support for any event, issue, organization, or any other purpose for which support may be solicited. "Solicitation" shall include, but not be limited to, seeking donations of funds from motorists, seeking signatures from motorists, passing out literature to motorists, and any other activity wherein a pedestrian approaches a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is being operated and/or stopped on a state, county, or local right-of-way within the city. For the purpose of this section, "solicitation" shall not be construed to mean activities whereby pedestrians stand immediately off and/or immediately adjacent to public rights-of-way displaying signs in support of any cause, provided such activity does not require any physical contact between the pedestrian and motorists as previously described herein and provided such activity does not create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  Prohibited activity. It shall be strictly prohibited within the city to engage in any solicitation activity on a state, county, or municipal rights-of-way within the city. It is the intent of this provision to prohibit all such solicitation activity in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by fine and/or imprisonment as provided in Florida Statutes, Chapter 775. 
(Ord. No. 19-2003, § 2, 5-13-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 41-1996, § 4, adopted Nov. 12, 1996, reserved § 11-379. Formerly, such section pertained to bond and derived from § 21-9 of the 1963 Code. Ord. No. 19-2003, § 2, adopted May 13, 2003, added new provisions to the Code as § 11-379.  
Sec. 11-380. - Hours of solicitation. 
No peddling, canvassing or solicitation shall occur by any individual licensed under this article before 9:00 a.m. on any day and after 6:00 p.m. during the months of standard time and after 7:00 p.m. during the months of daylight savings time unless the peddler, canvasser or solicitor has the express permission of the property owner or resident prior to calling for solicitation. 
(Code 1963, § 21-22)  
Sec. 11-381. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of any code inspector or police officer of the city to require any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to be duly authorized, to produce his business tax receipt and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1963, § 21-10; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 5, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-382. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided by section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 21-11)  
Secs. 11-383—11-405. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 35-1997, § 4, adopted October 28, 1997, repealed §§ 11-406—11-413. Formerly, such sections pertained to solid waste collection and disposal. 
 
Secs. 11-406—11-413. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MOTION AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY PRODUCTION PERMITS 
 
Sec. 11-414. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Titusville Motion and Still Photography Production Permit Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-415. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a one-stop permitting process for motion picture and still photography on public property owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city, in recognition of the economic impact of the motion picture and television industry. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-416. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise: 
City shall refer to the City of Titusville, Florida. 
City equipment is any tangible property, other than real property, purchased by public funds and utilized in the normal course and scope of providing governmental service by the city. 
City facility is any public street, sidewalk, place or building owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city to include, but not be limited to, city park and recreation facilities. 
Production is the commercial taking or making of a motion picture, television, videotape, or still photographic production. This term shall include, and a production permit shall be required for, such production on private property not at a studio involving the erection of tents or other temporary structures or involving the use of pyrotechnics, explosives, or other incendiary devices. 
Production permit (also referred to herein as permit) is the permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-417. - City manager. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to act as the agent for the city in the receipt and processing of applications for production permits. After review and approval by the applicable city department and final approval by the city manager, the permit will be issued. The city manager is further authorized to act as liaison with the Brevard County Film Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-418. - Permit required; suspension and/or revocation; violation. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in, and/or start any motion and still photography production on or upon any city facility or utilizing city equipment unless a production permit shall first have been obtained from the city manager. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided for by law. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit once issued shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the production until such time as the noncompliance is remedied. The suspension shall be initially communicated orally, followed by a written suspension order. Continued failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit may result in revocation of the permit at the discretion of the city manager. Continuation of the production in violation of the suspension and/or revocation shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-419. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person seeking the issuance of a production permit shall file an application with, and on forms provided by, the city manager prior to commencement of production. The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location(s) of the production. 
(2)  Duration and type of production. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance coverage with the city named as an additional insured as commensurate with the scope of the production. 
(4)  Special effects to be utilized, especially incendiary or explosive devices. In addition, the application shall list the person in charge (pyrotechnician) of such special effects together with his/her qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and/or state agencies. 
(5)  Proposed utilization of city equipment. 
(6)  Necessity for closures of public streets and sidewalks and duration therefor. 
(7)  A written summary or explanation of the portion of the production to be shot within unincorporated areas of the city. 
(8)  Number and type of vehicles and/or equipment and number of personnel to be on location with the production. 
(9)  An agreement to pay for extraordinary services provided by the city. 
(10)  A hold harmless/indemnification agreement for the benefit of the city and any participating municipality. 
(11)  The applicant for a motion and still photography production permit shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that the applicant carries workers' compensation insurance for applicant's employees as provided by the laws of the state. The applicant shall file with the city manager a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) aggregate issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state for the benefit of the city as an additional insured, as evidence of the ability to respond for damages which may result from or be attributable to the motion and/or still photography production. The insurance policy shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-420. - Nonexemption from other city Code requirements. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to exempt any holder of a production permit from any other required licenses, permits, or other required authority or from any other provision of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Sec. 11-421. - Cost for extraordinary services. 
The city shall recover its cost for extraordinary services rendered in connection with a production. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, charges for personnel and/or equipment committed in support of the production which are outside the normal scope of government services, and an allocable share of the city's overhead costs will be applied to the direct charges for personnel, equipment and other direct costs incurred by the city. Based on the information contained in the permit application, an estimate of these costs shall be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit. The applicant agrees to pay the city in advance for any services provided by the city. The city manager's office will provide coordination and advise the applicant of estimated costs. 
(Ord. No. 20-1995, § 1, 7-25-95)  
Secs. 11-422—11-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 11-500. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Amusement attraction means any building or structure around, over, or through which persons may move or walk, without the aid of any moving device integral to the building or structure, which building or structure provides amusement, pleasure, thrills, or excitement. The term does not include enterprises principally devoted to the exhibition of products of agriculture, industry, education, science, religion, or the arts. 
Amusement device means any mechanical device or combination of devices, which carries or conveys passengers on, along, around, over, or through a fixed or restricted course or within a defined area for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, or excitement. The following are not considered amusement devices or amusement attractions: traditional theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, miniature golf, exercise equipment, batting cages, and live animal rides. 
Applicant means the property owner, individual or organization sponsoring the event and who must apply for the special event permit. 
Booth means a small stand for the sale of goods or containment of games and other individual entertainment activities associated with the special event. 
Classifications, waivers. Special events shall be classified in the below-listed categories and subject to certain terms and conditions based on the impact the event may have on Titusville residents and city services. 
"Class A." Those public or private events which by design are intended to attract patrons from both within and outside Brevard County and may include: 
1.  Paid commercial advertisement; and 
2.  Outside beer/alcohol concessions or amplified entertainment. 
These events shall include, but are not limited to, certain festivals, concerts, athletic events, contests, competitions and dances. These events shall be limited to the downtown redevelopment area, urban village, and industrial zoned properties and may include the following characteristics: 
• Up to four (4) stages 
• One (1) observation tower 
• Multiple sources of amplified sound 
• Tents/canopies 
• Serving of food 
• Beverages and alcohol (where permissible) 
• Multiple parking areas and traffic control 
• Four (4) days of activities 
• Hours of operation: no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 11:00 p.m. (1:00 a.m.—New Year's Eve), unless otherwise stipulated by the terms of the special event permit 
"Class B." Those public or private events which by design are intended to attract patrons from the City of Titusville area where advertisement, if done, is limited to the Brevard County target market. These events shall include, but are not limited to, certain cultural events, arts and craft shows, athletic events, community celebrations, dances, car and boat shows (as regulated by section 11-516), competitions, and parades. "Class B" events shall not be allowed on single-family residential lots. These events may include the following characteristics: 
• Up to two (2) stages 
• Amplified sound 
• Tents/canopies 
• Serving of food 
• Beverages and alcohol (where permissible) 
• Up to four (4) days of activities 
• Hours of operation: no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 11:00 p.m. (1:00 a.m.—New Year's Eve), unless otherwise stipulated by the terms of the special event permit 
"Class C." Those activities or events that involve the private use of city-owned or controlled property and are not open to the general public. These events are characterized by their limited impact on traffic, parking and noise in surrounding neighborhoods, and do not exceed the capacity of the facility or other property proposed to be used. "Class C" events on property controlled by Brevard County Parks and Recreation shall be exempt from the city's special event permit process. Such events or activities shall include, but are not limited to, weddings, large picnics, family reunions, block parties, and birthday parties. "Class C" events are not intended to regulate typical use of parks or public areas, but only those events that require rental of pavilions, park facilities, road closures, building or alcohol permits, and/or other city or county services. These events may include the following characteristics: 
• Serving of food 
• Beverages and alcohol (where permissible) 
• Up to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of tents/canopies 
• One (1) source of amplified sound 
• Up to eight (8) hours of activities 
• Less than five hundred (500) people 
• Hours of operation: no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 11:00 p.m. (1:00 a.m.—New Year's Eve), unless otherwise stipulated by the terms of the special event permit 
Provider means the person, partnership or organization that is providing the amusement rides, devices, games, and booths, tents or entertainment to the sponsoring person, partnership or organization. 
Security violations includes any activity which results in an arrest by a certified law enforcement officer, resulting in the imposition, by a court of law, of a fine, imprisonment, probation and/or other criminal penalty. This term includes only those arrests which occurred during a permitted special event and on property where such event was held. 
Special event means: 
(a)  Any temporary public gathering for the purpose of participating in entertainment in an open area which may consist of music, parades, fairs, festivals, carnivals, circuses, sports events, arts and crafts, or any other public entertainment event taking place in the incorporated areas of the city, excluding state and federally owned property and property controlled by the county parks and recreation department unless when there is a request for city services. Organized sport leagues shall not be classified as a special event and are hereby exempt from said restrictions. 
(b)  Public events held in facilities that are not within the original purpose of the facility. 
(c)  Any event with one (1) or more of the following, regardless of the anticipated number of attendees: 
(1)  Amusement rides or devices subject to inspection under F.S. ch. 616. 
(2)  Any special event requiring the utilization or temporary closing of any state, city, or county maintained public and private roadways including, but not limited to, road races and block parties. 
(3)  The operation and/or performance of a fireworks display. 
(4)  A temporary tent in excess of four hundred (400) square feet for use at public gatherings. 
(d)  Special event shall not mean any activity upon or over any watercourse or body of water including, but not limited to, boat races, unless it also includes an activity defined as a special event. 
(e)  No special event shall extend on any weekday or weekend after 11:00 p.m. 
Sponsor means the person, entity or organization responsible for the finances and administration of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-501. - Permit required. 
Any special event held within the corporate limits of the City of Titusville shall obtain a special event permit. All special events shall comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter and with all terms, conditions, and requirements identified in an issued permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-502. - Permit application. 
(a)  The applicant for a permit under this article shall file a completed special event application with the special events coordinator of the city. As part of the application, the applicant must complete and submit to the special events coordinator a "pre-event assessment list" along with a completed site plan and tentative schedule of events with the application. The "pre-event assessment list" shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
• Type of event, activities 
• Location of event 
• Date and times of event 
• Event applicant(s) 
• Contact person(s), telephone number(s) 
• Estimated number of spectators/attendees (each day of event) 
• Requested waiver of fees (exceptions) 
• Tentative schedule of events for each day of event 
• Detailed site plan, including pedestrian traffic access 
• Vehicular traffic control plan 
• Life safety plan 
• Other information deemed appropriate by the event applicant(s) 
(b)  The special events coordinator shall review the application to determine if the proposed event may be designated as a special event. If so determined, the special events coordinator shall contact the applicant(s) and make arrangements for a planning meeting. 
(c)  Planning meeting. Upon receipt of a completed application if so determined, the special events coordinator shall prepare a planning meeting. All aspects of the proposed event and its impact on the city shall be discussed to establish policy and procedural requirements, necessary city services, appropriate fees and correct any deficiencies from a public health and safety standpoint that may be necessary and/or in the best interests of the city. City staff will either approve or disapprove both "Class A" and "Class B" events. Upon approval by city staff, the special events coordinator shall establish an agreement stipulating the terms and conditions of the permit and all estimated fees. No planning meeting or agreement is required for "Class C" events. The special events coordinator shall coordinate "Class C" events. The special events coordinator has approval authority for "Class C" events. 
(d)  No single location shall play host to more than four (4) "Class B" special events per calendar year. Requests for "Class C" events will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Special events held on property within the downtown redevelopment area and industrial zoned properties shall be exempt from said requirement. 
(e)  No event will be approved that would adversely impact another event previously approved or applied for with the city. 
(f)  Acquiring all permits is the responsibility of the applicant(s), and they must be submitted to the city's special events coordinator no later than twenty-one (21) days prior to the first day of the special event. This includes, but is not limited to: 
• Finalized site plan 
• Finalized life safety plan 
• Security schedule 
• Letters to affected property owners 
• Other required inspections and permits 
(g)  If the special event application is denied, the special events coordinator will provide the reason(s) for denial in writing. The applicant(s) may, in writing, appeal the decision to the city manager as defined within section 11-505. 
(h)  If an event is not approved, the city shall not be responsible for any costs incurred by the event applicant(s). 
(i)  Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a special event permit may be grounds for immediate suspension of the event until such time as the noncompliance is remedied. The noncompliance shall be initially communicated orally, followed by a written suspension order, if the noncompliance is not remedied. Noncompliance includes conducting unapproved activities and activities involving unsafe conditions. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-503. - Advanced notification. 
(a)  Whenever a "Class A" or "Class B" special event is planned to be held within the city on the holiday or holiday weekend of Martin Luther King [Jr. Day], Easter, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year's Eve, the applicant(s) shall submit at least sixty (60) days, but no more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days, prior to the event a special event application to the special events coordinator. 
(b)  Whenever a "Class A" or "Class B" special event is planned to be held within the city that does not include a holiday weekend, the applicant(s) thereof shall, at least sixty (60) days, but no more than one hundred eighty (180) days [prior], submit a completed special events application to the special events coordinator. "Class A" and "Class B" special event requests submitted less than sixty (60) days in advance will be subject to a late fee in the amount on file with the city. No "Class A" or "Class B" special event requests will be accepted with less than forty (40) days' notice in advance of the proposed event date. 
(c)  Whenever a "Class C" special event is planned to be held within the corporate limits of the city, the applicant(s) thereof shall submit at least thirty (30) days, but no more than one hundred eighty (180) days, prior to the event, a special events application to the special events coordinator. "Class C" special events submitted less than thirty (30) days in advance will be subject to a late fee in the amount on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-504. - Special event permit; fee/issuance. 
(a)  A nonrefundable check made payable to the City of Titusville for a special events application fee shall be required upon application approval. The applicant(s) shall be required to pay fees for law enforcement, fire, EMS, building and public works and equipment fees, and provide the security required pursuant to sections 11-512 and 11-513 herein. All estimated fees shall be paid by at least five (5) days prior to the event. Failure to pay the estimated fees shall result in the permit not being issued unless approved by the city. 
(b)  If an entire special event is canceled, all fees other than the event application fee and the fees for services rendered or contractually obligated shall be reimbursed to the applicant(s). 
(c)  The special event applicant(s) for "Class A" events shall be notified of event approval or disapproval and/or any additional requirements or modification of requirements, no less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of the event. A nonrefundable check made payable to the City of Titusville shall be required upon application approval by the city staff. 
(d)  The special event applicant(s) for "Class B" events shall be notified of event approval or disapproval and/or any additional requirements or modification of requirements, no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of the event. A nonrefundable check made payable to the City of Titusville shall be required upon application approval by the city staff. 
(e)  The special event applicant(s) for "Class C" events shall be notified of event approval or disapproval and/or any additional requirements or modification of requirements, no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of the event. A nonrefundable check made payable to the City of Titusville for a special events application fee will be required upon application approval by the special events coordinator. 
Exemptions. Events observed for federally recognized holidays are exempt from special event fee requirements. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-505. - Limiting, altering, denying applications and appeals. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to limit, alter, or deny special events. The city may deny a special event permit application if it is determined that the activity will adversely impact neighboring businesses or residents, impose a safety hazard, create a noise disturbance that is not appropriate for the location, create the potential for damage to city or county property, place the city in a position of contingent liability, or overextend the city's ability to provide services. The city may limit the duration of the event including the hours of the event and the number of days it can be conducted to minimize adverse impact caused by the activity that the city cannot manage. 
(b)  If the special event application is denied, the special events coordinator will provide the reason(s) for denial in writing. The applicant(s) may, in writing, appeal the decision to the city manager within ten (10) days of application denial. The requests for appeals will be considered by the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager will render a final decision in writing within seven (7) working days upon receipt of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-506. - Fireworks display. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements in section 11-503, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Name and address of individual(s) performing display. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of transporting company. 
(3)  A copy of the driver's license for each individual transporting the pyrotechnics including the hazardous materials transportation sticker. 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of fireworks company providing pyrotechnics. 
(5)  Location of where and how pyrotechnics will be stored. 
(6)  A complete list of firing shells and their respective sizes. 
(7)  A site plan as required by the National Fire Protection Association #1123, as adopted by Florida Administrative Code, including, but not limited to, the location of the firing range, distance from any structures, and electrical lines. 
(8)  Copy of a plan to provide adequate on-site fire suppression. 
(b)  All fireworks display shows must meet the National Fire Protection Association standards. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-507. - Tents. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a temporary structure for use by the general public as a tent without having made application for and receiving a permit to do so in accordance with the conditions and limitations as established by city zoning and land use laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Sales tents may be erected temporarily on commercially developed property, or on a vacant commercially zoned property adjacent to commercially developed property, for a period not to exceed more than six (6) weeks per year. The sales tent shall not encroach into any parking driveway aisle and shall not impact more than twenty-five (25) percent of the number of existing parking spaces on a developed site. When proposed to be located on vacant commercially zoned property adjacent to commercially developed property the applicant shall provide written proof that the owner of the adjacent property has consented to the use of his improved parking and access driveways to accommodate the applicant's parking needs. 
(c)  The applicant for a special event permit under this article shall file a special event application in accordance with section 11-502 and shall specify at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Plot plan of proposed site, indicating the existing structures, all parking and driveway isles. 
(2)  Flame-retardant certificate for tent. 
(3)  The building official shall require a separate electrical permit in the event that: 
a.  The maximum size portable generator designated for use as the primary electrical supply exceeds ten kW. The generator must be equipped with ground-fault protection devices. Only ul listed flexible cords with attachment plugs may be used. Hard wiring shall be completed only by a Florida certified or registered electrical contractor. 
b.  Any alteration to the existing wiring will require a separate electrical permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-508. - Alcohol and beverage sales. 
Alcohol and beverage sales conducted on the property on which the special event is being held shall be in accordance with Florida State Statutes and shall be considered in conformance with the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances, chapter 4 "alcoholic beverages" upon the approval of the special event. The city manager may provide city approval for a permit for the drinking, consumption, and possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon any city street, sidewalk or parking area open to the public in the ordinary course of business provided that such permit is applied for in advance through the process outlined in this chapter, and the permit has a connection with social functions such as weddings, receptions, chamber of commerce functions, civic leagues, charitable organizations, art and craft shows, public sporting events, and other social functions of a similar nature. Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the alcohol licensee to ensure that no open containers of alcohol sold on the premises shall be permitted beyond the designated special event site. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-509. - Indemnification/insurance; liquor liability insurance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a special event permit the applicant(s) shall execute an indemnification form which provides that the applicant(s) agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents and employees against any loss, damage or expense (including all costs and reasonable attorney's fees) suffered by the city for: 
(1)  Any breach of the approved agreement reached at the planning meeting, including any inaccuracy in or breach of any representation, warranty or covenant made by the applicant(s) to the city. 
(2)  Any claims, suits, actions, damages or cause of actions for any personal injury, loss of life or damages to personal or real property sustained by reason of, result of, or by presence of the applicant on public property by applicant's agents, employees, invitee and/or any other persons. 
(b)  Insurance coverage shall be on licensed insurance company letterhead, or its legal equivalent, and shall provide liability insurance protection for the city, not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person for bodily injury, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, indemnifying the city as "additional insured". 
(c)  If alcoholic beverages are to be dispensed, served, sold or distributed at an outdoor event, the applicant(s) shall in addition provide liquor liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(d)  The applicant shall pay the premiums for the insurance and provide the completed indemnification form to the city prior to issuance of the special event permit. 
(e)  "Class C" special events are exempt from the insurance requirement, but will be required to provide a completed indemnification form to the city. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect in any way the city's rights, privileges and immunities as set forth in F.S. § 768.28. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-510. - Performance bond; security for damage to public property. 
Security for damage to public property shall be provided by the applicant(s) in a form suitable to the city to secure restoration of any public property damaged within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of all property line boundaries of the special event, and within twenty-four (24) hours of the conclusion of the event, to warrant that the same shall be free of trash, garbage, litter and any other debris and that the said property shall be placed in the same conditional state existing prior to the special event. The amount of the security shall be set forth per the request fee on file with the city. The city inspector shall inspect the public property impacted by the special event on the days immediately prior to and following the conclusion of the event to confirm compliance. The security shall also be conditioned to cover any nonpaid expenses incurred by the city for any additional services such as necessary reinspections, additional personnel costs due to schedule adjustments and any other impact to existing city services not approved prior to the special event. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-511. - Public law enforcement and private security services. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized by the chief of police, the Titusville Police Department shall be the sole provider for public law enforcement services. The number of public law enforcement personnel and the number of the applicant's private security personnel required to service the special event shall be determined in the planning meeting with final approval by the city. 
(b)  The formula for determining the number of public law enforcement officers required shall be two (2) police officers for the first two thousand (2,000) or less persons peak attendance per day. Attendance above two thousand (2,000) persons shall require two (2) additional officers for each additional increment of two thousand (2,000). The number of authorized private security personnel shall be determined in the planning meeting based on city requirements, applicant(s) needs, traffic control, parking and required protection of adjacent sites within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property of which the special event is held. This formula shall be considered as a guideline only. Additional officers may be authorized or required, depending upon the character and risk factor of the proposed special event. 
(c)  The city, in consultation with the applicant(s), shall establish the appropriate time frames in which public law enforcement and private security is needed for each aspect of the special event. The applicant(s) will provide a tentative schedule of activities for each day of the event at the planning meeting. The city shall assign a "special event field operations detail" to handle law enforcement services. Because the final activities schedule may change, the city's police department supervisor in charge of the detail shall have the authority to adjust the work schedule to cover any activities that may require additional or fewer public law enforcement services. Fees for police services may vary due to scheduling adjustments determined and approved on site by the police supervisor and the applicant(s) during the event. Any additional fees generated by scheduling adjustments shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s). 
(d)  In the event the applicant(s) are authorized to utilize sworn law enforcement officers from an agency other than the Titusville Police Department, an agency representative must be present in the planning meeting. That agency must meet the requirements for security, as agreed in the meeting. Law enforcement officers from other agencies shall be responsible for arresting, booking and transporting arrestees as the law may require in each situation. 
(e)  Fee schedule for determining officer personnel and equipment costs, to be paid by applicant(s) of event, shall be as set forth per the request fee on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-512. - Fire department services. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized by the fire chief, the Titusville Fire Department shall be the sole provider for fire department services. The number of certified fire department personnel and the level of fire protection services required to service any special event shall be determined by the city in the planning meeting with final approval by the city. Fire department services shall be for the purpose of fire protection standby and shall be required for each structure intended to be used for public assembly when the place of assembly reaches attendance of three hundred (300) or more occupants. Fire protection shall also be required during the event, or certain aspects of the event, in any structure in which any type of explosive, open flame, spark-producing device or flammable solid, liquid or gaseous material is used. The fire department shall determine all that is necessary to provide adequate fire protection and safety for each event. 
(b)  Two (2) firefighters shall be required for each tent or assembly structure as deemed necessary. For occupancies exceeding three hundred (300) persons, there shall be a minimum of one (1) additional firefighter posted at each approved entrance/exit. In any structure utilizing any type of explosive, open flame, spark-producing device or flammable solid, liquid or gaseous material one (1) firefighter shall be posted at each entrance/exit. 
(c)  The city shall also establish the appropriate time frames fire personnel are needed for fire protection services for each aspect of the special event. The applicant(s) will provide a tentative schedule of activities for each day of the event at the planning meeting. Because the final activities schedule may change, the fire supervisor in charge shall have the authority to adjust the work schedule to cover those activities that may require additional fire protection services. Fees may vary due to scheduling adjustments approved by the fire supervisor and the applicant(s) on site during the event. Any additional fees generated by scheduling adjustments shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s). 
(d)  In the event the applicant(s) are authorized to utilize certified firefighters from an agency other than the Titusville Fire Department, an agency representative must be present in the planning meeting and the agency must meet the requirements for fire protection as agreed in the meeting. 
(e)  The fee schedule for determining fire department personnel costs, equipment costs, and inspection fees to be paid by applicant(s) of event, shall be set forth per the request fee on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-513. - Emergency medical services (EMS); advanced life support/water rescue. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized by the fire chief, the City of Titusville Fire Department shall be the sole provider for emergency medical services. The number of emergency medical services personnel and the level of emergency medical care services necessary shall be determined by the city. 
(b)  Two (2) emergency medical technicians (EMT/paramedics) shall be required for the first two thousand five hundred (2,500) or less persons attendance per day. Attendance above two thousand five hundred (2,500) persons shall require two (2) additional EMTs for each additional two thousand five hundred (2,500) or any part thereof. For events over two thousand five hundred (2,500) persons, there shall also be an advanced life support capability, with a minimum of two (2) certified emergency medical personnel, one (1) of which shall be a certified paramedic. 
(c)  The city shall establish the appropriate time frames emergency medical services personnel are needed for each aspect of the special event. The applicant(s) will provide a tentative schedule of activities for each day of the event at the planning meeting. Because the final activities schedule may change, the police or fire department supervisor shall have the authority to adjust the EMS work schedule to cover those activities which may require additional emergency medical care services in agreement with the applicant(s). 
(d)  If EMS services are waived by the fire chief or his/her designee, fees due to a private EMS contractor or the public fire department for extended services shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s). 
(e)  In the event the applicant(s) is authorized to utilize certified emergency medical technicians for standby, both private or from an agency other than the Titusville Fire Department, the applicant(s) shall ensure that the requirements for emergency medical services are met as agreed in the planning meeting. 
(f)  All special events involving river and lagoon system activities that include boats, personal watercraft, canoes, kayaks, paddle boards, surf and boogie boards, and/or swimming shall require a two-person water rescue team with an approved rescue craft. 
(g)  The fee schedule for determining fire department personnel and equipment costs, to be paid by the applicant(s) of the event, shall be set forth per the request fee on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-514. - Public health requirements. 
The provisions of F.S. pt. I, ch. 386, sanitary nuisances; Chapter 64E-10.002 Florida Administrative Code, sanitary facilities, special requirements, places of public assembly; Chapter 64E-11.009, Florida Administrative Code, temporary food service events; and F.S. §§ 381.006—381.0072, environmental health; and all rules of the state department of health promulgated pursuant thereto are adopted by reference. The formula for determining the number of sanitary facilities required per special event shall be one (1) sanitary facility per one hundred (100) people. 
(Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 11-515. - Parades and block parties. 
(a)  A permit for all parades shall be obtained from the special events coordinator. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be driven through a parade or other procession, except with the permission of a police officer. 
(c)  Application. In addition to the requirements in section 11-503, the following are required: 
(1)  A map showing the location of the event, indicating the complete route of the proposed event and all auxiliary and adjacent roadways. The applicant must also supply an alternate route for travel impacted by the proposed event. 
(2)  Road closure permits from the state department of transportation if the parade route will utilize a state highway. 
(d)  When applicable the sponsor and/or provider will be responsible for: 
(1)  Coordinating traffic control with the county sheriff's department, municipal law enforcement agency and/or the state highway patrol and notifying the fire department and emergency management services of the closure and alternate routes. 
(2)  City may request written majority support from those parties owning real property within the designated event. 
(3)  Notifying the general public affected by the temporary road closing at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance of the event. 
(4)  Implementing and removing the approved maintenance of traffic (MOT) plan including all signage, barricades, etc., necessary to safely protect the traveling public within the area of the event. The MOT plan shall designate the beginning and end time for the plan. 
(5)  Erecting signage identifying road closures and detours in advance of actual closure in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) latest edition. 
(6)  Collecting and disposing of all debris within the road and rights-of-way upon completion of the event. 
(7)  No vehicle shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, due to height restrictions of traffic signals. 
(8)  Maximum speed of vehicles or units in event shall not exceed ten (10) miles per hour (mph). 
(9)  If the block party is a noncommercial activity and is not open to the public, the block party will not be required to supply the city with a certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1963, § 26-3; Ord. No. 19-2012, § 2, 5-22-12) 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 19-2012, adopted May 22, 2012, renumbered § 20-27 as § 11-515.  
Sec. 11-516. - Temporary auto sales and shows. 
(a)  The temporary sales or shows (not to exceed five (5) consecutive days) of automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles and related merchandise may be permitted in any CM and RC zoning districts. The applicant shall submit a site plan reflecting the intended temporary sale or show, and included in said site plan shall be the particular lot, together with dimensions of said site, including any and all structures, parking, ingress and egress, setbacks and other information as may be necessary to review said application. The applicant shall submit information showing: 
(1)  The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
(2)  The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted; written permission from the owner of the property must be shown; 
(3)  A statement detailing the nature of the proposed sales or show event, including dates and hours of operation; 
(4)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers. Above-noted information shall be submitted to the planning administrator or his designee, accompanied with a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per show or sale event a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the proposed event. An applicant who is a charitable, religious, educational, or not-for-profit organization, as defined in section 11-42 of the Code of Ordinances, shall be exempt from paying an application fee. 
(5)  There shall be a maximum of eight (8) auto sales events per year citywide. Those desiring to obtain a temporary auto sales event permit may submit an application on the first business day in November for the following calendar year. During the 30-day sign up period, local dealers shall have the right to select the first four (4) sales events. Thereafter, any applicant may apply for a temporary auto sales event permit on a first come first serve basis. 
(6)  Sales events shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) days apart and there shall be no more than one (1) sales event per calendar month. 
(b)  Minimum development criteria to be met shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  All ingress/egress to said site shall be from an arterial roadway. 
(2)  All temporary structures, sanitary facilities and electrical wiring to be permitted and inspected. 
(3)  If the proposed event is to have temporary trailers, and said trailers are to be open for use by the general public, they shall be required to be handicap accessible. In addition, trailers open to the general public are required to provide proper tie downs for appropriate wind load restraint and receive site inspections/approval from the building department. This requirement shall not be required if the trailers are not open to the general public and used only by sales staff representatives to conduct the temporary sales event. 
(4)  All tents shall be required to be fire retardant and appropriate documentation noting fire retardants is required to be provided to the fire department. The fire marshal will inspect tents on site for appropriate documentation and setup. 
(5)  The applicant shall be responsible for arranging all the required inspections prior to the commencing of each sales event. Failure to obtain the required inspection shall cause the permit to become void. 
(6)  The applicant shall possess a city mobile vendors' business tax receipt and pay the fee as prescribed in section 11-31. A charitable, religious, educational, or not-for-profit organization, as defined in section 11-42 of the Code of Ordinances, shall be exempt from the business tax receipt fee. 
(7)  The applicant shall be the primary operator of a licensed and certified repair facility, equipped with at least three (3) mechanical work bays. The City of Titusville may require proof of ownership of the repair facility or a bona fide lease of at least one (1) year. 
(8)  A banner/sign, a minimum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area, prominently displaying the name and address of the dealer conducting the sale shall be required to be placed on the site. The banner/sign shall be in compliance with the sign code (land development regulations, section 39-171). 
(c)  In determining whether or not the application shall be approved, the planning administrator shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The traffic to be generated by the intended temporary use. Ingress and egress to the property with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in the case of a fire or catastrophe. 
(2)  The effect of the temporary use upon surrounding properties. General compatibility with adjacent properties and other properties in the district. Staff shall also consider nuisance factors detrimental to adjacent and nearby properties. Nuisance factors shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, noise, odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference, and/or mechanical vibrations. 
(3)  Compliance with applicable codes, safety and fire regulations. 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading/staging are for the event, with particular attention to the items in [paragraph] (1) above. The area of the sales event/show shall not place the existing use of the site under its minimum on-site parking requirements. 
(5)  Screening and buffering of adjacent residential uses. 
(6)  Temporary signs and temporary proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, compatibility and harmony with properties in the district. 
(d)  The planning administrator may impose any additional condition it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Limiting the size or location of the event on the property. 
(2)  Controlling/limiting the location and number of vehicle access points for the event. 
(3)  Limiting the number, size and location of lighting and signs. 
(Ord. No. 35-1999, § 1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 5-2000, § 1, 3-5-00; Ord. No. 49-2002, § 10-22-02; Ord. No. 19-2012, § 1, 5-22-12) 
Editor's note— Section 11-516 had been saved from repeal. Refer to Adopting Ordinance 31-1992.  
Secs. 11-517—11-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - RAVE CLUB ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 11-601. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Titusville Rave Club Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-602. - Authority. 
This article is enacted under the home-rule owner of Titusville, Florida in the interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-603. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city to address the unique problems associated with rave clubs by implementing rave club regulations, and to protect juveniles and adults from criminal activity that occurs at such rave clubs. 
(b)  Titusville hereby asserts that the following purposes of the rave club regulations set forth herein are matters of legitimate, substantial and compelling governmental interests: 
(1)  To protect juveniles and adults from illegal drug activity, including use, sale, and drug abuse such as overdoses, and to reduce, if not eliminate, such activity from occurring in rave clubs; 
(2)  To protect juveniles and adults from criminal activity occurring in rave clubs: 
(3)  To protect juveniles and adults from predatory-type sexual crimes and acts occurring in rave clubs; 
(4)  To reduce the amount of criminal activity occurring in rave clubs predominantly in the late-night and early-morning hours by prohibiting rave clubs from operating during the late-night and early-morning hours; and 
(5)  To prevent, eliminate or, at least reduce, the deleterious effects of noise, traffic and debris on residential and commercial property near rave clubs that occurs in the late-night and early-morning hours. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-604. - Findings of fact. 
The city finds and determines, as factual matters, the following: 
(1)  Late-night and all-night rave clubs and similar forums of assembly, commonly or sometimes referred to as "raves", are frequently sites for the sale, possession and use of illicit drugs; 
(2)  Rave clubs expose juveniles and adults to illegal drug activity, and such exposure to drug activity is found to result often in drug addiction, drug overdoses, and death of juveniles and adults; 
(3)  Rave clubs are often sites for criminal activity; 
(4)  Rave clubs expose drug activity to the uninitiated youth of the city and such exposure to drug activity occurring at such raves is often found to result in drug addiction, overdose and death of both juveniles and adults; 
(5)  Rave clubs provide an arena for predatory-type sexual crimes, thus, for the protection of the city's youth, juveniles should not congregate in such social settings with adults; additionally, regulation of rave clubs is also necessary for the protection of adult victims of such crimes; 
(6)  Criminal activity occurring at rave clubs takes place predominantly in the late-night and early-morning hours; 
(7)  The actions of rave club patrons entering and exiting rave clubs can have an adverse impact on nearby residential and commercial properties in terms of excessive noise, traffic and debris, and such impacts are exacerbated by the fact that rave club patrons enter and exit such rave clubs at late-night and early-morning hours when citizens have a reasonable expectation of peace and quiet; and 
(8)  The above-referenced problems associated with rave clubs, while not unique and specific to rave clubs, tend to occur more frequently and tend to be more prevalent than in other places of assembly that are not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-605. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Adult rave club means any rave club whose patrons or admittees are eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
Business tax receipt holder means a person in whose name a rave club business tax receipt has been issued, as well as the individual listed as the applicant on the application for a rave club business tax receipt. 
Convictions or convicted means the finding of guilt or the entry of a plea of guilt or nolo contendere for a violation of a municipal or city ordinance or state or federal law, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld, or the forfeiture of a bond or bail when charged with a violation of a municipal or city ordinance or state or federal law. 
City manager means the City of Titusville Manager or designee. 
Juvenile rave club means any rave club whose patrons or admittees are seventeen (17) years of age or younger. 
Knowingly means with actual knowledge of a specific fact or facts, or with reasonable inquiry a reasonable person should have known a specific fact or facts. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Police means the City of Titusville Police Department. 
Rave club means any place, area or property which is operated either as an ongoing enterprise or undertaking or as a onetime event or a limited number of events, which is open to the public, and which: 
(1)  Has music, either live or electronically produced or transmitted; 
(2)  Has space available for dancing or dancing is permitted, regardless of whether such dancing takes place; 
(3)  Allows free admission or admission by payment of a direct or indirect charge, fee, donation, or other form of consideration, or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket, token or membership card; and 
(4)  Is not licensed or permitted to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed on premises. 
The term "rave club" does not include: 
(1)  An establishment with a license reviewed and approved by the state and City of Titusville to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption; 
(2)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in section 11-82, Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, lawfully established, existing, permitted and licensed, during such hours of the day as such establishment is being lawfully and principally operated as an adult entertainment establishment; 
(3)  A bona fide dance studio where students are taught the art of dancing or ballet; 
(4)  A place owned, leased or operated by the federal, state, or local government; 
(5)  A place owned, leased or operated by public or private elementary school, secondary school, college, or university; 
(6)  A place owned, leased or operated by a not-for-profit organization and sponsored by a bona fide law enforcement organization or federal, state, local government or school board; 
(7)  A place owned, leased or operated by a bona fide religious organization, created, organized, existing and recognized as such pursuant to all applicable laws including federal tax laws; or 
(8)  A private residence or residential facility from which the general public is excluded. 
Rave club business tax receipt means a business tax receipt to operate a rave club issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09  
Sec. 11-606. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-607. - Business tax receipt required; application for business tax receipt; application fee. 
(a)  No person may operate a rave club without a business tax receipt. 
(b)  An application for a business tax receipt shall be made on a form provided by the administrator and shall have notarized signature thereon. The applicant must be qualified to be issued a business tax receipt according to the provision of this article. 
(c)  A person who wishes to operate a rave club shall sign the application for a business tax receipt as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a rave club is not an individual, each individual who has an ownership interest in the business which will operate the rave club equal to or greater than twenty (20) percent must sign the application for a business tax receipt as an applicant. Each applicant must meet the requirements of section 11-608, and each applicant shall be considered a business tax receipt holder if a business tax receipt is granted. 
(d)  Each applicant shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such application fee shall be used to defray the costs and expenses or reviewing the rave club business tax receipt application and for each business tax receipt under the terms of this article. 
(e)  The applicant shall indicate whether the application is for a juvenile rave club or adult rave club. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-608. - Requirements for issuance of business tax receipt; posting. 
(a)  Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of an application for a rave club business tax receipt, the administrator shall either approve or deny issuance of the business tax receipt. The administrator shall deny a business tax receipt when he finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed or refused to answer or has falsely answered a question on the application provided, or has failed or refused to provide any information requested on the application provided. 
(3)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of any provision of these rave club regulations within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  An applicant has failed to obtain a certification from the fire marshal that the rave club complies with all applicable provisions of chapter 9, Fire Prevention and Protection, Code of Ordinances, City of Titusville; relative to places of assembly, including, but not limited to, maximum permitted occupancy load. 
(5)  An applicant has failed to obtain a certification from the building official that the rave club complies with all applicable provisions of chapter 6, Building and Building Regulations, Code of Ordinances, City of Titusville; including, but not limited to, those relative to places of assembly. 
(6)  An applicant has failed to obtain a certification from the zoning department that the rave club complies with all applicable provisions of the land development code; including, but not limited to, provisions related to zoning and parking. 
(7)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime 
a.  involving: 
(i)  Any felony, or 
(ii)  Any misdemeanor offense of ch. 784, Florida Statutes, assault; battery; culpable negligence; ch. 787, kidnapping; false imprisonment; luring or enticing a child; custody offenses; ch. 790, weapons and firearms; ch. 794, sexual battery; ch. 800, lewdness; indecent exposure; ch. 812, theft, robbery and related crimes; ch. 827, abuse of children; ch. 837, perjury; ch. 856 drunkenness; open house parties; loitering; prowling; desertion; ch. 562, selling, serving or giving alcoholic beverages to a minor; ch. 859, poisons; adulterated drugs; ch. 870, affrays; riots; routs; unlawful assemblies; ch. 874, street terrorism enforcement and prevention; ch. 877, miscellaneous crimes; and ch. 893, drug abuse prevention and control, as said chapters currently exist or may be amended from time to time, or 
(iii)  Any violation of the rave club or dance hall regulations of any other city, county, state or other government; and 
b.  for which: 
(i)  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date; if the conviction is for an above-listed misdemeanor offense; 
(ii)  Less than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for a felony offense; or 
(iii)  Less than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of the least conviction or the date of release from confinement for last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more above-listed misdemeanor offenses or combination of above-listed misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(8)  An applicant has been convicted of a felony involving any sexual crime against a minor. 
(b)  The fact that an applicant is appealing a conviction shall have no effect on the disqualifications of the applicant under subsection (a) above. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(7) above may qualify for a rave club business tax receipt only when the time period required by subsection (a)(7)b. has elapsed. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application, the administrator shall distribute copies to the police department, fire marshal and the specified city departments. The police chief, fire marshal and the specified city departments shall review the application for compliance with the provisions of this section, and forward their respective comments to the administrator for consideration in determining whether to issue or deny the business tax receipt in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The administrator, upon approving issuance of a rave club business tax receipt shall send the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of such action. The business tax receipt fee shall be nonrefundable in the amount of two hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($262.50). The administrator shall inform the applicant where he or she must pay the business tax receipt fee and obtain the business tax receipt. 
(f)  The administrator's approval of the issuance of a business tax receipt does not authorize the applicant to operate a rave club until the applicant has paid the business tax receipt fee and obtained possession of the business tax receipt. 
(g)  The business tax receipt shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the street address of the rave club. 
(h)  The business tax receipt shall be posted at the rave club in a conscious place at or near the entrance so that it may be easily read by any individual at any time. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-609. - Rave club manager. 
(a)  A business tax receipt shall designate an individual or individuals as the rave club manager or managers and shall register his, her or their names with the administrator. Furthermore, whenever the business tax receipt holder wishes to add the name of a different rave club manager, he shall register the new manager's name with the administrator. 
(b)  An individual may not be designated as a rave club manager if the individual would otherwise be disqualified under subsections 11-608(a)(7)a. and b. and (a)(8) from obtaining a rave club business tax receipt. 
(c)  No rave club may be operated unless a rave club manager is on the premises of the rave club during all hours of operation and until at least thirty (30) minutes after closing to ensure that the rave club is operated in accordance with the requirements and restrictions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-610. - Person under eighteen prohibited in adult rave club. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may enter an adult rave club unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be either a parent or guardian of another person under the age of eighteen (18) years for the purpose of gaining the other person's admission into an adult rave club. 
(c)  No permittee or employee of an adult rave club shall knowingly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter or remain on the premises of an adult rave club. 
(d)  No permittee of an adult rave club shall maintain or operate the premises without posting a conspicuous sign at each entrance to the business that reads: "It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter this premises without a parent or guardian". 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-611. - Person age eighteen and over prohibited in juvenile rave clubs. 
(a)  No person age eighteen (18) and over may enter a juvenile rave club. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be under age eighteen (18) for the purpose of gaining admission to a juvenile rave club. 
(c)  No permittee or employee of a juvenile rave club shall knowingly allow a person age eighteen (18) or over to enter or remain on the premises of the juvenile rave club. 
(d)  No permittee of a juvenile rave club shall maintain or operate the premises without posting a conspicuous sign at each entrance to the business that reads: "It is unlawful for any person age eighteen (18) or over to enter this premises". 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section (a) and (c) that the person is: 
(1)  A permittee or employee of the rave club; 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a person inside the rave club; or 
(3)  A governmental employee in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-612. - Hours of operation; re-entry by customer. 
(a)  No person my operate a juvenile rave club during any hours other than 4:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and from 4:00 p.m. on Friday to 12:01 a.m. on the following day, and from 1:00 p.m. Saturday to 12:01 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  No person may operate an adult rave club during any hours other than 1:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)  All customers, patrons, members, guests, invitees, and others not employed by the rave club shall vacate the premises, including the parking areas, no later than thirty (30) minutes after the designated closing time. 
(d)  When the rave club allows admission by payment of a charge or fee, any customer or patron who leaves the rave club shall be required to pay the charge or fee again whenever he or she reenters the rave club. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-613. - Security, paramedic. 
(a)  Whenever a rave club is open to the general public, the rave club business tax receipt holder shall have on the premises, at the business tax receipt holder's expense, the greater of either (i) three (3) off-duty sworn law enforcement officers, or three (3) private security officers having either a Class D or Class MS license as set forth in ch. 493, Florida Statutes, or (ii) one (1) off-duty sworn law enforcement officer, or one (1) private security officer having a license described above, per one hundred fifty (150) of the persons allowed under the maximum occupancy load for the structure in which the rave club is operated. The police chief may require a license to increase the number of off-duty law enforcement officers or licensed private security officers when a special event or limited engagements are scheduled to take place at a premises holding a business tax receipt. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to mean that the police chief must require law enforcement officers to serve in an off-duty capacity at a premises holding a business tax receipt. 
(b)  Whenever a rave club is open to the public, at a minimum, at least one (1) state licensed paramedic with radio communication directly to the 911 public safety answering point shall be present at the expense of the business tax receipt holder. Depending on the event, in the discretion of the fire chief, a state-licensed advanced life support ambulance with crew and transport capabilities may be required to be present at the expense of the business tax receipt holder. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-614. - Inspections. 
(a)  Application for, and issuance of, any rave club business tax receipt shall constitute consent by the business tax receipt holder for authorized employees of the city and authorized law enforcement officers, building inspectors and code enforcement officers to enter and inspect the premises of the rave club at any time it is open or occupied for the purpose of verifying compliance with these rave club regulations. 
(b)  No business tax receipt holder, rave club manager, or employee of the rave club shall refuse to permit a lawful inspection of a rave club by an authorized employee of the city or any authorized law enforcement officer at any time it is open or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-615. - Expiration of business tax receipt; renewal. 
(a)  A business tax receipt for a rave club shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  A business tax receipt may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 11-608. An application for renewal should be made at least forty-five (45) days before the date of expiration. When made less than forty-five (45) days before the date of expiration, the expiration date shall not be extended by virtue of the fact that a renewal application is then pending. An applicant shall be required to pay the two hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($262.50) nonrefundable fee. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-616. - Transfer of business tax receipt prohibited; use of business tax receipt at another address prohibited. 
(a)  A business tax receipt holder shall not transfer a rave club business tax receipt to another person. Any attempt by any business tax receipt holder to transfer a rave club business tax receipt to another person shall be void and shall have no legal effect. 
(b)  A business tax receipt holder shall not operate a rave club under the authority of a business tax receipt at any place other than the address designated in the approved business tax receipt application. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-617. - Violations, penalties and remedies. 
(a)  It is deemed unlawful for a business tax receipt holder or an agent or employee of a business tax receipt holder to commit any one (1) of the following acts: 
(1)  Violation of any provision of the rave club regulations; 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages on the rave club premises; 
(3)  Refusal to allow an inspection of the rave club premises; 
(4)  Knowingly permit an intoxicated person to enter or remain on the rave club premises; 
(5)  Knowingly permit the possession, consumption, or sale of an alcoholic beverage on the rave club premises including the parking lot; or 
(6)  Knowingly permit the possession, consumption or sale of any illegal drugs on the rave club premises. 
(7)  Operation of the rave club in violation of any applicable city ordinance or land development regulations. 
(b)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a rave club in violation of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Suspension or revocation of business tax receipt. 
(2)  A violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-8 of Code of Ordinances of City of Titusville, and ch. 162 of Florida Statutes. 
(3)  Each day that a violation continues after receipt of a written notice of such violation shall constitute a separate violation and a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified herein. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties described above, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin, prevent, restrain, correct or abate a violation of this article. To the extent not inconsistent with Florida law, a violation of this article shall be subject to an injunction, temporary and permanent, without the necessity of a showing of irreparable harm. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-618. - Suspension of business tax receipt. 
The administrator shall suspend a rave club business tax receipt for a period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days if he or she learns that a business tax receipt holder or an agent or employee of a business tax receipt holder has committed any one (1) or more of the acts listed in subsection 11-617(a). 
(1)  Violated any provision of the rave club regulations and/or Code of Ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Consumed alcoholic beverages on the rave club premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the rave club premises; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted an intoxicated person to enter or remain on the rave club premises; 
(5)  Knowingly permitted the possession, consumption, or sale of an alcoholic beverage on the rave club premises; or 
(6)  Knowingly permitted the possession, consumption or sale of any illegal drug on the rave club premises. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-619. - Revocation of business tax receipt. 
(a)  The administrator shall revoke a business tax receipt if a cause for suspension under section 11-618 occurs and the business tax receipt was suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months, or if the administrator learns that one (1) or more of the following is true: 
(1)  A business tax receipt holder gave false or misleading information to the administrator during the application process. 
(2)  A business tax receipt holder or an employee of the rave club knowingly permitted the rave club to be operated during a period when the rave club business tax receipt was suspended. 
(3)  A business tax receipt holder has been: 
a.  Convicted of an offense listed in subsection 11-608(a)(7)a. for which the time period required in subsection 11-608(a)(7)b. has not elapsed; 
b.  Convicted of an offense described in subsection 11-608(a)(8); or 
c.  Convicted of or is under influence for any felony offense while holding a rave club business tax receipt. 
(4)  An employee of the rave club, while on the rave club premises, committed an offense listed in subsection 11-608(a)(7)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, two (2) or more times within a twelve-month period. 
(b)  The fact that an individual is appealing a conviction shall have no effect on the revocation of the business tax receipt. 
(c)  When the administrator revokes a business tax receipt, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the business may not be issued a rave club business tax receipt for one (1) year from the date the revocation becomes final. If, subsequent to revocation, the administrator finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a business tax receipt if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became final. 
(d)  If the business tax receipt was revoked under subsection (a)(3)a. above, an applicant may not be granted another business tax receipt until the appropriate number of years required under subsection 11-608(a)(7)b. has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-620. - Appeals, judicial review; requirement of exhaustion of procedure. 
(a)  An aggrieved party may appeal any adverse decision of the administrator involving the denial, revocation or suspension of a business tax receipt to the board of adjustments and appeals. The appeal shall be filed with the administrator within ten (10) days of the written decision of the administrator. The board shall hold a hearing and uphold or deny the decision of the administrator within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. In making its decision, the board shall: 
(1)  Review the application and any background information or data available to the administrator at the time of the decision and any new information made available after the date. 
(2)  Apply the criteria for revocation, suspension or approval as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Judicial review of a denial of issuance or renewal of a business tax receipt or of a suspension or revocation of a business tax receipt shall be available only after the procedures set forth above have been exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 6, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 11-621. - Conflicting provision. 
In the case of a direct conflict between any provisions of this article any portion or provision of any other appropriate federal, state or city law, rule, code or regulation, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 11-622. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase, word or provision of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article, provided the remaining portions effectuate the purpose and intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 28-2001, 8-28-01)  
Secs. 11-623—11-649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS AND CASH ONLY PHARMACIES 
 
Sec. 11-650. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Titusville through the regulation of certain pain management clinics and cash only pharmacies (as defined below) currently in operation and to provide for regulation of any additional pain management clinics and cash only pharmacies. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-651. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant means the owner or a person or person(s) authorized by the owner to complete an application for a license to operate a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy. 
Chronic nonmalignant pain means pain unrelated to cancer, which persists beyond the usual course of the disease or injury that is the cause of the pain, for more than ninety (90) days after surgery. 
Code enforcement officer means any employee designated as a code enforcement officer pursuant to F.S. ch. 166 or § 162.21. 
Department shall mean the department designated by the city manager to administer the mandates of this article. 
Pain clinics and pain management clinics means all privately owned pain management clinics, facilities, or offices, hereinafter referred to as "clinics", which advertise in any medium for any type of pain management services or employ a physician who is primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing or dispensing controlled substance medications except as follows: 
(1)  The clinic is licensed as a facility pursuant to F.S. ch. 395; 
(2)  The majority of the physicians who provide services in the clinic primarily provide surgical services; 
(3)  The clinic is owned by a publicly held corporation whose shares are traded on a national exchange or on the over-the-counter market and whose total assets at the end of the corporation's most recent fiscal quarter exceeded fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00); 
(4)  The clinic is affiliated with an accredited medical school at which training is provided for medical students, residents or fellows; 
(5)  The clinic does not prescribe or dispense controlled substances for the treatment of pain; or 
(6)  The clinic is owned by a corporate entity exempt from federal taxation under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)3. 
(7)  Hospice. 
Registration with the Florida Department of Health, pursuant to F.S. § 458.3265 or F.S. § 459.0137 shall be prima facie evidence of operating as a pain management clinic pursuant to this definition. 
Cash only pharmacy shall mean a pharmacy that primarily dispenses medication designated as Schedules II, III, and IV by F.S. §§ 893.03, 893.035, and 893.0355, including, but not limited to, opiods, including fentanyl, hydrocodone, morphine, and oxycodone, to individuals for cash, money order only and/or is not classified as a retail pharmacy and/or is not generally open and accessible to the general public and/or does not accept medical insurance from an insurance carrier authorized to do business in the State of Florida. For purposes of this definition a pharmacy that primarily dispenses medication means more than forty (40) percent of its prescriptions or more than forty (40) percent of its revenues are medications listed as Schedules II, III and IV in F.S. §§ 893.03, 893.035 and 893.0355. 
Retail pharmacy is defined as a pharmacy that fills prescriptions for medications by a licensed physician or person or entity authorized to prescribe medications in the State of Florida. A retail pharmacy shall have at least fifty (50) percent of its floor area available or open for retail sale of merchandise. Said pharmacy shall accept cash, credit or debit cards, and medical insurance from a carrier or such other form of payment and less than forty (40) percent of its revenues are derived from medication listed as Schedules II, III and IV in F.S. §§ 893.03, 893.035 and 893.0355. 
License shall mean a certificate issued pursuant to this article by the department, on an annual basis, authorizing the operation of a specific pain management clinic location in Titusville or cash only pharmacy. Each license shall at a minimum identify on its face, the clinic's or pharmacy name and physical address, the responsible physician's or pharmacist's name, the clinic owner's name or pharmacy and address and the property owner's name or pharmacy and address. Each license shall have a unique number identification on its face. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-652. - License required. 
Beginning March 1, 2011, no pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy as defined in this article, may operate in the City of Titusville without first obtaining a license issued by the department; except that any pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy who has filed an application and paid the application fee may continue operating until the department renders a decision to either grant or deny the license and notifies the applicant of the decision. Licenses shall be granted only for new clinics or pharmacy that satisfy the requirements of this article, or were open and operational prior to July 13, 2010, and have satisfied all other requirements of this article including the payment of the applicable application and license fees. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-653. - License application process and requirements. 
(a)  Application required. Any pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy, as defined in section 11-651 above, must complete an application available from the department which shall, at a minimum, as applicable, require the applicant to provide the following: 
(1)  The registration number from the state department of health as required by F.S. § 458.3265 or 459.0137, if the clinic must be registered in accordance with state law or state pharmacy registration number. 
(2)  Proof satisfactory to the department that the applicant is or has been conducting business in the City of Titusville as a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy at the registered location for which the applicant is seeking a City of Titusville license that was issued prior to July 13, 2010, and continued in business through March 1, 2011. 
(3)  Designation of the physician who shall be responsible for complying with all requirements related to registration and operation of the clinic and the physician's DEA number. The designated physician must have a full, active and unencumbered license under F.S. ch. 456, 458 or 459 and shall practice at the clinic location for which the physician has assumed responsibility. Within ten (10) days after termination or absence of a designated physician, the clinic must notify the department of the identity of another designated physician for the clinic or forfeit the clinic's license. 
(4)  Designation of the pharmacist who shall be responsible for complying with all requirements related to registration and operation of the pharmacy and the pharmacist's DEA number. The designated pharmacist must have a full, active and unencumbered license under F.S. ch. 456 or 465 and shall practice at the location for which the pharmacist has assumed responsibility. Within ten (10) days after termination or absence of a designated pharmacist, the clinic must notify the department of the identity of another designated pharmacist for the clinic or forfeit the clinic's license. 
(5)  A list of all persons associated with the management or operation of the clinic or pharmacy, whether paid or unpaid, part-time or full-time, including all contract labor and independent contractors. This list includes, but is not limited to, all owners, operators, employees and volunteers. For persons listed, the following additional information must be provided: 
a.  The person's title; 
b.  Current home address, telephone number and date of birth; 
c.  List of all criminal convictions, whether misdemeanor or felony, that are drug related; 
d.  A copy of a current Florida driver's license or a government issued photo I.D.; and 
e.  A set of fingerprints. 
This list shall be required to be updated within ten (10) days of any new person becoming associated with the clinic or pharmacy. 
(6)  The property owner's name, address, telephone number and a copy of a Florida driver's license or a government issued photo I.D., if the property owner is different than the clinic owner or pharmacy. 
(7)  A copy of a valid business tax receipt required pursuant to F.S. ch. 205, and the Code of Ordinances issued before July 13, 2010, if applicable. 
(8)  Whether the pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy dispenses controlled substances at the pain management clinic or pharmacy site. 
(9)  A floor plan of the pain management clinic showing the location and size of the waiting area, location and size of the patient rooms and location of any type of diagnostic equipment. In addition, if any controlled substances are dispensed at the site or are stored at the site and the location and method of security for any controlled substances kept on the clinic's premises. For cash only pharmacies the same information as applicable. 
(10)  Any other information the department director deems necessary. 
(11)  A sworn notarized statement from both the designated physician or pharmacist and the clinic or pharmacy owner attesting to the veracity and accuracy of the information provided in the application. 
(12)  In the event that any information provided in the application changes, a new updated application must be filed with the department within ten (10) days of the change. 
(13)  A separate permit is required for each clinic or pharmacy location. 
(14)  Provide an affidavit by the medical director or pharmacist attesting to the fact that no employees, full-time, part-time, contract, independent or volunteers have been convicted of or who has pled guilty or nolo contendere at any time to an offense constituting a felony in this state or in any other state involving the prescribing, dispensing, supplying, selling or possession of any controlled substance prior to the adoption date of this article and that the business shall not employ any such persons thereafter. 
(15)  Provide a disclosure of interest affidavit to identify the natural persons having the ultimate ownership interest in the business. The disclosure of interest affidavit shall provide in detail as applicable all principal stockholders and percent of stock owned by each, or a list of the trust beneficiaries and the percent of interest held by each, or a list of the principals including general and limited partners. Where principal officers, stockholders, beneficiaries or partners consist of other corporations, trusts, partnerships or other similar entities, further disclosure shall be made to identify the natural persons having the ultimate ownership interests. Said disclosure shall be updated within ten (10) days of any change. 
(b)  Application fee and requirements. Each application for a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The application fee is in addition to the applicable business tax receipt fee. Any changes to the application or license fees authorized by this article may be accomplished by resolution of the city council without the need to revise this article. 
It is the applicant's sole responsibility to provide accurate contact information when submitting the application to the department. If the application for a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license is not completed, the department shall notify the designated contact person listed in the application. A completed application must be received by the department within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the deficiency notice from the department in order to avoid assessment of another application fee. Failure to timely respond within the fifteen (15) days shall result in a denial of the application as incomplete. A new application must then be submitted that is accompanied by the full nonrefundable application fee, in order to request a license. 
(c)  [Inspections required.] The department shall perform inspections(s) of the facility as necessary to determine whether or not the application submitted is accurate in all respects and to verify a physician licensed under F.S. ch. 456, 458 or 459 is on the premises during all times medications are dispensed or prescribed or a pharmacist is on duty supervising the dispensing of controlled substances. 
(d)  [License required.] Beginning March 1, 2011, no pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy may operate in the City of Titusville without a valid City of Titusville license (as defined herein). In addition, it shall be a violation of this article for the property owner where the clinic is situated to allow an unlicensed pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy to open or operate without a valid pain management or cash only pharmacy clinic license. 
(e)  [Action on application.] A completed application with no missing information shall be acted upon within twenty (20) days of receipt of the completed application. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-654. - Grounds for license denial or revocation. 
The city manager or designee shall deny or revoke a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license upon the occurrence of one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  An application contains material false information or missing information. 
(b)  The clinic or pharmacy is not registered, if required, with the state in accordance with F.S. § 458.3265 or F.S. § 459.0137 or F.S. ch. 465, or other applicable law or has had its registration suspended or revoked by the state. 
(c)  A copy of a valid business tax receipt issued prior to July 13, 2010, is not submitted with the application for each clinic location existing prior to July 13, 2010. 
(d)  The clinic was not open and fully operational immediately prior to July 13, 2010; or has not received approval for a new clinic or pharmacy pursuant to this article and chapter 59 of the land development regulations. 
(e)  Failure to allow for inspection of the clinic or pharmacy at any time by a code enforcement officer, law enforcement officer, or any other person authorized to enforce ordinance violations in the City of Titusville at any time the clinic is open or occupied. 
(f)  Failure to abide by any provision of this article. 
(g)  Allowing any person to work or volunteer at the clinic or pharmacy, whether paid or unpaid, who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to (even if sealed or expunged) an offense that constitutes a felony for receipt of illicit and diverted drugs, including any controlled substance listed in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V of F.S. § 893.03 or any other state or the United States. 
(h)  The facility is owned by or has any contractual or employment relationship with a physician or pharmacist: 
(1)  Whose drug enforcement administration number has ever been revoked; 
(2)  Whose application for a license to prescribe, dispense or administer a controlled substance has been denied or revoked by any jurisdiction; 
(3)  Who has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to (even if sealed or expunged) an offense that constitutes a felony for receipt of illicit and/or diverted drugs, including any controlled substance listed in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V of F.S. § 893.03 or any other state or the United States; 
(4)  Whose license has been suspended or revoked or has had other action taken as a result of physician's personal abuse of drugs or alcohol. 
The city manager or designee may grant an exception to subsections (g) and (h) above, if more than ten (10) years have elapsed since the adjudication date. 
(i)  The fact that an appeal is pending for any items listed in (g) and (h) above has no effect on the city manager or designee's obligation to deny or revoke a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license. 
(j)  If the payment for the application fee or license fee is invalid or uncollectible for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-655. - Additional license compliance requirements. 
(1)  A valid City of Titusville pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license issued pursuant to this article must be prominently displayed in a common public area of the pain management clinic no later than March 1, 2011. 
(2)  In the event any information contained in the license application changes, a new updated application must be filed with the department within ten (10) days of the change. Failure to do so will result in license revocation and penalty as provided for in section 11-654 above. 
(3)  A pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license is nontransferable and cannot be assigned. Whenever ownership or management of a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy changes, a new application must be filed for a new license and all applicable fees paid. 
(4)  A valid business tax receipt must be maintained by the pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy. 
(5)  The designated physician shall secure all prescription pads so that only authorized persons may access them. Beginning on March 1, 2011, every written prescription must include the clinic's name, address and City of Titusville's license number. 
(6)  The hours of operation of the pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
(7)  No pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy shall be wholly or partially owned by, or have any contractual relationship (whether as a principal, partner, officer, member managing member, employee, independent contractor, or otherwise) with, any physician, pharmacist, or any other person who prescribes drugs and who, within five (5) years prior to the receipt of any application for a business tax receipt: 
(i)  Has been suspended, had his or her license revoked, or been subject to disciplinary action for prescribing, dispensing, administering, providing, supplying or selling any controlled substance in violation of any state, federal or similar law where such person is licensed to practice; 
(ii)  Has been convicted or, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, a violation of any state, federal, or similar law where such person is licensed to practice related to drugs or alcohol, specifically including, but not limited to, prescribing, dispensing, administering, providing, supplying, or selling any controlled substance; 
(iii)  Has been suspended, had his or her license revoked or been subject to disciplinary action by any state, federal or other governmental entity where such person is licensed to practice; 
(iv)  Has had any state, federal or other governmental entity where such person is licensed to practice take any action against such person's license as a result of dependency on drugs or alcohol; or 
(v)  Has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, any felony or crime involving moral turpitude. 
(8)  No pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy shall be wholly or partially owned by or have as a principal, partner, officer, member, managing member or otherwise where the owner is an entity, any person who: 
(i)  Has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, a violation of any state, federal or similar law where related to drugs or alcohol; or 
(ii)  Has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, any felony or crime involving moral turpitude. 
(9)  No pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy shall have employees full-time, part-time, contract, independent or volunteers or any person who has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, any felony or crime involving moral turpitude within any five-year period before any application for a certificate of occupancy or business tax receipt. Any application for a certificate of occupancy or business tax receipt shall include an affidavit, under oath, by the medical director, attesting that neither the medical director nor any other person employed in any capacity by the pain management clinic, whether an employee, independent contractor or otherwise: 
(i)  Has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, a violation of any state, federal or similar law related to drugs or alcohol, specifically including, but not limited to, prescribing, dispensing, administering, providing, supplying or selling any controlled substance; or 
(ii)  Has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, any felony or crime involving moral turpitude. 
The failure to provide the required affidavit shall result in the automatic revocation of the pain management clinic's right to operate in the city. 
(10)  A pain management clinic shall be operated by a medical director who is a Florida-licensed physician, board certified in pain medicine. A cash only pharmacy shall be operated by Florida-licensed pharmacists. 
(11)  In order to obtain a certificate of occupancy or business tax receipt, a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy shall provide with its application: 
(i)  An inventory of diagnostic equipment to be located at the clinic; 
(ii)  A natural disaster management plan; and 
(iii)  A floor plan showing the location and nature of adequate security measures, including those required by the State of Florida for controlled substances, to safeguard all drugs to be dispensed in the course of its business. 
(12)  If the registration of a pain management clinic is revoked or suspended by the Florida Department of Health, the pain management clinic permit shall be revoked automatically and shall not be subject to provisions of subsection (j) [(10)] of this section. 
(13)  The pain management clinic shall be fully owned by a physician or a group of physicians each of whom are Florida-licensed physicians in good standing; or must be licensed clinic under part X of F.S. ch. 400, as amended from time to time. 
(14)  The pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy is prohibited from having any outdoor seating areas, queues or customer waiting areas. All activities of the pain management clinic and pharmacy, including sale, display, preparation and storage, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. 
The pain management clinic is prohibited from having an on-site prescription drug dispensary for controlled substances listed in Schedule II of F.S. § 893.03. 
Within thirty (30) days of the removal of a pain management clinic from a building, site or parcel of land for any reason, the property owner shall be responsible for removing all signs, symbols, or vehicles identifying the premises as a pain management clinic. 
(15)  The pain management clinic shall be in compliance with all federal, state, county and municipal laws and ordinances, as amended from time to time. 
(16)  There shall be a one-half-mile separation between each pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy as defined by this section regardless of the municipal boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-656. - Review of license denial or revocation. 
The city manager or designee shall provide written notice of the denial of any new or renewed application specifying in writing the grounds therefore. The owner of the clinic or pharmacy whose application has been denied (except for an incomplete application) or revoked may request a review before the city council in writing. The request must be received by the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the notice. The decision of the city council shall be final. Any clinic or pharmacy that has a license denied or nonrenewed (except for an incomplete license), may not reapply for a period of six (6) months. 
Any license that has been denied or revoked may not be reissued to any of the owner(s) or the physicians(s) listed on the application regardless of the clinic's name for five (5) years except, that when the denial is solely based on an incomplete application, there is no prohibition against reapplying. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-657. - License renewals. 
Licenses required for pain management clinics or cash only pharmacies shall be valid for only one (1) year. At least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the license, a renewal application must be submitted along with a nonrefundable renewal application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Provided the pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy named in the renewal application and all information on the application are in compliance with this article, and other applicable city codes, a renewal license shall be issued by the department. Renewal licenses shall only be issued to businesses that were previously licensed and who timely file a renewal application. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-658. - Violation and inspections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article or to operate a pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy without a valid city issued pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license. Any code enforcement officer, law enforcement officer, or any other persons authorized to enforce city ordinances, may enter the clinic or pharmacy premises and conduct an inspection to determine compliance with this article at any time someone is present on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-659. - Service of notice; public records. 
(1)  Any notice required by this article shall be in writing and sent by certified mail or hand delivery to the mailing address set forth on the application for the pain management clinic or cash only pharmacy license, except that notices for code violations shall be provided in the manner prescribed by the City of Titusville Ordinance section 31-68. The mailing address set forth in the application shall be considered the correct mailing address. 
(2)  Any information contained in an application under this article is subject to the public records law, F.S. ch. 119, unless specifically exempted by law. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-660. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The city's code enforcement officers, law enforcement or any other person authorized to enforce city ordinances may enforce the provisions of this article. Any enforcement action or legal remedy available under controlling state law, including, but not limited to, prosecution as a misdemeanor with a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days or by both fine and imprisonment, may be imposed as a penalty. When enforced by a code enforcement officer, the enforcement provisions and procedures contained in the Code of Ordinances, as may be amended, are incorporated herein by reference and will apply. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action in law and equity as may be necessary to remedy any violation of, or refusal to comply with, any part of this article, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Pursuit of injunctive and/or declaratory relief in a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Initiating any action to recover any and all damages that may result from a violation of or refusal to comply with any part of this article; or 
(3)  Utilizing any other action or enforcement method allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-661. - Allocation of fees and fines. 
Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used exclusively to pay for the city's administrative costs including, but not limited to, the application process, inspections and enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-662. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not be construed to render the remaining provisions of this article invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 4-2011, § 2, 2-8-11)  
Secs. 11-663—11-674. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - REGULATION OF ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-675. - Legislative authorization. 
This article is enacted in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the City of Titusville, Florida, pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2, Florida Constitution and F.S. ch. 166, and the Charter of the City of Titusville, Florida. It is established to regulate the use of electronic gaming devices used to promote retail sales and effect giveaways through drawings by chance, sweepstakes or game promotions that do not otherwise violate Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-676. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter 11, article XV: 
(a)  Applicant means the operator for whom a permit application is submitted to the City of Titusville and in the name of whom, if the permit is granted, the drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, or game promotion shall be conducted. 
(b)  City manager shall mean the City of Titusville Manager or his or her designee. 
(c)  Conviction means a determination of guilt in a criminal case by a court of competent jurisdiction, regardless of whether the defendant pled guilty, no contest, or nolo contendere, or was found guilty by a judge or jury. 
(d)  Electronic gaming establishment means a business operation whether a principal use or accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines or devices, including, but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance and/or a game promotion pursuant to F.S. § 849.094, including sweepstakes, and where cash, prizes, merchandise or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such redeemed or distributed items are determined by the electronic games played or by predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes cafes, cybercafes or sweepstakes cafes. 
(1)  Computer simulation includes simulation by means of a computer, computer system, video display, video system or any other form of electronic video presentation. 
(2)  Device means any mechanical or electrical contrivance, computer, terminal, video or other equipment that may or may not be capable of downloading games from a central server system, machine, computer or other device or equipment. The term "device" also includes any associated equipment necessary to conduct the operation of the device. 
(3)  Game includes slot machines, poker, bingo, craps, keno, any other type of game ordinarily played in a casino, a game involving the display of the results of a raffle, sweepstakes, drawing, contest or other promotion, lotto, sweepstakes, and any other game associated with gambling or which could be associated with gambling, but the term "game" does not necessarily imply gambling as that term may be defined elsewhere. 
(4)  Gaming in the term "electronic gaming device" is for convenience of reference only. The term "electronic gaming device" as used in this article is defined exclusively by this subsection and does not incorporate or imply any other legal definition or requirement applicable to gambling that may be found elsewhere. 
(5)  Object means a coin, bill, ticket, token, card or similar object, obtained as a bonus or supplement to another transaction involving the payment of consideration. 
(6)  Payoff means cash, monetary or other credit, tickets, tokens, or electronic credits to be exchanged for cash or to receive merchandise or anything of value whatsoever, whether made automatically from the machine or manually. 
(7)  Play or operate or play or operation includes the use of skill, the application of the element of chance, or both. 
(8)  Upon connection with means insertion, swiping, passing in range, manually inserting pin numbers or codes or any other technical means of physically or electromagnetically connecting an object to a device. 
(e)  Minor means any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(f)  Operator means any person or entity in whose name a drawing by chance is conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, or game promotion that utilizes electronic equipment and has filed with the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(g)  Permit holder means the operator in whose name the city manager or designee has issued a permit under this article. 
(h)  Person means an individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any other type of organization, whether conducted for profit or not for profit, or a director, executive, officer or manager of an association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other organization. 
(i)  Rules means the restrictions and covenants governing the operation of the drawing by chance, sweepstakes, or game promotion. 
(j)  Security personnel includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, or a police officer or other person authorized by law who holds a Class "G" license issued by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and who is hired to provide security for the electronic gaming establishment pursuant to a security plan of the applicant or such other person designated by the operator to provide security for the establishment. 
(k)  Senior citizen's center means any public or private center, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide recreational or social services for persons who are fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(l)  Slot machine has the same meaning as specified in F.S. § 551.102, or as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-677. - Area of enforcement. 
The council is acting herein as the governing body for the City of Titusville, Florida, and this part shall be effective within the boundaries of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-678. - General prohibition. 
Except as expressly regulated and permitted by this article, no person or entity shall conduct a drawing by chance pursuant to F.S. § 849.0935, sweepstakes, or game promotion pursuant to F.S. § 849.094, or any other game of chance utilizing any electronic gaming device provided by an operator of the game of chance which displays the results by simulating a game or games ordinarily played on a slot machine. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-679. - Permitting and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall conduct or operate any retail facility that utilizes an electronic gaming device in the City of Titusville without having first obtained a permit from the city manager or his designee for each establishment. Each permit is valid only for the operator and the establishment named in the permit. Each permit is valid for one (1) year. 
(b)  Initial permits. Within sixty (60) days of enactment of this article, all current operators who have been operating a facility that utilizes an electronic gaming device and has a business tax receipt on or before November 8, 2011, and which are subject to this article, and which apply for, and pay required fees for a permit, shall be granted a permit for the facility as provided for in this section. Each such operator shall, in addition to the requirements set forth herein as part of the application, provide proof satisfactory to the city manager or designee that the operator was lawfully operating an electronic gaming establishment, that was utilizing an electronic gaming device as of November 8, 2011, which such evidence may include a current and valid lease, rental agreement, purchase and sale contract, bill of sale or receipt indicating the purchase, lease or use of electronic gaming devices for that particular facility, or other certificates, permits, licenses, receipts or filings issued by the federal, state or local government indicating proof of the uses contemplated by this article. 
(c)  Permits limited. Unless greater than five (5) permits have been issued as provided for in subsection (b) above, the city manager shall limit the total number of permits issued pursuant to this section to five (5). After the permits authorized by subsection (b) are issued, no permits for new businesses shall be issued unless the issuance of the permit will not cause the total number of permits issued to exceed five (5) permits. All qualifying operators who receive an initial permit as provided for in subsection (b) shall be entitled to renew their permit if they otherwise qualify and pay required fees. 
(d)  Application materials required for permit. 
(1)  Applicant shall file with the city manager the following materials: 
(i)  Articles of incorporation/sole proprietorship documents; tax ID number; 
(ii)  License or permits from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; 
(iii)  A copy of the certification report issued by an independent testing laboratory verifying that the computer software that is used by the operator to conduct a drawing by chance or game promotion confirmed to be finite and not RNG (random number generated) or not a slot machine as defined by Florida law. The certification report must be provided to the city manager or designee from the testing lab; 
(iv)  A copy of applicant's proposed rules governing the drawing by chance, sweepstakes or game promotion which includes the odds of winning and the prize table and rules showing that no purchase is required to enter sweepstakes; 
(v)  Probability chart; 
(vi)  Lease; 
(vii)  A complete list of all products and services offered and the prices charged therefor; 
(viii)  Proposed security plan designed to protect employees, patrons and the general public; 
(ix)  For a sweepstakes or game promotion operating pursuant to F.S. § 849.094, a copy of applicant's certification of a bond or trust account provided to the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, regardless of aggregate prize amount; nonprofit organizations operating pursuant to F.S. § 849.0935, are exempt from this provision. 
(x)  For every principal, officer, and director of the operator, a fingerprint card and a letter certifying the results of a criminal background check generated by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement or other authorized law enforcement agency. 
(2)  Applicant shall provide a sworn affidavit containing the following: 
(i)  The identity of the applicant and if the applicant is: 
A.  An individual, his name, residence address, and date of birth; 
B.  An unincorporated organization, the names, dates of birth, and residence addresses of its principals; or 
C.  For a corporation, the corporate name, state of incorporation and the names, dates of birth, and residence addresses of its principal officers, directors, and shareholders and copy of incorporation documents and a certificate from the Department of State that the corporation is in good standing; or 
D.  A limited liability company, the company name, state of incorporation and the names, dates of birth, and residence addresses of its members and managers and copy of incorporation documents and a certificate from the Department of State that the corporation is in good standing; 
(ii)  A description, including the number of electronic gaming devices; 
(iii)  A statement of whether any of the individuals listed has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any capital crime, first degree felonies under the laws of Florida, the United States, or any other state, and, if so, the particular criminal act involved and the place of conviction or felonies involving illegal gambling or gaming operations, felonies involving rape, molestation and crime involving moral turpitude; 
(iv)  The street address of the electronic gaming devices; 
(v)  If the applicant is a branch, chapter, lodge, or other local unit of a charitable organization or corporation, the name of the primary organization and the street address of its principal office; and 
(vi)  The name and address of an individual in the City of Titusville or outside the city who is authorized to receive notices from the city or owner; and 
(vii)  A statement certifying that all information on the application and any attachments thereto is true and that the applicant understands that any misstatement of material fact in the application will result in the denial of the permit or, if it has been issued, in the suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(e)  Initial application fee. Each applicant shall remit a nonrefundable application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for permits of twenty (20) devices or more and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for less than twenty (20) devices as a nonrefundable application fee. 
(f)  Review of application. 
(1)  Duration of review. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of an applicant's completed permit application, the city manager or a designee shall grant or deny the application. If any principal, officer, shareholder or director of the operator has a pending criminal case for an enumerated crime the city manager may delay its grant or denial of the permit until sixty (60) days after the final judgment or determination. 
(2)  Eligibility of applicant. An applicant may be denied for a permit if: 
(i)  Within five (5) years of the date of the application, applicant has been convicted of any crime enumerated in subsection 11-679(d)(2)(iii) or under the laws of Florida, the United States, or any other state unless said violation would not constitute a crime in Florida; 
(ii)  Within three (3) years of the date of the application, has had a permit under this article revoked or been convicted for a violation of this article; 
(iii)  The application does not comply with F.S. ch. 849.094, and rules of the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; 
(iv)  The application materials are incomplete or contain a misstatement of a material fact. 
The city manager shall deny the permit for any of the above reasons. If an applicant satisfies all permit filing requirements and is not ineligible, the city manager shall approve the application. 
(g)  Denial of permit. An applicant whose permit application is denied may reapply at any time by completing all steps of the application procedure, including payment of a new application fee. An applicant whose permit was denied may, within twenty-one (21) days after receipt of denial, appeal said denial to the city council. The decision to deny a permit shall be considered nonfinal agency action subject to appellate review by the city council ("council"). The decision of the council shall constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Any appeal of the city manager's denial decision shall be made within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of a notice of denial by filing a written notice of appeal with council along with the requisite appeal fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Failure to file written notice of appeal and appeal fee within the prescribed time period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(h)  Permit fees. The permit fee for electronic gaming devices shall be in accordance with the following schedule: An annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per electronic gaming device. 
(i)  Duration of permit. A permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(j)  Renewal of existing permit. Existing permits shall be renewed upon compliance with this article, notwithstanding the total number of permits issued. The permit holder shall apply for the renewal permit no later than sixty (60) days and no sooner than one hundred twenty (120) days before the expiration of the current permit. The renewal permit application shall include all the materials and the application fee required for the issuance of an original permit, and shall include evidence of current lawfully existing operations consistent with the requirements of this article. Renewal permit applications shall be processed using the same procedure and standards as required for review of an original permit application but shall be processed within thirty (30) days. Upon approval, renewal permit applicants shall pay the same fees as set forth in subsection (h) above and said renewals shall be deemed denied if an eligible applicant fails to pay these fees on or before the thirtieth day after approval, availability, and notice of the permit authorization. 
(k)  Lost or destroyed permit. The fee for a replacement permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(l)  Revocation of permit. The city manager or a designee may revoke a permit for violation of any provision of this article or due to a permit holder's cessation of the use of electronic gaming devices during its normal business hours for at least thirty (30) consecutive days. In the event the cessation of use is caused by a fire, windstorm, hurricane or other similar catastrophe, a permit holder may request additional time to resume normal operations and may submit such a request to the city manager for his review. Prior to revocation, the city manager shall provide to the permit holder, through their individual in the City of Titusville authorized to accept notices from the city, the following: 
(1)  A written notice of intent to revoke the permit, 
(2)  A fourteen-calendar-day opportunity to cure the alleged violation, and 
(3)  An opportunity to be heard prior to revocation. 
Revocation shall not take place before twenty-one (21) days after receipt of a notice of revocation is delivered to the permit holder and opportunities to cure and to be heard are provided. The decision to revoke a permit shall be considered nonfinal agency action subject to appellate review by the city council ("council"). The decision of the council shall constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Any appeal of the city manager's revocation decision shall be made within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of a notice of revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the council, along with the requisite appeal fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Failure to file written notice of appeal and appeal fee within the prescribed time period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(m)  Restrictions on transfer of permits. Upon submission of a transfer application by the proposed transferee to the city manager or his designee, there shall be a transfer fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The transfer application shall include the information required in the original application for permit. The transfer shall demonstrate compliance with this article and applicable state and federal law. Within thirty (30) days the permit will be either approved or denied. If denied, applicant may appeal the decision under the same procedure and fee, as set forth above, in the revocation of permit procedure. Any change in majority or controlling interest in any permit holder shall be deemed a transfer of a permit. Any transfer to another transferee who is presently the owner or has a majority or controlling interest in any two (2) or more existing facilities (electronic gaming establishments) within the city shall require the review and approval of the city council. The city council shall review a request for transfer in those situations to ensure that a monopoly is not created within the city limits of the City of Titusville by one (1) owner or owners controlling a majority interest in other permitted facilities. The city council upon review of said request may impose restrictions or limitations so as to ensure that a monopoly is not created within the city limits for the protection of the citizens of the city. This review shall apply when an existing owner or operator owns or controls a majority interest in separate corporations, limited liability corporations, joint ventures or other forms of ownership and the applicant shall furnish such information as required by the city which reflects the ownership status of the transferee. Controlling ownership includes husband/wife, family members or relatives. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-680. - Inspections. 
By the application for granting of this permit, during business hours, the city manager, the City of Titusville Police Department, or their agents may enter the facility without any warrant for purposes of inspecting all areas of the facility, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article or any other ordinances within their authority, including, but not limited to, the right to enter the facility and to select and remove any electronic gaming device to inspect, test and/or have tested to determine compliance with this article and return if found in compliance within five (5) days. The right to remove any electronic gaming device will be limited to those necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-681. - Signage requirements. 
(a)  Exterior of facility. Exterior signage shall be limited to the advertisement of the consumer product and/or service sold at the facility. No signs shall be posted on the exterior of any electronic gaming establishment that suggest gambling takes place or display any image commonly associated with slot machines or gambling. All signage shall be further subject to all applicable City of Titusville code regulations regarding signs. Any sign for which a city permit has been previously granted which contain images commonly associated with slot machines or gambling may be maintained for up to five (5) years from the date of this article. 
(b)  Interior of facility. The permit holder shall conspicuously post the name of the permit holder, a description of all products and services sold, and the complete rules for all sweepstakes or game promotions. Rules for all promotions shall include the following language in at least 26-point font: 
"State and local law prohibits this establishment from requiring an entry fee, payment, or proof of purchase as a condition of participating. No purchase donation or contribution is required. You may obtain free entries upon request from an employee on the premises." 
The permit holder shall conspicuously also post a sign which shall include the following language in at least 26-point type: 
"The video displays are for amusement and entertainment only. The video displays do not determine the result of your sweepstakes entries." 
The permit holder shall affix signage that shall include the following language in at least 10-point type on each electronic gaming device: 
"The video displays are for amusement and entertainment only. The video displays do not determine the result of your sweepstakes entries." 
A complete copy of the rules, prize tables, and odds of winning shall be made available on request without cost. Any consumer product or service offered for sale shall be identified by description and price by conspicuous posting. A copy of the permit shall be posted conspicuously at the main counter or at the entrance. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-682. - Limitations on operation of business. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages. Permit holders shall not sell or permit any individual to consume or possess any alcoholic beverages within any electronic gaming establishment. 
(b)  Minors. Minors are prohibited from entering any electronic gaming establishment. It is the responsibility of the owner and employees of the facility to ensure no minors are present within the facility. A person's ignorance of minor's age, a minor's misrepresentation of his or her age, [or] a bona fide belief of minor's age may not be raised as a defense for violation of this section. 
(c)  Limitation on electronic gaming devices. Permit holders shall not operate more than fifty (50) electronic gaming devices. 
(d)  Hours of operation. No electronic gaming establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. each weekday which is Sunday night until Thursday night and 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. each weekend which is Friday until Sunday night. 
(e)  Additional restrictions. No electronic gaming establishment shall: 
(1)  Design, engage in, promote, or conduct a game wherein the winner may be predetermined or the game may be manipulated or rigged; 
(2)  Arbitrarily remove, disqualify, disallow or reject any entry; 
(3)  Fail to award any prize offered; 
(4)  Print, publish, or circulate literature or advertising material which is false, deceptive or misleading; 
(5)  Require an entry fee, payment or proof of purchase as a condition of entering. 
(f)  Additional requirements. An operator of an electronic gaming establishment shall: 
(1)  Furnish upon request a list of the names and addresses of all persons who have won prizes which have a value of more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the value of such prizes, and the dates when the prizes were won and keep the list at the facility for one (1) year; 
(2)  Maintain a trust account or bond in an amount equal to the total announced value of the prizes offered or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), whichever is less, or a copy of the trust account or bond furnished to the State of Florida. 
(3)  Display at the point of sale contact information related to gambling addiction treatment. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-683. - Safety and security requirements. 
The permit holder shall maintain the following security devices and standards: 
(a)  Video surveillance. All such electronic gaming establishments shall install a video surveillance system capable of recording and retrieving an identifiable image for both the entrance for the cashier area of the electronic gaming establishment as well as the interior of the electronic gaming establishment. The video surveillance system shall be maintained and kept in working order at all times. The video surveillance system recordings, whether by film or digital, shall be kept for a period no less than seven (7) days and shall be open and accessible to representatives of the City of Titusville, including the City of Titusville Police Department, at all times upon reasonable notice; 
(b)  A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts; 
(c)  At all public entrances to the facility, a conspicuous notice stating cash register contains a limited amount of cash; 
(d)  A cash management policy limiting cash on hand; 
(e)  A silent alarm system capable of notifying law enforcement; 
(f)  Monday through Friday during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to close and during the entire business day on Saturday and Sunday, maintain at least one (1) licensed, armed security guard holding a Class "G" license issued by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services or such other security system as selected by the operator pursuant to the security plan; and 
(g)  Permit holder must maintain reasonable safety standards, including, but not limited to, lighted parking areas or provision through lease agreements for security lighting. 
(h)  May not cover facility windows with opaque or reflective window tinting, posters, flyers, or anything else that obstructs the exterior view into the interior of the facility except when necessary to block sun glare for the viewing of computer screen. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-684. - Addiction information. 
All electronic gaming establishments shall be required to have displayed in a conspicuous location near the cashier, flyers, pamphlets or leaflets that contain a current list of the names, addresses, and phone numbers of local Gambling Anonymous facilities and treatment centers. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-685. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not prohibit an individual's personal, recreational, and noncommercial ownership, possession, play, operation or use of a device which could be construed to be an electronic gaming device. 
(b)  This article does not prohibit the ownership, possession, play, operation or use of any device expressly permitted by the Florida Statutes and not otherwise prohibited by the Florida Constitution, except that devices permitted by Article X, Section 23 of the Florida Constitution and F.S. ch. 551. 
(c)  This article does not prohibit a religious or charitable organization from conducting a fund-raising activity involving gaming, provided the religious or charitable organization does not conduct the activity more than twice in one (1) calendar year, the organization provides advance written notice to the City of Titusville Police Department of the date, time, place, and nature of such activity and who will be conducting it, and the activity is not otherwise unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-686. - Conflict with state law. 
Nothing in this article is intended to conflict with the provisions of the Florida Constitution or F.S. ch. 849, concerning gambling. In the event of a direct and express conflict between this article and either the Florida Constitution or F.S. ch. 849, then the provisions of the Florida Constitution or F.S. ch. 849, as applicable, control. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 11-687. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this article and shall be punishable as such and/or said violation may be processed as a code violation pursuant to [F.S.] ch. 162 and the Municipal Code Enforcement Board. 
(b)  The City of Titusville City Attorney's Office is authorized to pursue temporary or permanent injunctive relief or any other legal or equitable remedy authorized by law in courts of competent jurisdiction to cure, remove or end any activity which violates this article. 
(c)  Permittees shall have a private right of action to pursue all legal and equitable remedies necessary to ensure full compliance with this article against any other permittee, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 17-2012, § 1, 5-8-12)  
Chapter 12 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police, § 2-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - State misdemeanors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the city, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. The misdemeanors and infractions contained in the Florida Statutes are hereby readopted as offenses against the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by the penalty as is therefor provided by the laws of the state, but in no case shall such penalty exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or an imprisonment for more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1963, § 15-23) 
Case Law reference— Adoption of state law relating to misdemeanors by city upheld, see McFarland v. Roberts , 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); also Orr v. Quigg , 135 Fla. 653, 185 So.726 and Wright v. Worth , 83 Fla. 204, 91 So.87; adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference includes laws both in existence at the time and those latter adopted by the state legislature, see State v. Smith , 189 So.2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). Follows rule in Hect v. Shaw , 112 Fla. 762, 151 So.333(1933). "… when the adopting statute makes no reference to any particular statute or part of statute by its title or otherwise, but refers to the law generally which governs a particular subject, the reference in such a case includes not only the law in force at the date of the adopting act, but also all subsequent laws on the particular subject referred to …" 
(1) 
A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead , 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975); 
(2) 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id ; 
(3) 
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id . 
State Law reference— State law misdemeanors, see Fla. Stats. general index under heading for listing of state law misdemeanors and infractions; penalty for misdemeanors, §§ 775.082, 775.083; distribution of fines, etc., F.S. § 34.191.  
Secs. 12-2—12-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 21-2011, adopted Sept. 13, 2011, repealed §§ 12-2—12-6 in their entirety. Former §§ 12-2—12-6 pertained to firearms and derived from the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 27-2000, adopted July 11, 2000; and Ord. No. 28-2002, adopted June 11, 2002.  
Sec. 12-7. - Fishing—Municipal pier. 
No person shall fish or attempt to fish, or catch any fish, within one hundred (100) feet of the Titusville Pier, sometimes known as Municipal Fishing Pier, being a portion of the old bridge with any gig, spear, snatch-hook, gill net, seine or any other net. 
(Code 1963, § 15-10)  
Sec. 12-8. - Same—Sand Point and yacht basin. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set any gill net, trammel net or seine within the bulkhead line on Sand Point, that is to say, westerly of such bulkhead. It shall be unlawful for any person to set any gill net, trammel net or seine within two hundred (200) feet of the entrance to the yacht basin on Sand Point in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to set any gill net, trammel net or seine within the yacht basin located on Sand Point in the city. 
(Code 1963, § 15-11)  
Sec. 12-9. - Obstructing street. 
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer, commission merchant or other merchant to obstruct any public street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling, vending, showing or disposing of their wares and merchandise, or of delivering the same, nor shall any assembly of persons as bidders, be assembled for the purpose of bidding for the same, so as to obstruct free passage on the sidewalks or streets in the city. 
(Code 1963, § 15-19) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of streets, F.S. § 316.2045.  
Sec. 12-10. - Obstructing street crossings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction of any kind whatever in or across any of the street crossings within the limits of the city, so as to block or obstruct in any way, such street crossings or crossing for a longer or greater period of time than five (5) minutes at any one (1) time so that it will prevent the free passing of persons, vehicles or teams over, on and across such crossing or crossings. 
(Code 1963, § 15-20) 
State Law reference— Obstructing streets, F.S. § 316.2045.  
Sec. 12-11. - Obstructing waterways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dam, obstruct or in any way place anything in any natural drain, waterway or ditch running through and within the corporate limits of the city, which will in any way obstruct the water from flowing freely through such natural drain, waterway or ditch. 
(Code 1963, § 15-21) 
State Law reference— Obstructing waterways, F.S. § 327.44.  
Sec. 12-12. - Peeping Toms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the private property of another in the nighttime and spy or look into the doors or windows of any building located on such private property and used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1963, § 15-22)  
Sec. 12-13. - Restrictions on parking recreational vehicles and other vehicles on public lands at certain times. 
No person shall park or leave unattended a motor home, truck camper, recreational vehicle or motor vehicle parked in designated areas which are on file in the city clerk's office for more than twenty-four (24) hours before a space shuttle launch and ending twelve (12) hours after the launch or during the period beginning twenty-four (24) hours before a space shuttle landing and ending twelve (12) hours after the landing, unless otherwise authorized. Any person parking a motor home, truck camper, recreational vehicle or motor vehicle within the areas designated for a period of time longer than authorized above, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 15-39) 
Cross reference— Streets, § 17-31 et seq.; stopping, standing, parking, § 20-51 et seq.; parking, § 52.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 12-14. - Noise abatement equipment modifications. 
(a)  No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or any other noise-abatement device of a motor vehicle in such a manner that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is above that emitted by the vehicle as originally manufactured. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the city with an exhaust system or noise-abatement device so modified. 
(Code 1963, § 15-29)  
Sec. 12-15. - Admission of minors to adult bookstores, etc.; sale of material. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or employee of any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motel or hotel or adult dancing establishment as defined in section 11-82 to admit or allow to enter upon the premises any person under the age of seventeen (17) years. 
(b)  The owner, operator, or employee of any adult bookstore, adult movie theater or adult hotel or motel or adult dancing establishment shall be held responsible for the enforcement of the foregoing provisions for admission of persons under the age of seventeen (17) years. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 15-31(a), (b)) 
Cross reference— Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels and hotels and other establishments, § 11-81 et seq.  
Sec. 12-16. - Display of pornographic materials in establishments where juveniles permitted. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Juvenile shall mean any person under the age of seventeen (17) years. 
(2)  Nudity shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(3)  Sexual conduct shall mean acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast. 
(4)  Sexual excitement shall mean the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(5)  Sadomasochistic abuse shall mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask, or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
(6)  Harmful to juveniles shall mean that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
a.  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles, 
b.  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles, and 
c.  Is utterly without redeeming social importance for juveniles. 
(7)  Knowingly shall mean having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both: 
a.  The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and 
b.  The age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonably bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
(b)  Penalty. A person convicted under this section shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-15. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to place in plain view in any establishment giving unrestricted access to juveniles so as to likely to come within the view of such juveniles: 
(1)  Any picture, videocassette tape or cover, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of a human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles. 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection (c)(1) above, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(d)  Notice. Any establishment giving unrestricted access to juveniles where materials are displayed or available to the public, as referred to in subsection (c) above, shall be required to have such materials out of the plain view of juveniles by: 
(1)  Having a separate area for adult patrons to review such materials. In video stores or stores having a separate area, patrons shall not be allowed to view films. Such separate area shall be shielded and divided from the other areas of the establishment with a visual barrier and clearly marked with a sign saying: 
NOTICE 
THIS ESTABLISHMENT OFFERS MATERIAL OR ENTERTAINMENT HAVING SEXUAL CONTENT. SUCH MATERIALS OR ENTERTAINMENT ARE FOR ADULTS ONLY. IF THIS OR NUDITY WOULD OFFEND YOU, DO NOT ENTER. 
(2)  Having such materials only accessible from the owner or operator of the establishment and available only upon request of the adult patron. 
(e)  Legislative intent. It is the intention of the city council that this section shall apply to all persons within the city and shall specifically be deemed to be an adoption of an endorsement of the laws of the state pertaining to this subject, but specifically making it unlawful as stated herein to allow the display of obscene materials in an area where unrestricted access is given to juveniles. 
(Code 1963, § 15-32) 
Cross reference— Adult bookstores and other adult establishments, § 11-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 12-17. - Public display of periodicals, books, etc., with lewd covers prohibited. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Description or depictions of illicit sex or sexual immorality shall mean: 
a.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
c.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
(2)  Nude or partially denuded figures shall mean: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1.  Human genitals; 
2.  Pubic region; 
3.  Buttock; and 
4.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(3)  Knowingly shall mean having knowledge of the character and content of the publication, or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose the content and character of same. 
(b)  Every person who shall willfully or knowingly display to open public view from the streets, sidewalks, or public areas, any still picture or photograph, or any book, pocket book, pamphlet, motion or movie picture, or magazine, the cover of which exploits, is devoted to or is principally made up of descriptions or depictions of illicit sex or sexual immorality or which is lewd, lascivious or indecent, or which consists of pictures of nude or partially denuded figures posed or presented in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or to exploit sex, lust or perversion for commercial gain or any article or instrument of indecent or immoral use shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 15-33) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 12-18. - Sale or exhibition to minors of indecent publications, pictures, or articles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Harmful to juveniles shall mean that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles, 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles, and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social importance for juveniles. 
Juvenile shall mean any person under the age of seventeen (17) years. 
Knowingly shall mean having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both: 
(1)  The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and 
(2)  The age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonably bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
Nudity shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
Sadomasochistic abuse shall mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
Sexual conduct shall mean acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast. 
Sexual excitement shall mean the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, lend, give away, show, or distribute to a juvenile any of the following: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles. 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection (b)(1) of this section, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(c)  Admission. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to admit into a live show or performance any juvenile to see, observe, watch a show or performance which shows or depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any of the aforementioned provisions may be punished pursuant to section 1-15. It is recognized that to the extent of any conflict of this section with F.S. § 847.013 that state law shall control. 
(Code 1963, § 15-34) 
Cross reference— Adult bookstores and other establishments, § 11-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 12-19. - Rule of construction for sections 12-15 through 12-18. 
Any interpretation or construction of sections 12-15 through 12-18 concerning what constitutes pornographic materials or obscenity shall be construed in accordance with the standards set forth in Miller v. California , 413 U.S. 15 (1973). The standard for reviewing the material as a whole is whether or not: 
(1)  The material appeals to a prurient interest in sex. 
(2)  The material portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way. 
(3)  The material does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1963, § 15-35)  
Sec. 12-20. - Nudity; indecent exposure. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Nudity shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or but-tocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or 
the showing of the area of the female breast, with less than a fully opaque covering, from below the top of the areola, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Public place shall include but not be limited to any place where members of the public may gather, whether outside or within the confines of an enclosed structure, and shall include any commercial business or establishment, whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership or otherwise; restaurant; club; bar; nightclub; country club; meeting room; social, religious, fraternal or similar organization; mall; shopping area; parking lot; laundry mat; donut shops; carwashes or other type of establishment. Public place does not include a private residence, home, apartment, motel or hotel room for sleeping and similar private residence or places to live or sleep. Public place does not include nudity in connection with medical examination or treatment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally in a public place: 
(1)  Engage in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engage in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appear in a state of nudity; and/or 
(4)  Fondle the genitals of himself or another person. 
(c)  Any person in violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Code 1963, § 15-43; Ord. No. 47-1990, § 15, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 26-1991, § 2, 8-13-91) 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment establishments, § 11-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 12-21. - Touching or offering to touch the genitals of another for compensation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to receive a fee or other compensation, directly or indirectly, for touching or offering to touch the genitals of another, either directly or indirectly by employing an object or device, for the purpose or with the intent of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of either party. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person owning, managing or otherwise controlling any place of business to cause or permit any agent, employee or other person under his control or supervision to participate in conduct prohibited in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 15-44; Ord. No. 47-1990, § 16, 11-13-90) 
Cross reference— Adult entertainment establishments, § 11-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Obscenity, F.S. ch. 847.  
Sec. 12-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-1992, § 1, adopted Oct. 13, 1992, repealed former § 12-22 in its entirety, which pertained to sounding of trail whistles or warnings.  
Sec. 12-23. - Machinery parts, scrapped lumber, etc.—Storage and maintaining prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit junk, scrap metal, scrap lumber, wastepaper products, discarded building materials, or any unused abandoned vehicle, vehicles, or abandoned parts, machinery or machinery parts, or other waste materials, to be in or upon any yard, garden, lawn, out-building, or premises, in the city unless in connection with a business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed for the same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit any accumulation of any such waste materials to be in or upon any yard, lawn, garden, out-building or premises, in the city, if it constitutes a fire hazard, a hazard to the safety of persons or property, or an unsanitary condition. 
(Code 1963, § 15-15)  
Sec. 12-24. - Same—Abandonment upon property of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or abandon any of the waste materials mentioned in section 12-23, upon premises not owned or occupied by such person without the consent of the owner thereof or the person occupying the same. 
(Code 1963, § 15-16)  
Sec. 12-25. - Off-the-road vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Off-the-road vehicles. As used in this section, the term "off-the-road vehicle" shall mean any motor-propelled vehicle, including all terrain vehicles, four-wheel drive vehicles, jeeps, dune buggies, motorcycles, minibikes, and every other description of motor-propelled vehicle used or capable of being used as a means of transportation over land areas not graded or paved for use as a road; except that such term shall not be construed to include vehicles which are being utilized for the maintenance of property, such as riding lawnmowers, tractors, trucks or similar vehicles. 
(b)  Prohibited activity. 
(1)  No off-the-road vehicle shall be operated over public land areas within the city not graded or paved for use as a road. 
(2)  Prior to operating an off-the-road vehicle in an area not graded or paved for use as a road, the operator of the vehicle must be in possession of written permission from the owner of the land where the vehicle is being operated. 
(3)  The operation of an ATV, as defined in F.S. 317.0003, is prohibited upon the public roads or streets of this state, except that such an ATV may be operated during the daytime on an unpaved roadway where the posted speed limit is less than thirty-five (35) miles per hour by a licensed driver or by a minor under the supervision of a licensed driver. The operator must provide proof of ownership upon request by a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  No off-the-road vehicle shall be operated over land areas within the city where prohibited by signs. 
(5)  No person shall operate any off-the-road vehicle, upon any bicycle path, pedestrian path, trail, sidewalk or sidewalk area. 
(6)  No person shall operate any off-the-road vehicle in public parks within the city unless such use is specifically allowed by signage posted in that particular park. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel while in the performance of their official duties. 
(d)  Penalty. A violation of this section is punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 47-2006, § 1, 10-10-06)  
Sec. 12-26. - Camping; exceptions. 
(a)  Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Camp or camping. Sleeping or otherwise being in a temporary shelter out-of-doors, sleeping out-of-doors, or cooking over an open flame out-of-doors. 
(b)  Prohibited activity: It shall be unlawful for any person within any part of the city to engage in the following conduct: 
(1)  Camp on any sidewalk, right-of-way or easement, parking lot, park or picnic grounds, or other public property, except as may be specifically authorized by the appropriate governmental authority by ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit. 
(2)  No person shall camp on private property, in vacant lots, or under any bridge or structure without owning such or without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession of such. 
(c)  Enforcement: Any person violating any provision of this section shall vacate the place upon the request of a law enforcement officer. If at any time after having been informed by a police officer that the aforementioned conduct is in violation of a city ordinance, the violator refuses to comply, he/she may be arrested. If a law enforcement officer encounters a person violating this section, who volunteers that he or she has no home or other permanent shelter, he or she must be given an opportunity to enter a homeless shelter or similar facility if available. If the violator refuses to enter the shelter or facility, an arrest may be made. 
(d)  Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 33-2007, § 1, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 12-27. - Fertilizer use requirements. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. As a result of impairment to surface waters within the City of Titusville caused by excessive nutrients, the City of Titusville has determined that the use of fertilizers on lands within the City of Titusville creates a risk of contributing to adverse effects on surface and/or groundwater. Accordingly, the City of Titusville finds that management measures for the use of the fertilizers is required. 
This section regulates the proper use of fertilizers by any applicator; requires proper training of commercial and institutional fertilizer applicators; establishes training and licensing requirements; establishes a prohibited application period; specifies allowable fertilizer application rates and methods, fertilizer-free zones, low maintenance zones, and exemptions. The ordinance requires the use of best management practices which provide specific management guidelines to minimize negative secondary and cumulative environmental effects associated with the misuse of fertilizers. These secondary and cumulative effects have been observed in and on Titusville's natural and constructed stormwater conveyances and surface waters. Collectively, these water bodies are an asset critical to the environmental, recreational, cultural and economic well-being of Titusville's residents and the health of the public. Overgrowth of algae and vegetation hinder the effectiveness of flood attenuation provided by natural and constructed stormwater conveyances. Regulation of nutrients, including both phosphorus and nitrogen contained in fertilizer, will help improve and maintain water and habitat quality. 
(b)  Definitions. For this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Administrator means the city manager or an administrative official of the City of Titusville designated by the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. 
Application or apply means the actual physical deposit of fertilizer to turf, or landscape plants. 
Applicator means any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants in the City of Titusville. 
Best management practices mean turf and landscape practices or combination of practices based on research, field-testing, and expert review, determined to be the most effective and practicable on-location means, including economic and technological considerations, for improving water quality, conserving water supplies and protecting natural resources. 
Best management practices training program means a training program approved pursuant to F.S. § 403.9338, or any more stringent requirements set forth in this section that includes the most current version of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection's "Florida-friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries, 2008," as revised, and approved by the administrator. 
Code enforcement officer, official or inspector means any designated employee or agent of the City of Titusville whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the City of Titusville. 
Commercial fertilizer applicator , except as provided in F.S. § 482.1562(9), means any person who applies fertilizer for payment or other consideration to property not owned by the person or firm applying the fertilizer or the employer of the applicator. 
Fertilize, fertilizing, or fertilization means the act of applying fertilizer to turf, specialized turf, or landscape plants. 
Fertilizer means any substance or mixture of substances that contains one (1) or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other corrective measures to the soil. 
Guaranteed analysis means the percentage of plant nutrients or measures of neutralizing capability claimed to be present in a fertilizer. 
Institutional applicator means any person, other than a private, noncommercial or a commercial applicator (unless such definitions also apply under the circumstances), that applies fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf and/or landscape plants. Institutional applicators shall include, but shall not be limited to, owners, managers or employees of public lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business sites and any residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership. 
Landscape plant means any native or exotic tree, shrub, or groundcover (excluding turf). 
Low maintenance zone means an area a minimum of ten (10) feet wide adjacent to watercourses which is planted and managed in order to minimize the need for fertilization, watering, mowing, etc. 
Person means any natural person, business, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, association, club, organization, and/or any group of people acting as an organized entity. 
Prohibited application period means the time period during which a flood watch or warning, or a tropical storm watch or warning, or a hurricane watch or warning is in effect for any portion of the City of Titusville, issued by the National Weather Service, or if heavy rain 1 is likely. 
Restricted application period means June 1 through September 30. 
Saturated soil means a soil in which the voids are filled with water. Saturation does not require flow. For the purposes of this section, soils shall be considered saturated if standing water is present or the pressure of a person standing on the soil causes the release of free water. 
Slow release, controlled release, timed release, slowly available, or water insoluble nitrogen means nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the plant longer than a reference rapid or quick release product. 
Surface waters as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (Chapter 62-340, Florida Administrative Code) means water on the surface of the earth, contained in bounds created naturally or artificially, including the Atlantic Ocean, bays, bayous, sounds, estuaries, lagoons, lakes, ponds, impoundments, rivers, streams, springs, creeks, branches, sloughs, tributaries, canals, and ditches. 
Turf, sod, or lawn means a piece of grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass. 
Urban landscape means pervious areas on residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, highway rights-of-way, or other nonagricultural lands that are planted with turf or horticultural plants. For the purposes of this section, agriculture has the same meaning as in F.S. § 570.02. 
1 World Meteorological Organization definition of heavy rain: Rainfall greater than or equal to fifty (50) mm (two (2) inches) in a twenty-four-hour period. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to and shall regulate any and all applicators of fertilizer and areas of application of fertilizer within the City of Titusville, unless such applicator is specifically exempted by the terms of this section from the regulatory provisions of this section. This section shall be prospective only, and shall not impair any existing contracts. 
(d)  Timing of fertilizer application. 
(1)  No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus to turf and/or landscape plants during the prohibited application period, during the restricted application period, or to saturated soils. 
(e)  Fertilizer free zone. 
(1)  Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten (10) feet of any pond, stream, watercourse, lake, canal, or wetland as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (Chapter 62-340, Florida Administrative Code) or from the top of a seawall. If more stringent City Code regulations apply, this provision does not relieve the requirement to adhere to the more stringent regulations. Newly planted turf and/or landscape plants may be fertilized in this zone for a sixty-day period beginning thirty (30) days after planting if needed to allow the plants to become well established. Caution shall be used to prevent direct deposition of nutrients into the water. 
(2)  Fertilizer shall not be applied within twenty-five (25) feet of the shoreline of the Indian River Lagoon. 
(3)  A voluntary fertilizer free zone of ten (10) feet shall be encouraged, through educational outreach, on each side of streets without stormwater retention that drain to the Indian River Lagoon. 
(4)  Planting native vegetation that does not require mowing or fertilization along the shoreline of the Indian River Lagoon shall be encouraged. 
(f)  Low maintenance zone. A voluntary ten-foot low maintenance zone is strongly recommended, but not mandated, from any surface waters, pond, stream, watercourse, lake, wetland or from the top of a seawall. A swale/berm system is recommended for installation at the landward edge of this low maintenance zone to capture and filter runoff. If more stringent City Code regulations apply, this provision does not relieve the requirement to adhere to the more stringent regulations. No mowed or cut vegetative material should be deposited or left remaining in this zone or deposited in the water. Care should be taken to prevent the over-spray of aquatic weed products in this zone. 
(g)  Fertilizer content and application rates. 
(1)  No fertilizer containing phosphorous shall be applied to turf or landscape plants in the City of Titusville unless a soil or plant tissue deficiency is verified by a University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agriculture Sciences, approved testing methodology. In the case that a deficiency has been verified, the application of a fertilizer containing phosphorous shall be in accordance with the rates and directions provided by Rule 5E, Florida Administrative Code. Deficiency verification shall be no more than two (2) years old. However, recent application of compost, manure, or top soil shall warrant more recent testing to verify current deficiencies. 
(2)  The nitrogen content of fertilizer applied to turf or landscape plants within the City of Titusville shall contain at least fifty (50) percent slow release nitrogen per guaranteed analysis label. 
(3)  Fertilizers applied to turf within the City of Titusville shall be applied at rates that are in accordance with requirements and directions provided by Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code, Labeling Requirements for Urban Turf Fertilizers. 
(4)  Fertilizer containing nitrogen or phosphorus shall not be applied before seeding or sodding a site, and shall thirty (30) days after seeding or sodding, except when hydro-seeding for temporary or permanent erosion control in an emergency situation (wildfire, etc.), or in accordance with the stormwater pollution prevention plan for that site. 
(h)  Application practices. 
(1)  Spreader deflector shields are required when fertilizing via rotary (broadcast) spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, fertilizer-free zones, surface waters and water bodies, including wetlands. 
(2)  Fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled, or otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces. 
(3)  Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. 
(4)  Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container. 
(5)  In no case shall fertilizer be washed, swept, or blown off impervious surfaces into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, or water bodies. 
(i)  Management of grass clippings and vegetative matter. In no case shall grass clippings, vegetative material, and/or vegetative debris be washed, swept, or blown off into surface waters, stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, watercourses, water bodies, wetlands, sidewalks or roadways. Any material that is accidentally so deposited shall be immediately removed to the maximum extent practicable. 
(j)  Exemptions. The provisions set forth above in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right to Farm Act, F.S. § 823.14. 
(2)  Other properties not subject to or covered under the Florida Right to Farm Act that have pastures used for grazing livestock; 
(3)  Any lands used for bona fide scientific research including, but not limited to, research on the effects of fertilizer use on urban stormwater, water quality, agronomics, or horticulture. 
(4)  Golf courses, athletic fields, and parks that apply fertilizer in accordance with the rates and directions provided by Rule 5E, Florida Administrative Code. 
(k)  Training. 
(1)  After December 31, 2013, all commercial and institutional applicators of fertilizer within the City of Titusville, shall abide by and successfully complete training and continuing education requirements in the "Florida-friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries", offered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida IFAS "Florida Friendly Landscapes" program, or an approved equivalent. 
(2)  Private, noncommercial applicators are encouraged to follow the recommendations of the University of Florida IFAS Florida Yards and Neighborhoods program when applying fertilizers. 
(l)  Licensing of commercial applicators. 
(1)  After December 31, 2013, all commercial applicators of fertilizer within the City of Titusville, shall abide by and have successfully completed training and continuing education requirements in the "Florida-friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries", offered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida IFAS "Florida-friendly Landscapes" program, or an approved equivalent program, prior to obtaining a business tax receipt for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants. Commercial fertilizer applicators shall provide proof of completion of the program to the city upon application or renewal of a business tax receipt. 
(2)  After December 31, 2013, all commercial applicators of fertilizer within the city, shall have and carry in their possession at all times when applying fertilizer, evidence of certification by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services as a commercial fertilizer applicator pursuant to Rule 5E-14.117(18), Florida Administrative Code. 
(3)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants (including, but not limited to, residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties, and multifamily and condominium properties) must ensure that at least one (1) employee has a "Florida-friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" training certificate prior to the business owner obtaining a business tax receipt. Owners for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants shall provide proof of completion of the program to the city. 
(m)  Enforcement. Funds generated by penalties imposed under this section shall be used by the city for the administration and enforcement of F.S. § 403.9337, and the corresponding sections of this article, and to further water conservation and nonpoint pollution prevention activities. 
(n)  Conflict and severability. In the event this section conflicts with any other ordinance of the City of Titusville or other applicable law, the more restrictive shall apply. If any phrase or portion of the ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion. 
(Ord. No. 36-2013, 1-14-14)  
Sec. 12-28. - Synthetic drugs. 
(a)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound shall mean a chemical or chemical compound whose molecular make-up is similar to those substances listed as controlled substances in F.S. Ch. 893, and whose intended primary use when introduced into the human body is to mimic the effects of a controlled substance. 
Synthetic drugs shall mean both "synthetic cannabinoids" and "bath salts" as defined in this section. 
Synthetic cannabinoids shall mean any herbal or plant material, whether in granular, loose leaf, powder, liquid, food additive, incense, or other form, which has been soaked, sprayed, or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the herbal or plant material, or the smoke emitted from its burning, to mimic or simulate the effects of a controlled substance when inhaled, ingested, or otherwise introduced into the human body. Any herbal or plant material described above shall be considered a synthetic cannabinoid regardless of the labeling posted on the packaging for the material and regardless of whether the labeling states that its contents are "not for human consumption", "not for smoking", or contains some other similar statement. The fact that a herbal or plant material, packaged and advertised as a food additive, plant food, insect repellant, potpourri, incense, etc., has been soaked, sprayed, or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product may be considered in determining whether the product is a synthetic cannabinoid. This term specifically excludes any herbal or plant material containing synthetic chemicals or chemical compounds which: 
(1)  Requires a prescription; 
(2)  Is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; and 
(3)  Is dispensed in accordance with Florida and federal law. 
Bath salts shall mean any product in granular, crystalline, powder, stick, tablet, capsule or block form, or any stimulant type product, which contains, has been treated, or has otherwise been enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the material, or the smoke emitted from its burning, to mimic or simulate the effects of a narcotic or other controlled substance when inhaled, ingested, or otherwise introduced into the human body. Any material described above shall be considered a synthetic drug regardless of the labeling posted on the packaging for the material and regardless of whether the labeling states that its contents are "not for human consumption", "not for smoking", or contains some other similar statement. The fact that a material, packaged and advertised as a cleaning agent, food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant potpourri, incense, etc., has been soaked, sprayed, or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product may be considered in determining whether the product is a synthetic drug. This term specifically excludes any material containing synthetic chemicals or chemical compounds which: 
(1)  Requires a prescription; 
(2)  Is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; and 
(3)  Is dispensed in accordance with Florida and federal law. 
Controlled substance shall mean any substance defined or listed in schedule I, II, III, or IV of section 893.03, Florida Statutes, as amended, including any isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers, esters, and ethers of such substances. 
(b)  Determination of a product as a synthetic drug. The following factors, taken in the totality of the circumstances, may be considered in determining whether a product, substance, or other material should be classified as a synthetic drug. For the purposes of enforcement of this ordinance, the establishment of two (2) or more of these factors shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a synthetic drug. 
(1)  Marketing: The product is marketed for a purpose for which it is rarely, if ever, suitable for use (e.g., incense, potpourri, food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant, iPod cleaner, glass cleaner, etc.). 
(2)  Sales location: The product is displayed and sold in businesses such as liquor stores, smoke shops, and gas/convenience stores, where products intended for a similar use are not typically sold. 
(3)  Labels and packaging: 
a.  The product is marketed as a common non-consumable product, and contains warnings not normally found on products intended for a similar use. The warnings may be similar, but not limited to, "not for human consumption", "not for purchase by minors", etc.; 
b.  The product's packaging or labeling contains notices stating or suggesting that the product is in compliance with laws regulating controlled substances, including, but not limited to, "does not contain any chemical compounds prohibited by state law", "contains no prohibited chemicals", "product is in accordance with State and Federal laws", "product is in compliance with new Florida Law HB 1175", "does not contain AM2201 or any DEA banned substance", "legal herbal substance", "100% compliant guaranteed", "100% chemical free", "100% synthetic free", etc.; or 
c.  Aspects of the product's packaging or labeling suggest the user will achieve a "high", euphoria, relaxation, mood enhancement, or that the product has other similar effects on the body. 
(4)  Price: The price of the product is disproportionately higher than other products marketed in the Titusville area for the same or similar use. 
(5)  Misleading directions: The product contains directions for the product's use which are not consistent with the use of products marketed for the same or similar use. (Example: product marketed as potpourri with directions stating, "Place caplet over door to enhance mood".) 
(6)  Similarity to illicit street drugs: 
a.  Products designed to make the substance appear similar to illicit street drugs (including, but not limited to, a white powder made to resemble cocaine, or an herbal substance dyed green to resemble marijuana); and/or 
b.  Products advertised using brand names and packaging designed to make the product appear similar to illicit street drugs, or labeled with names similar to commonly used street slang for illicit drugs, which names or labeling has no relation to the advertised use of the product being sold. (Known brand names include, but are not limited to, "AK-47","Aroma", "Atomic", "Aura", "Aurora Incense", "Barely In", "Black Mamba", "Black Rob", "Bliss", "Blizzard", "Blue Silk", "Bonzai Grow", "Boombay Blue", "Brain Storm", "Bullet", "Buzz", "California Dreams", "Charge Plus", "Charlie", "Chill X", "Chronic Spice", "Cloud 9", "Dank", "Daylights", "Dead Man Walking", "Demon", "Diable Botanical Incense", "Dragons Fire", "Drone", "D-ZL", "Earth Impact", "Earthquake", "Eight Balls", "Energy-1","Euphoria", "Fake Weed", "Fuzzy Wuzzy", "G-13", "G-20", "Galaxy Gold", "Genie", "Grape Ape Herbal Incense", "Green Buddha", "Guerrilla Warfare", "Hayze", "Hypnotig", "Hurricane", "Hurricane Charlie", "Hush", "Ivory Wave", "Jazz", "Joker", "K-2", "K-3", "K-3 Legal", "Kryptonite", "Kush", "Kush Mania", "Lovely Dovey", "Lucid", "Lunar Wave", "Maddie", "Mad Hatter", "Makes Scents", "Man of Steel", "Matrix", "Maui Wowie", "MCAT", "MDPV", "MDPK", "Meow Meow", "Meph", "Mind Trip", "Moon Rocks", "Mr. Happy", "Mr. and Mrs. Marley", "Mr. Nice Guy", "MTV", "Mystery", "Nightlights", "Ocean", "Ocean Blue", "Ocean Burst", "OMG", "O-Zone", "Peeve", "Pineapple Express", "Pixie Dust", "Posh", "Pot-Pourri", "Puff", "Pulse", "Pure Ivory", "Purple Haze", "Purple Wave", "PV", "Red Dove", "Scarface", "Scooby Snax", "Scope", "Sence", "Serenity", "Skunk", "Sky High", "Smoke", "Snow Leopard", "Solar Flare", "Soul Sence", "Space Truckin", "Spice", "Spice 99", "Spice Gold", "Spice Silver", "Stardust", "Stinger", "Sugar Sticks", "Supper Coke", "Three Monkey Incense", "Tiger Shark", "Vanilla Sky", "Voodoo", "Voodoo Child", "White Dove", "White Knight", "White Lightening", "Zohai", and a group of products marketed as from "The Spice Guy".) 
(7)  Ingredients: A product which has been enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product but mimics the effects of a controlled substance when the product, or the smoke from the burned product, is introduced into the human body. 
(8)  Verbal or written representations: Verbal or written representations made at the place of sale or display regarding the purpose, methods, use, or effect of the product, suggesting that the intended use of the product is to mimic the effects of a controlled substance. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  The possession, use, sale, distribution, production, or manufacture of synthetic drugs, as defined in this section, is prohibited. 
(2)  The display for sale or marketing of synthetic drugs, as defined in this section, on retail store shelves is prohibited. 
(3)  The advertisement of synthetic drugs, as defined in this ordinance, is prohibited. 
(4)  The sale, display for sale, marketing, advertisement, or other offer for sale of any product described in subsections (1)—(8) of section (b) above is prohibited. 
(d)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this section and shall be punishable as such and/or said violation may be processed as a code violation pursuant to chapter 162 and the Municipal Code Enforcement Board. 
(2)  The City of Titusville City Attorney's Office is authorized to pursue temporary or permanent injunctive relief or any other legal or equitable remedy authorized by law in courts of competent jurisdiction to cure, remove or end any activity which violates this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-2014, § 2, 2-25-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2014, adopted Feb. 25, 2014, enacted new provisions to be designated as § 12-27. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 12-27, said new provisions have been designated as § 12-28.  
Sec. 12-29. - Pet waste management. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. An ordinance to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the City of Titusville, Florida, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply. 
(b)  Definitions. For this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Immediate means that the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay. 
Owner/keeper means any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such a pet. 
Person means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of the State of Florida subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
Pet means a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship. 
Pet solid waste means waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement. 
Proper disposal means placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal. Disposal into a stormdrain or stormwater system is strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all persons, owners and keepers within the City of Titusville unless such person, owner or keeper is specifically exempted by the terms of this section from the regulatory provisions of this section. 
(d)  Requirement for disposal. All owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person. On any property owned or possessed by that person, all pet owners and keepers are required to properly dispose of their pet's solid waste as frequently as necessary to prevent a public nuisance. 
(e)  Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used for that purpose. 
(f)  Enforcement; penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each occurrence of such a violation shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this section and shall be punishable as such and/or said violation may be processed as a code violation pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162 and the Municipal Code Enforcement Board. Funds generated by penalties imposed under this section shall be used by the city for the administration and enforcement of F.S. § 403.9337, and the corresponding sections of this article, and to further stormwater pollution prevention activities. 
(Ord. No. 17-2015, § 1, 5-12-15)  
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances regarding swimming pools, § 18-11. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, F.S. ch. 381; sanitary nuisances, F.S. § 386.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-6) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 13-2—13-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-26. - Conditions constituting menace to public health, welfare enumerated, declared public nuisance. 
(a)  The allowing of debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers, or stagnant water, diseased, dead or damaged trees to accumulate or a dense growth of vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and/or grass in excess of twelve (12) inches in height from the ground to exist on any lot, tract or parcel of land which is bordered by other improved property or a dedicated public street on at least two (2) opposite sides and provided that the distance between these opposite sides (measured from lot/property lines) is less than two hundred fifty (250) feet. If the distance between the dedicated public street and/or improved property is greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet, the point of measurement shall be defined as a strip or buffer twenty-five (25) feet wide along the lot/property line of the improved property and/or dedicated street side of the lot, tract, or parcel in question unless the twenty-five-foot strip is not accessible by reason of a fence, ditch, cliff or other impassable obstacle. The condition described in this section along any improved property described in the city to the extent and in the manner that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare; creates a fire hazard; or provides a nest and/or breeding ground for sandflies, mosquitoes, rats, mice, other rodents, snakes, and other types of pests and vermin shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Placing, discarding or allowing debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, weeds, noxious plants, sand, leaves or grass on any sidewalk located on the owner's or occupant's lot, and placing, discarding or allowing debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, weeds or noxious plants, except as provided in chapter 16 for solid waste collection in the planting space between the sidewalk or property line and the street shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. Such nuisance shall be subject to the notice and remedy provided in sections 13-29 through 13-32. Such unlawful conduct shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 12-27)  
Sec. 13-27. - Enforcement. 
A property owner who fails to maintain his property as required by section 13-26 shall constitute a violation of a municipal ordinance and the property owner as a separate and additional remedy may be subject to enforcement and fines pursuant to the city code enforcement board, § 14.01 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Volume II. Repeat violations may be subject to fines up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
(Code 1963, § 12-31; Ord. No. 34-1990, § 3, 9-11-90) 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 14.01 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 13-28. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, manager, owner, agent, or renter to allow debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, papers, stagnant water; diseased, dead or damaged trees to accumulate, or a dense growth of vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and/or grass on any lot, tract, or parcel of land in the city, which provides or may provide a nest and/or breeding ground for sandflies, mosquitoes, rats, mice, other rodents, snakes and any other types of pests; or become a menace to life, property, public health, or create a fire hazard. Any person found violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 12-32)  
Sec. 13-29. - Notice to property owner to remedy or authorize city to remedy conditions. 
(a)  If the city manager finds that debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, paper or stagnant water, diseased, dead or damaged trees have accumulated or a dense growth of vines, underbrush, weeds, wild growth and/or grass in excess of twelve (12) inches in height from the ground exists on any lot, tract or parcel as aforedescribed within the city, to the extent and in the manner that it constitutes or may reasonably become a menace to life, property, the public health, the public welfare; creates a fire hazard; or provides a nest and/or breeding ground for sandflies, mosquitoes, rats, mice, other rodents, snakes and other types of pests and vermin, he shall in writing, direct a notice to the owner of record of such property by certified mail at his last-known mailing address as shown by the records of the tax appraiser of the county advising that the aforementioned debris, rubbish, trash, tin cans, etc., have been found to exist on the property described on such notice and demand that such owner cause such condition to be remedied forthwith, or the city is authorized to have such work done on behalf of the owner at the rates on file in the code enforcement division, and the cost of such work, including an administrative charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first notice, concerning such property, eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for the second notice, one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third notice, and an additional fifty-dollar ($50.00) charge for each additional notice thereafter occurring within a one-year period, shall be assessed against the owner and shall automatically become a lien against the property if not paid in the time prescribed in section 13-31. The written notice shall state the specific violation of which the owner is charged and the location where information may be obtained concerning the cost of the city lot cleaning. 
(b)  If there is an occupied dwelling on the property, a copy of the notice shall be served by an appropriate official of the city, including but not limited to a police officer, upon the occupant of the property, or upon any agent of the owner thereof, or by mailing the notice by registered or certified mail. The mailing of such notice shall be sufficient proof thereof and the delivery of notice to an occupied dwelling shall be equivalent to mailing. If the mailing address of the owner is not known and the property is unoccupied and the owner has no agent in the city, the notice shall be posted upon the property as notice to the owner thereof and a copy posted at an appropriate location at the city hall. The form of notice to be used is provided in section 13-30. 
(Code 1963, § 12-28; Ord. No. 20-2009, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 13-30. - Form of notice of public nuisance. 
The following is the form for the notice of public nuisance: 
"NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
"Dear ___________: 
RE: [Fill in Legal Description of Lot] 
"According to the tax records of the City of Titusville, you are the owner of the above legally described property. Said property was inspected by the City on ________, 20___. This inspection revealed a violation of section 13-26 of the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances dealing with public nuisances. Specifically, the violation noted was: 
[Fill in appropriate violation] 
"According to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, the owners of property deemed a public nuisance and so notified herein are required to eliminate the nuisance within ten (10) calendar days. 
"The failure to maintain your property in accordance with section 13-26 of the Code, is a violation of the City of Titusville's Ordinances and if not corrected within the time period enumerated above, the violation will be abated by the city and you will be billed for the cost at rates on file with the city and, in the event payment is not made within thirty (30) days, the cost will be assessed against the property as a lien, foreclosure to follow with fees incident to foreclosure. 
"As a separate and additional remedy, the violation shall be processed through the City of Titusville Code Enforcement Board, which has authority to impose fines up to $250.00 per day, and for repeat violations, up to $500.00 per day. 
"Pursuant to the provisions of section 13-31 of the Code of Ordinances of Titusville, Florida, you have the right to appeal the finding that your property has become a nuisance. If you elect to protest the finding that your property is a nuisance, you must file a written appeal with the city clerk of the City of Titusville within ten (10) calendar days from the date of this letter. 
"The city regrets having to take a hard line on nuisance abatement. We ask for your assistance in maintaining proper standards for the health, safety, and general welfare for the citizens of Titusville. 
	_____
Code Enforcement Officer" 
 
(Code 1963, § 12-29; Ord. No. 34-1990, § 1, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 6-1992, § 1, 5-12-92)  
Sec. 13-31. - Protest by property owner; council determination final. 
(a)  If the property owner or his duly authorized agent elects to protest the notice as set forth in sections 13-29 and 13-30, he must file a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the notice to the owner. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting and the city council shall determine conclusively whether the condition described in section 13-26 exists. Such determination shall be final. If the owner or duly authorized agent fails to appeal the notice as set forth in sections 13-29 and 13-30 in the time prescribed, the owner or agent shall waive any right to question whether or not the condition as described in the notice to the owner or agent did, in fact, constitute a public nuisance and the owner or agent shall not be entitled to raise that defense in any subsequent foreclosure proceeding or any other proceeding incident to lot cleaning. 
(b)  If the city council determines that the situation and condition as set forth herein and in the notice to the owner does not exist, the notice to the owner shall be considered forthwith null and void and of no effect and no action shall be taken by any agency of this city in regard to such condition at that time. If the city council shall determine that the condition described in the notice to the owner does exist, the owner shall have ten (10) days from the date of such determination by the city council to correct such condition. 
(c)  If the owner does not appeal such notice or fails to correct such condition within the ten (10) days specified, the city manager shall direct the appropriate agency of the city to correct such condition as outlined in sections 13-29 and 13-30. 
(Code 1963, § 12-30(a); Ord. No. 34-1990, § 2, 9-11-90)  
Sec. 13-32. - Payment within specified time when conditions remedied by city. 
(a)  If the owner shall not correct or remedy the condition prescribed in the notice and the city takes action pursuant to the notice to have the lot, parcel, or strip of land cleaned, the expenses incurred in remedying the condition shall be computed in accordance with the rates on file in the code enforcement division and a statement of the expenses shall be mailed to the owner of the affected property. In addition to the expense of actually cleaning the lot or strip, the city shall be entitled to include an administrative fee as provided in section 13-29(a). 
(b)  If the owner or his agent fails to make payment within thirty (30) days, the expense shall become and automatically constitute a lien upon the property, which shall be payable with interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from thirty (30) days after the statement was mailed to the owner, and which expense and charge shall be a first and prior lien against the property, subject only to the lien of taxes due to the county and state, and of the same character as a lien of the city for municipal taxes. 
(c)  Upon failure of the owner of the property, to pay the lien, it will be foreclosed in the same manner as tax liens in favor of the city are foreclosed, or foreclosed in the same manner as mortgages under state law are foreclosed, and it shall be lawful to join in any complaint for foreclosure of any one (1) or more lots or parcels of land. The suit for foreclosure may be brought at any time after the expiration of sixty (60) days after the statement has been mailed to the owner. In addition to the costs and expenses which constituted the lien and the interest accumulated thereon, the city shall be entitled to collect and receive its costs in prosecuting the foreclosure, which costs shall include court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, abstract costs, publication costs, and such other costs as are assessable in foreclosure actions. 
(d)  Any property owner shall have the right to have a hearing before the city council to show cause, if any, why the expenses and charges should not constitute a lien against the property, provided, however, that the finding by the city council that the condition described herein and notice to the owner thereof exists, shall be final. 
(Code 1963, § 12-30(b))  
Secs. 13-33—13-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, § 17-31 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Procedure regarding lost property or wrecked, abandoned property of no apparent intrinsic value or where owner is not readily identifiable which is on public property, F.S. § 705.101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fully enclosed structure means any commercial or residential garage and any other manmade and lawfully permitted building structure which effectively screens and prevents viewing of its contents from adjacent residents, walkways, roadways, alleys, and the property line of the property on which the structure is located; however, the door of the structure may be kept open while performing any repairs. 
Inoperative vehicle means any self propelled vehicle designed for travel under its own power which is dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, demolished, or partially demolished; or any vehicle designed for highway travel not bearing a current tag and registration. 
Lawful place of business shall mean a place of business properly zoned for automotive repair or storage, or on which such uses are permitted as a nonconforming use, and for which the owner of the business has a current city occupational license. 
Other abandoned property shall mean all other personal property other than defined as a vehicle herein. 
Property shall mean any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, propellers, or hulls, and transport persons or property or pull machinery as defined in F.S. § 316.01 and shall include, without limitation, automobile, boat, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor home, motor scooter, off-road vehicle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
Vehicle repair means the repairing, reconditioning, or rebuilding of all vehicles. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-1; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 10-13-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-57. - Disposal of certain abandoned property. 
Abandoned personal property other than as provided for in section 13-71 shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with F.S. § 705.101 et seq. and the provisions of that statute are hereby incorporated by reference into this section. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-7)  
Secs. 13-58—13-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, F.S. § 705.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-71. - Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-2)  
Sec. 13-72. - Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street prohibited. 
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. No vehicle shall be parked on any street, highway or right-of-way within the city unless the vehicle has a current tag and registration. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-3; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 10-13-09)  
Sec. 13-73. - Inoperative vehicles prohibited; time limit for disposition; exception. 
(a)  No person in charge or in control of any property within the city, whether an owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any inoperative vehicle to remain on such property longer than seventy-two (72) hours. No person shall leave any vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than seventy-two (72) hours unless the vehicle has a current tag and registration. Only one (1) inoperative vehicle at a time shall be allowed to remain on such property during the aforementioned seventy-two-hour period. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  A vehicle in a fully-enclosed structure; 
(2)  A vehicle in a carport that has an opaque covering made of either vinyl, nylon, chamois, or other similar material that is resistant to weather and is commercially intended to be used as an outdoor protective cover for a vehicle. Such cover shall provide sufficient screening so as to prevent ordinary viewing of any inoperable vehicle or its parts from adjacent public and private property. 
(3)  Vehicles stored or kept on the premises or property of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, provided that any inoperative vehicles are stored in an appropriate and approved screened storage space, junkyard or depository, maintained in a lawful place and manner in the city. 
(4)  Any vehicle or off-road vehicle that is not in compliance with state regulations for street usage, but is in operating condition and intact, so that the vehicle does not meet the definition of inoperative vehicles as provided in section 13-56. 
(c)  Inoperative vehicles placed on a licensed truck, trailer, or other vehicle is not an authorized exception and the inoperative vehicle is prohibited. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-4; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 10-13-09)  
Sec. 13-74. - Impounding of vehicles. 
(a)  Authority of city manager. The city manager is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of any provisions of this division or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such a vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with this division. 
(b)  Notice. Whenever the city manager determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this division, then the city manager shall cause a notice to be placed upon such vehicle, in substantially the following form: 
 "Notice to the owner and all persons interested in the attached property. This property to wit: (setting forth brief description), located at (setting forth brief description of location), is improperly stored and is in violation of (setting forth ordinance regulation violated), and must be removed within 10 days from the date of this notice; otherwise it shall be destroyed by order of the City of Titusville. This order may be appealed by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk on or before 4 hours from the time said vehicle is ordered to be removed. 
 "Dated this (setting forth date of posting notice). 
 "Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of City Manager or designated representative)." 
If the vehicle in violation of this division is located on any public street or highway, such notice as stated above may require the vehicle to be removed within twelve (12) hours from the placing of the notice on such vehicle, and if it should be determined by the city manager that the location of such vehicle on the public street or highway of the city constitutes a hazard, such vehicle may be, under the circumstances, immediately impounded to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the community. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person may postpone the operation of such order of the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk on or before four (4) hours from the time such vehicle was ordered to be removed. If such appeal is filed, the city manager shall not take action until such appeal is reviewed by the city council at its next regular council meeting following the filing of the notice of appeal. In the event the appeal is denied, such automobile shall be removed, at the owner's expense, within twenty-four (24) hours after the person making the appeal is notified of the adverse decision by the city council. If the appeal is granted by the city council, the order of the city manager shall be of no force and effect. Appeals to any section of this division may be sought through the city council. 
(d)  Disposition of vehicle. If the vehicle is not removed in accordance with the notice set forth in subsection (b) above, the city manager may cause the vehicle to be removed and such vehicle may be disposed of in any manner as determined by the city manager, and all proceeds from the disposition of such vehicle shall be retained by the city. 
(e)  Reclaiming vehicle. The city manager shall cause the vehicle to be retained by the city for a period of twenty (20) days after such vehicle is removed. If, at any time during the twenty-day period after removal, the owner provides proof of ownership (title, registration, a bill of sale) to the city manager and pays the required fee to the city, the owner shall be issued a release which will allow him to pick up the vehicle at the depository where the vehicle has been stored. The owner will be required to remove the vehicle from the depository to a satisfactory place of storage within forty-eight (48) hours. The owner will be required to pay towing and storage fees as set forth by city contract and a twenty-dollar administrative fee. 
(f)  Penalty for obstruction. Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists the city manager or any person authorized by the city manager in the discharge of his duties, as provided for in this section, upon conviction shall be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(g)  Immunity from prosecution. The city manager or the city shall not be liable for damages caused during the removal or impounding of any vehicle impounded or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1963, § 1A-5)  
Sec. 13-75. - Vehicle repair work. 
Repair of vehicles purchased for repair and resale, or vehicles repaired for any compensation received, shall be considered a vehicle repair business. Vehicle repair work shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations. Vehicle repair work that is completed on property that does not have a licensed repair business within the city must also comply with state and federal regulations, specifically the following: 
(1)  Hazardous wastes, such as used brake fluid, antifreeze, battery acid, gasoline/diesel fuel, lead acid batteries, power steering fluid, rust removers, transmission fluid, and motor oil must be disposed of at an authorized hazardous household waste center. 
(2)  No property owner shall store hazardous wastes on their property except in a completely enclosed structure and no longer than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(3)  All painting of vehicles must comply with Federal Rule 40 CFR Part 63 Subpart HHHHHH. Those qualifying for exemption to this Rule as a hobbyist or private citizen must either paint less than two (2) vehicles per year and/or receive no compensation for any vehicle painting activities. 
(Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 10-13-09)  
Sec. 13-76. - Vehicle repair business on residential property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a vehicle repair business on residential property. Some vehicle repair activity in residential districts may be such that it is excessive, prolonged, unusual, and may be to the detriment of the quiet, safety, comfort and quality of life to the surrounding property owners. In such cases, the excessive and prolonged repair activity is such that it has the characteristics of a vehicle repair business, and shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 10-13-09)  
Sec. 13-77. - Storage of vehicle repair parts and equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, keep, or set any vehicle repair equipment, tools, parts and accessories on any property for longer than forty-eight (48) hours, unless such equipment, tools, parts and accessories are stored in a fully enclosed structure or carport. 
(Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 10-13-09)  
Secs. 13-78—13-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Noise standards, F.S. § 403.415; motor vehicle noise standards, F.S. § 316.293. 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted in this article, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which exceeds the limits set forth in this article. 
(Code 1963, § 8A-16; Ord. No. 42-2004, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 13-102. - Sound limitations. 
(a)  Terminology and standards. All terminology used in this article not defined below shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
(1)  A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
(2)  Decibel (dB) means a unit for describing the amplitude of sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter. 
(3)  Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an existing or imminent peril. 
(4)  Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a metering characteristic and weighting A, B or C, as specified in American National Standards Institute specification for sound level meters, ANSI S51.4-1979, or if not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
(5)  Sound level meter means an instrument, which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighing networks, used to measure sound pressure levels. The output meter reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated and the instruments are of Type 2 or better, as specified in the American National Standards Institute Publication 51.4-1979, Type 1 or Type 2, or its successor publications. 
(6)  Sound pressure level means twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure level to the reference of twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter. 
(b)  Classification of use districts. For the purposes of defining the use district, all residential and general use zoned districts shall be considered residential; all hospital-medical, tourist, business, marina and governmental uses shall be considered commercial; and all industrial shall be considered industrial. Any area not otherwise classified shall conform to commercial standards. 
(c)  Measurement of sound. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute. 
(d)  Maximum permissible sound levels. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any occupancy in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth the use district category in Table I, for more than ten (10) percent of any measurement period, which shall not be less than ten (10) minutes when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use from which the sound emanates. When a use district category abuts another use district, the sound level of the most restrictive limit shall apply; for example, if residential abuts commercial and the commercial sound is being measured, the residential sound limit shall apply. 
For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequencies of sound, sound level meters and octave band filters shall be employed. In the enforcement of this regulation, noises produced by the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities shall not be included in determining the maximum permitted decibel levels. 
Table I 
Use District Category 	Time 	Sound Level Limit dBA 
Residential 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	55 
50 
Commercial 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	60 
60 
Industrial 	At all times 	65 
 
In industrial districts, the decibel resulting from any activity, whether open or enclosed, shall not exceed at any point on or beyond any lot line the maximum decibel levels for the designated octave band as set forth in the table above, and where an industrial district adjoins a district permitting residences, the maximum permitted decibel levels at any point on or beyond the district boundary shall be reduced by six (6) decibels from the maximum permitted level in the table. 
In an industrial district, no activity shall cause a steady state or impact vibration on a lot or boundary line in excess of that indicated in the table below: 
	Vibration Displacement (in inches) 
Frequency (cycles per second) 	Steady State 	Impact 
Under 10 	.0005 	.0010 
10—19 	.0004 	.0008 
20—29 	.0003 	.0006 
30—39 	.0002 	.0004 
40 and over 	.0001 	.0002 
 
Vibration shall be measured by normal vibration analysis equipment with associated transducer mounted vertically on two-inch pipe driven into the ground at least three (3) feet. 
Use District Category 	Time 	Sound Level Limit dBA 
Downtown CRA District: Commercial core (south of Garden Street, west of Indian River Avenue, east of the railroad tracks, and north of South Street) 	Friday and Saturday 
7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. 
11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
Sunday—Thursday 
at all times 	  
65 
60 
60 
 
Sounds of short duration, such as forge hammers, punch presses, and metal shears, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter, shall be measured with the impact noise filter as manufactured by the General Radio Company, or its equivalent, in order to determine the peak value of the impact. For sounds so measured, the sound pressure level set forth in the table below may be increased by six (6) decibels. 
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level (in decibels) 
Octave Band (cycles per second) 	Sound Pressure Level (decibels) 
0—74 	79 
75—149 	74 
150—299 	66 
300—599 	59 
600—1,199 	53 
1,200—2,399 	47 
2,400—4,799 	41 
4,800 and over 	39 
 
(e)  Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations, except as listed in Table I: 
(1)  Air conditioners are exempt from the provisions of Table I of this article when the equipment is functioning in accord with manufacturer's specifications and with all manufacturer's standard mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition according to standards promulgated by the American Refrigeration Institute. The same exception shall apply to lawn mowers and agricultural equipment during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., except for the mowing of golf courses which shall be allowed during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(2)  Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from activities such as those planned by student, governmental or community groups. 
(3)  Noise, between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. each day except Sunday, for construction operations for which building permits have been issued, or construction operations not requiring permits due to ownership of the project by an agency of government; providing all equipment is operated in accord with the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard equipment, manufacturer's mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. 
(4)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves and bells and chimes of churches. 
(5)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(6)  Noises resulting from emergency work. 
(7)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the city in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. Regulation of noises emanating from operations under permit shall be according to the conditions and limits stated on the permit and contained in subsection (f) of this section. 
(8)  Noises made by persons having obtained a permit to use the streets. 
(9)  All noises coming from the normal operations of aircraft, not including scale model aircraft. 
(10)  Those motor vehicles controlled by F.S. § 316.293, as may be amended, but not those motor vehicles exempted from coverage. 
(11)  Motor vehicles defined in F.S. § 316.293(6)(a) and (b). 
(f)  Special permits. Applicants for permits for relief from the maximum allowable noise level limits designated in this article may be made in writing to the city manager or his duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the city manager hereunder must be in writing and shall contain all conditions upon which such permit shall be effective. Prior to issuance of the permit, the city manager shall notify in writing abutting property owners of such application and allow abutting property owners to submit comments to the city manager within five (5) days. The city manager, or the duly authorized representative, may grant the relief as applied for under the following conditions: 
(1)  The city manager may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements as he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community of the surrounding neighborhood, including use of mufflers, screens or other sound-attenuating devices. 
(2)  Permits may be granted for the purpose of entertainment under the following conditions: 
a.  The function must be open to the public (admission may be charged). 
b.  The function must take place on public property. 
c.  The permit will be given for only four (4) hours in one (1) twenty-four-hour day. 
d.  The function must be staged between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(3)  Special permits for nonentertainment special purposes may be issued under the following conditions: 
a.  If the special purpose: 
1.  Is related to the operation of a trade or business, when the special purpose is not in the ordinary course of that trade or business; or 
2.  Does not relate to the operation of a trade or business, when the special purpose is not an ordinary event in the affairs of the applicant; and 
b.  If the special purpose is a recurring purpose, when it does not recur more often than four (4) times each calendar year; and 
c.  If the special purpose: 
1.  Is absolutely necessary to the operation of the applicant's trade or business; or 
2.  Does not relate to the operation of the trade or business, when the special purpose is compatible with the ordinary activities of the neighborhood in which the special purpose is to occur; and 
d.  Except in emergency situations, as determined by the city manager, the special permit may be issued for only four (4) hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekdays; and 
e.  Special permits may be issued for no longer than fifteen (15) consecutive days, renewable by further application to the city manager. 
(4)  No permit may be issued to allow the use of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device on the exterior of any building which at any time exceeds the sound level limits in Table I, except those used for emergency warnings. 
(5)  The city manager may issue a permit, subject to reasonable terms and conditions for fairs and carnivals. 
(Code 1963, § 8A-17; Ord. No. 42-2004, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 19-2009, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 2, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 2-2017, § 1, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 13-103. - Noises prohibited; unnecessary noise standard. 
(a)  Some sounds may be such that they are not measurable or may not exceed the limits, but they may be excessive, unnatural, prolonged, unusual and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and property of the residents of the city. 
(b)  With the exception of those exemptions provided by state law, noises prohibited by this section are unlawful, notwithstanding the fact that no violation of section 13-102 is involved and notwithstanding the fact that the activity complained about is exempted in subsection 13-102(e). 
(c)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, musical instruments, phonographs, etc. Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Sound trucks. Sound trucks or other devices or media for amplifying sound operated or permitted to be operated within the city for advertising purposes or to attract the attention of the public, where the sound therefrom is transmitted from, to, in or over any public thoroughfare, park or other public place. This subsection shall not prohibit the use of sound amplification for dissemination of religious or political messages, or information concerning civic, recreational and other matters of general public interest; provided prior permission has been obtained from the chief of police, who is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to make and enforce reasonable conditions as to the time, place, volume of sound, etc. 
(4)  Dropping or throwing objects. The unnecessary dropping or throwing of objects on or against the ground, pavement, concrete walk on or against the ground, pavement, concrete walk or other object so as to create loud or unnecessary clanging, grating, rattling or other noise. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of city officials. 
(7)  Exhausts. Discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. Creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repair of buildings. Erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday of each week, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less, while the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods of three (3) days or less, while the emergency continues. If the building official shall determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. The making of minor repairs and alterations to a building by the owner or occupant thereof between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays shall not be within the prescription of this subsection. 
(11)  Disturbance of schools, courts, churches, hospitals. Creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to a school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients therein; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating the proximity of a school, hospital, church or court. 
(12)  Noises to attract attention. Use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention, by creating noise, to any performance, show or sale. 
(13)  Noisy loads. Transporting of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner, so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(14)  Noisy equipment. Operation, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other machine or equipment, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(15)  Vehicle repair equipment. Operation, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. of any air compressor, grinders, sanders, impact wrenches, metal cutting tools, including compressed air pneumatic tools, hand or electric tools that, when used, disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants and/or is plainly audible at the property line of the operator of said equipment and/or is loud and disturbing to a reasonable person at the property line of the operator. 
(16)  Blowers and fans. Operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the blower or fan is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1963, § 8A-18; Ord. No. 42-2004, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 2, 10-13-09) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle noise generally, F.S. § 403.415; mufflers required, F.S. § 316.272; motor vehicle noise restrictions, F.S. § 316.293.  
Sec. 13-104. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties designated in section 1-15. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  Upon conviction of being in violation of this article three (3) times for the same offense within a twelve-month period, when such sound is created by the same sound emitter or same type of sound emitter, the noise-creating equipment may be confiscated by the court following such latest conviction until such time as the offender can satisfy the court that he is prepared to and, in fact, will operate such equipment within the limits of this article. Further violation shall result in the permanent confiscation by the court upon such conviction. 
(c)  The owner of property, a tenant, a lessee, a manager, an overseer, an agent corporation, or any other person entitled to lawfully possess or who claims lawful possession of such property at the particular time involved shall each be responsible for compliance with this article and each may be punished for violation of this article. It shall not be a lawful defense to assert that some other person caused such sound, but each lawful possessor or claimant of the premises shall be responsible for operating or maintaining such premises in compliance with this article and shall be punished, whether or not the person actually causing such sound is also punished. 
(Code 1963, § 8A-19; Ord. No. 42-2004, § 1, 7-13-04)  
Sec. 13-105. - Additional remedy; injunction. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision hereof, which endangers the comfort, repose, health and peace of residents in the area, is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city is authorized to pursue any and all remedies therefor. Nothing shall be construed to limit any private right of action. 
(Code 1963, § 8A-20; Ord. No. 42-2004, § 1, 7-13-04)  
ARTICLE V. - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MORTGAGED REAL PROPERTY IN DEFAULT 
 
Sec. 13-106. - Purpose and intent of the registration. 
The purpose and intent of this section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by establishing a process to limit and reduce the amount of deteriorating property located within the city. Vacant buildings and real property under foreclosure are a major source of blight, especially when the owner or mortgagee fails to properly maintain said buildings and property. Real property under foreclosure often suffers from a lack of maintenance and becomes neglected during the time it takes a mortgagee to complete the foreclosure process and secure property. It is further the intent of the city to establish registration and maintenance requirements for vacant properties and properties under foreclosure as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of inadequate maintenance of abandoned and vacated properties subject to mortgages in default. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abandoned real property means any real property that is vacant and is under public notice of default, notice of mortgagee's sale, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is retained by the mortgagee, or properties transferred to mortgagee under a deed-in-lieu of sale. 
Default means that the mortgagee has decided to file a mortgage foreclosure action on the defaulted mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in default at such time as the mortgagee provides the mortgagor a written notice declaring the mortgage in default, and the mortgagor vacates or abandons the property, or the mortgagee takes action to commence foreclosure proceedings in a court of law, and the default shall continue until such time as the mortgagor cures the default and the action has been completed or the ownership of the real property has transferred to a new owner that intends to occupy the real property. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that, on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions shall include, but not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, electricity, water or other utilities turned off, stagnant swimming pool, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence. 
Foreclosed property means real property that is in default. 
Foreclosure means the judicial process by which a property, placed as security for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted. 
Enforcement officer means any fulltime law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by the city. 
Vacant means a building or parcel of land that is neither lawfully occupied nor used, or when it is in a nonoperative status. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-108. - Applicability. 
This article relates to abandoned and vacant property and to property subject to a mortgage that has been determined by the mortgagee to be in default. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-109. - Registration of real property mortgagee holding mortgages in default. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the City of Titusville shall, within ten (10) days of the date the mortgagee declares its mortgage to be in default, register the real property with the city or city's designee and, at the time of registration, shall designate in writing a local property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in default. 
(b)  Registration. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  The mortgagee's name, direct mailing address, e-mail address, contact person, and telephone number; 
(2)  The address and parcel identification number of the real property that is being foreclosed upon by mortgagee; 
(3)  Whether the property is vacant or occupied during the default period; 
(4)  If the real property is, or becomes, vacant, the name, street address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the local property manager that will work on the mortgagee's behalf to inspect, maintain, and secure the real property. The local property manager's current street address and land line telephone number shall be within one (1) of the following counties: Brevard, Indian River, Orange, Osceola, Seminole, or Volusia and shall be available to be contacted by the city Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; and 
(5)  If a foreclosure complaint involving the real property has been filed in circuit court, or the real property is subject to a bankruptcy proceeding, the style of the case including court name, case number, and parties; 
(6)  Provide express authorization for city employees to enter upon the exterior of the property in the event the property becomes vacant for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(c)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, inspection, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain in default. 
(e)  Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under this ordinance must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(f)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly register or to revise from time to time the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this ordinance is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville and shall result in a notice of violation by the code enforcement department. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-110. - Registration fees. 
The city council shall establish by resolution fees for the registration and re-registration requirements of this article. Said fees shall be based on the reasonable estimated cost of administering the provisions of this article and shall be due and payable at the time of registration or re-registration. The city may delegate the collection of such fee to an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-111. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or not being properly maintained. Weeds, overgrown brush or dead vegetation over twelve (12) inches tall are prohibited. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c)  Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in the Code. 
(1)  Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial or industrial installation, as applicable. Landscaping shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(2)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings and weeds. 
(d)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that pool and spa water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the city's Code and the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property is a violation of the Code of Ordinances and shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation by the code enforcement department. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-112. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Improved properties subject to this article, and property subject to this article which is required to be enclosed or secured in accordance with law, shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that shall allow a child or adult to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or boarding. 
(c)  If a mortgage on the property is in default on the property and has become vacant or abandoned, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the Code of Ordinances and the mortgagee, or local property manager on the mortgagee's behalf, must perform weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws or ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure the property is a violation of this article and shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation by a code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-113. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city, in the discharge of duties as provided in this ordinance, upon conviction shall be sanctioned as provided in the Code of Ordinances of the city, or F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-114. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city manager to enforce this article, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry or trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-115. - Additional authority. 
The city manager or designee shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this article to require an on-site security guard. Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a continuing public nuisance. The city shall have the authority to promptly abate the public nuisance, in whole or in part, at the expense of the mortgagee or other responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-116. - Supplemental provisions. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by Code. 
(Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 12-8-09)  
Sec. 13-117. - Industrial performance standards. 
(a)  Smoke and particulate matter. No activity in an industrial district shall discharge into the atmosphere any air contaminate which is equal to or greater than the density designated as Number Two on the Ringelmann Chart as measured from the point of emission, or such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the standard given above except when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply. 
However, when a fire box, boiler, or other combustion device is cleaned or a fire is being stated therein, contaminants, the density of which is greater than Number Two on the Ringelmann Chart, may be permitted for a period not to exceed at total of three (3) minutes in any one-hour period. 
Performance standards regulating the discharge of particulate matter shall conform to the standards as set forth by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) of the State of Florida as stated in Chapter 17-205(2) of the Administrative Code of the State of Florida. A copy of said code is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(b)  Odorous matter. In any industrial district, no odor shall be permitted at any lot line exceeding the lowest amount set forth in Table 111, "odor thresholds," of chapter 5, "physiological effects" of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the Manufacturing Chemists Association, according to the latest addition of such table published for compounds described therein. For compounds not described in Table 111, odor thresholds may be established by the methods indicated in chapter 5 of the manual, and no odor shall be permitted at any lot line exceeding the amount determined by the application of such methods. A copy of said manual is incorporated by reference. 
(c)  Glare and heat. Industrial activities located within an industrial district shall be designed and operated in such a manner so as to prevent the emission of glare and heat of such intensity as to be perceptible to ordinary senses at any point along the lot line of the property on which the activity is located. Shaded light sources shall be used to illuminate signs, facades, buildings, parking and loading areas, and shall be directed away from properties lying outside the industrial district. 
(d)  Electromagnetic interference. It shall be unlawful for any industrial activity within an industrial district to emit any electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, it shall be unlawful to emit any electromagnetic radiation which will cause an abnormal degradation in the performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors due to the proximity, primary, field, blanketing, spurious re-radiation, conducted energy in power or telephone systems, or harmonic content. The determination of abnormal degradation in performance shall be made in accordance with the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Radio Manufacturers Association. In case of conflict between principles and standards of the above groups, the most stringent standard shall apply. Copies of each such regulation and publication are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(e)  Radiation hazards. Standards for controlling radiation hazards shall comply with the standards set forth in the Florida State Board of Health Sanitary Code for all industrial activities within the industrial district. A copy of said regulations is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(f)  Industrial sewerage and waste. No industry shall discharge into any stream, lake, the ground, or the public sewer system any waste which shall be harmful or dangerous to persons, animals, or vegetation beyond the lot line of the property upon which the industrial use is located. 
(g)  Fire and explosive hazards. Industrial districts shall be designated as fire districts as shown in the Florida Building Code and shall be in conformance with the provisions of chapter 9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 2-2017, § 2, 1-10-17)  
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; certain public places, § 17-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Recreation, F.S. ch. 418. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NORTH BREVARD COMMISSION ON PARKS AND RECREATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Provisions regarding the appointment, removal, and resignation requirements, § 2-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Created; purpose; area. 
There is hereby created and established by the city in conjunction with the School Board of Brevard County, and the Board of County Commissioners of Brevard County, jointly and severally, the North Brevard Commission on Parks and Recreation, hereinafter called the "commission" to institute, provide, administer and maintain a joint park, recreation and culture system for the city, school board, and county commission district 1. Such system and facilities thereof to be entirely within the area and confines of the county commission district one (1) as presently constituted. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-11; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-27. - Membership; appointment. 
The commission shall consist of nine (9) members; four (4) of whom shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners, one (1) of whom shall be appointed by the school board, and four (4) of whom shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-12; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-28. - Term; vacancies. 
Each commission member shall be appointed for a two-year term of office with the exception of the initial appointment which will be as follows: two (2) of the appointees of the city, two (2) of the appointees of the board of county commissioners and the appointee of the school board shall be appointed for an initial term of two (2) years; two (2) of the appointees of the board of county commissioners shall be appointed for an initial term of one (1) year. Commission members shall be eligible for reappointment and all subsequent appointments shall be for a two-year term. A commission member's term shall be upon good behavior, consistent attendance, or upon earlier resignation. A commission vacancy shall be forthwith filled by the appointee who will complete the remainder of the unexpired term by the board which appointed the member whose office was vacated. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-13; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-29. - Qualifications of members; compensation; personal liability. 
(a)  Members of the commission appointed by the city and the board of county commissioners shall all be residents of county commission district one (1). Members of the commission shall serve without pay. No member of the commission shall serve as a paid employee of the commission. 
(b)  No commission member shall be held liable, individually or jointly with any other commission member or members, for any act or omission occurring within the scope of the lawful activities of the commission. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-14; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-30. - Commission constituted advisory board. 
The commission shall be considered an advisory board and an agency of each of the governmental bodies who now or hereafter (by amendment) appoint members to the commission. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-15; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-31. - Officers; vote required; meetings; bylaws. 
The commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman for terms to be designated by the commission. A majority of the total number of commission members shall constitute a quorum necessary to conduct business. A majority of those present shall be required to adopt, amend, or repeal any action by the commission. The commission shall hold regular meetings monthly and shall adopt its own bylaws subject to the authority provided herein. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-16; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-32. - Objectives of commission. 
The objective of the commission is to function as an advisory board to the city, the board of county commissions and the school board for the establishment, maintenance and administration of a system of parks, recreational and cultural facilities, now in existence or hereafter created, for the joint use and benefit of county commission district one (1) and the participating municipalities and boards therein, thereby insuring the following advantages and services: 
(1)  The joint and cooperative effort of the participating governmental bodies in establishing the commission will permit maximum economy and utilization in providing and maintaining park, recreation and cultural facilities and programs within the included area in consideration of the resources and personnel available. 
(2)  A joint and cooperative effort will eliminate the duplication of personnel and facilities, which would otherwise be required if the respective governmental bodies established and conducted separate and coordinated programs. 
(3)  The commission will provide a long range plan for the development of park, recreational and cultural facilities and programs which will include all segments of the district's population. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-17; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-33. - Power and authority generally. 
(a)  The commission shall review, assess, and evaluate for commission district 1 parks and recreation: 
(1)  Existing park and recreation facilities. 
(2)  Types of activities available at facilities. 
(3)  Types of activities not available at facilities. 
(4)  Adequacy and availability of facilities for the present and future needs and activities. 
(5)  Existing funding sources for facilities and activities. 
(6)  Maintenance and its appropriate funding. 
(7)  Existing rules and regulations established for the administration of the parks and recreation facilities and activities. 
(8)  Any other issue relevant to adequate or improved provisions of parks and recreation facilities and activities. 
(b)  The commission shall make final recommendations to the board of county commissioners regarding the following: 
(1)  Improvements and changes regarding subsection (a). 
(2)  Design plan/proposals for new facilities and improvement to old facilities. 
(3)  New sources of funding or of community involvement for the development and/or maintenance of parks and recreation facilities. 
(c)  The commission shall issue a biannual report regarding its activities which shall be issued to the city, board of county commissioners, and the school board. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-18; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-34. - Tax monies; other funds. 
Funding for the facilities and activities as set out herein shall be provided by, and subject to the approval of, the board of county commissions from the various sources which are provided for by the board of county commissioners and/or the voters of Brevard County for the use and benefit of county commission district 1 as it may be established from time to time. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-19; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 14-35. - Duration of commission; withdrawal of participants. 
The commission shall continue in existence and operation as long as this article remains adopted by all of the governmental bodies. Any participating body may withdraw from participation at the end of any fiscal year by formal action of the participating body. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-21; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 1995, repealed former § 14-35, which pertained to additional monies from municipalities, and renumbered former §§ 14-36 and 14-37 as §§ 14-35 and 14-36.  
Sec. 14-36. - Amendment of article. 
This article may be amended at any time, in whole or in part, upon any given amendatory provision being adopted and approved by each and every of the governing authorities of the governmental bodies who remain in adoption of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-22; Ord. No. 23-1995, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Note— See the editor's note at the end of § 14-35.  
Secs. 14-37—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKS 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Sand Point Park rules. 
(a)  Persons or groups wishing to use any of the pavilions at Sand Point Park may reserve these facilities from the city manager or his designee. The authorized representative shall assign the applicant the specific facility as per availability. 
(1)  Applications for reservations and payment of fees for same must be paid forty-eight (48) hours in advance of use. 
(2)  Individual picnic tables, grills and pavilions are on first-come, first-served basis. 
(b)  Sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in Sand Point Park unless a permit has been issued pursuant to section 14-62 of the code. Any permit for sale shall be limited to beer and/or wine. 
(c)  Refunds of fees required in subsection (a) above shall be made only if applicant provides forty-eight (48) hours' advanced notice of cancellation. However, a five-dollar administrative service charge shall be deducted from the refund. 
(d)  Park hours are 7:00 a.m. until dark unless authorized by permit from the city manager. No person shall enter or remain on Sand Point Park premises during closing hours without a permit as provided in section 14-62. 
(e)  An applicant who reserves, and is permitted to use, a facility at the park is responsible for his own behavior and also his group's behavior. No temporary facilities or tents shall be erected on the park properties without a permit as provided in section 14-62. 
(f)  All pets shall be kept on a short leash at all times. In addition, all pets shall be properly vaccinated and licensed, and pet owners shall be required to clean up after their own pets. 
(g)  Fires shall only be allowed in picnic grills provided by the park. Open fires are prohibited unless permitted by the city manager. Certain grills and cookers may be permitted for cooking if it is determined by the city that they are safe. 
(h)  No facilities shall be rented to a person under the age of eighteen (18). Burden of proof of age must be established by the user to the satisfaction of staff designated to make reservations. 
(i)  All users of the Sand Point Park facilities shall comply with all federal, state, county or other local laws, rules or regulations. 
(j)  All garbage and refuse shall be deposited in designated trash containers. All facilities shall be left in orderly fashion for the next person. Tables, chairs and building furnishings shall not be removed from the building unless permitted as provided in section 14-62. 
(k)  No person shall use any loudspeaker or other amplifying equipment, nor shall any person play upon any musical instrument in confines of Sand Point Park without a permit as provided in section 14-62. 
(l)  No person shall conduct or participate in any public assemblies, entertainment, tournaments, religious gatherings, demonstration, parades, processions, or meetings on any subject, religious, social, political or otherwise at Sand Point Park unless a permit has been issued as provided in section 14-62. 
(m)  No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale any tangible or intangible object, merchandise or thing nor solicit for any trade, occupation, business, or profession for any consideration within Sand Point Park without a permit as provided in section 14-62. 
(n)  No person shall post any signs on park properties without permission from city manager or his representative as provided in section 14-62. 
(o)  The operation of vehicles in Sand Point Park shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The motor vehicle speed shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour within park confines. 
(2)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the park except on designated roadways and parking areas, except as exempted for special purposes by the city manager. 
(3)  No person shall enter or exit Sand Point Park in any vehicle except at entrances and exits established for that purpose, except as exempted for special purposes by the city manager. 
(p)  No person shall mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(q)  No person shall display or discharge any rocket or fireworks of any description without a permit as provided in section 14-62. 
(r)  No person shall, catch, harm, kill, trap, chase, or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird except poisonous snakes. No person shall remove or have in his/her possession the young of any wild animal, or eggs, or nest of young of any reptile or bird. 
(s)  No person or group shall interfere with, hinder or oppose any officer, agent or employee of the city in the discharge of his duties or with enforcement of the park regulations and rules. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-2(a)—(v); Ord. No. 44-2005, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 21-2011, § 2, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 14-62. - Permit application. 
Any permit required in section 14-61 shall be obtained from the city manager or his designee. The city manager may attach any reasonable condition to the permit and the city manager may refuse to issue a permit in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare. Any denial may be appealed to the city council. Permit fees shall be as set forth in the general rules and regulations herein adopted as a part of this section by reference and on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-2(w); Ord. No. 44-2005, § 2, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 14-63. - Use of pavilions. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to promulgate additional rules to implement the general rules and regulations regarding use of the Valicenti pavilion and double pavilion. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-2(x))  
Sec. 14-64. - Ballfields. 
The rules and regulations in this article shall not apply to the ballfields located on Sand Point Park; county regulations adopted by reference in section 14-66 shall apply to such fields. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-2(y))  
Sec. 14-65. - Violation. 
Any person violating any of the park rules may be immediately expelled or ejected from Sand Point Park and any person violating any of the above rules shall be punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-3)  
Sec. 14-66. - Adoption of county park regulations and enforcement. 
The city hereby adopts by reference the rules and regulations of the county which are on file in the city clerk's office and made a part hereof as regulations of activities in certain parks within the city. It is the intention and purpose of the city to adopt by reference the rules and regulations adopted by the board of county commissioners. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-4)  
Sec. 14-67. - Enforcement. 
The police department is hereby expressly authorized to enforce the rules and regulations adopted in this article. Any person violating any park rule or regulation may be immediately expelled or ejected from the park and any violation of the rules and regulations shall upon conviction be punishable in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 15A-4)  
Chapter 15 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to establish an employees' pension plan, § 11(40). 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-76 et seq.; building official, § 6-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.60 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL EMPLOYEES' PENSION PLAN  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-26. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
Actuarial equivalent shall mean a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Mortality Table—Unisex, with disabled live set forward five (5) years and an interest rate of eight (8) percent per annum. This definition may only be amended by the city pursuant to the recommendation of the board using the assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to city discretion. 
Average final compensation for members who attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, and for credited service earned prior to August 26, 2013 for all other members, means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average salary of the five (5) best years of the last ten (10) years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time general employee, whichever is greater. A year shall be twelve (12) consecutive months. Effective August 26, 2013, average final compensation for members who did not attain age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, and members hired on or after that date, shall be defined in accordance with section 15-105. 
Beneficiary shall mean the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a retired member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect at the time of death of the member the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board shall mean the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided and serve as trustees of the fund. 
City means City of Titusville, Florida. 
Credited service shall mean the total number of years and fractional parts of years of continuous service as a general employee with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the city as a general employee. If a vested member leaves the employ of the city, his accumulated contributions, if any, will be returned only upon his written request. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed as a general employee with the city within six (6) months, his accumulated contributions, if less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within six (6) months, his accumulated contributions, if one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. 
Continuous service shall not be interrupted where there is a break in service of six (6) months or less that occurs after at least one (1) year of service. Any other break in service shall result in new accrual of credited service time for all purposes, if return to service occurs, unless otherwise required by law. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, any former employee who was vested in this system who is reemployed by the city as a general employee shall be deemed vested upon reemployment and shall not be required to revest. Upon reemployment, the member shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial termination of employment to determine the total benefit payable upon retirement. Calculations of benefits upon the initial termination of employment shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service as of the date of the initial termination of employment and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period), and credited service as of the date of subsequent termination of employment and retirement. These two (2) benefit calculations shall be added together to determine the final retirement benefit. 
In the event that a member of this system has also accumulated credited service in another pension system maintained by the city, then such other credited service shall be used in determining the vested percentage as provided for in section 15-100 and for determining eligibility for early or normal retirement in each system. Such other credited service shall not be considered in determining benefits under this system. Only his credited service and salary under this system on or after his date of participation in this system will be considered for this system's benefit calculation. 
The years or parts of a year that a member performs "Qualified Military Service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L.103-353), after separation from employment as a general employee to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
(1)  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
(2)  The member returns to his employment as a general employee within one (1) year following the earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from service, unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
(3)  The member deposits into the fund the same sum that the member would have contributed, if any, if he had remained a general employee during his absence. The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this subdivision shall be five (5) years. The member must deposit all missed contributions within a period equal to three (3) times the period of military service, but not more than five (5) years, following re-employment or he will forfeit the right to receive credited service for his military service pursuant to this paragraph. 
(4)  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA Qualified Military Service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by section 414(u)(12) of the code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under section 3401(h)(2) of the code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under section 415(c) of the code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the city or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Effective date shall mean the date of June 9, 1992. 
Employee or general employee shall mean all regular full-time employees of the city, (which includes the city manager, city attorney and assistant city attorney), excluding certified firefighters, certified police officers, contract employees (employees with an employment contract to deliver a specific work product within a designated period of time) and elected officials, but including civilian, clerical and other noncertified employees of the police and fire departments. 
Fund shall mean the trust established herein as part of the system, including the principal life group annuity contract GA-39113. 
Internal Revenue Code shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Member shall mean an actively employed general employee who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for in this article, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Plan administrator shall mean the official designated by the board to conduct the day to day administrative duties of the board and with whom all required forms and claims for benefits shall be filed. 
Plan year means the twelve-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
Professional member shall mean a member who is designated a department head hired before May 1, 1985. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system or entry into the deferred retirement option plan. 
Salary for members who attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, and for credited service earned prior to August 26, 2013, for all other members, means the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a general employee reported on the member's W-2 form plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered, or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions but not including any reimbursement of expenses or payments of expense allowances, including, but not limited to, car allowance, cell phone allowance, clothing allowance, safety award, travel reimbursement, etc. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the [Internal Revenue] Code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with code section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than twelve (12) months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is twelve (12). If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. Effective August 26, 2013 salary for members who did not attain age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, and members hired on or after that date shall be defined in accordance with section 15-105. 
Spouse shall mean the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the City of Titusville General Employees' Pension Plan, as contained herein and all amendments thereto. 
(b)  Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(Code 1963, § 16-11; Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(1), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 1, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 02-2005, § 1, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 74-2007, § 1, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 1, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 24-2013, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 25-2013, § 1, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 18-2014, § 1, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 1, 1-10-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 15-27. - Conditions, eligibility of membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. All general employees as of September 21, 1999, and all future new general employees, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(b)  Acceptance of system. Each general employee shall complete a form prescribed by the board providing that the general employee accepts the terms and conditions of the retirement system. 
(c)  Designation of beneficiary. Each general employee shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(d)  Opt out option. Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, a new employee hired as the city manager, city attorney or assistant city attorney may notify the board and the city, upon employment as city manager, city attorney or assistant city attorney, of his election to not be a member of the system. Current employees of the city who are selected to become the city manager, city attorney, or assistant city attorney are not eligible for the opt-out provided for herein. In the event of any such election, he shall be barred from future membership in the system so long as he continues to be employed as city manager, city attorney or assistant city attorney. Thereafter, contributions to the plan in accordance with section 15-28 shall not be required, he shall not be eligible to be elected as a member trustee on the board or vote for a member trustee, and he shall not be eligible for any other benefits from the plan. 
(Code 1963, § 16-12(1); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(2), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 2, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 2, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-28. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. 
(1)  Amount. Effective October 1, 2010, each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of two and one-half (2.5) percent of his salary. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the [Internal Revenue] Code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for Federal Income Tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make monthly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the required city contribution as shown by the applicable actuarial valuation of the system. 
(c)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund. Such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(d)  Shared investment returns. Effective with the plan year beginning October 1, 1997, the lesser of: 1) any investment return earned on the assets of the general employees' pension plan (as actuarially determined by a four-year moving weighted average) in excess of or less than eight (8) percent per annum; or 2) the net actuarial gain (loss) for the plan year shall be evenly divided with fifty (50) percent of these excess earnings or gains (losses) utilized to reduce or increase the required contribution to be made by the city to the general employees' pension plan as provided in subsection (a) above, and the remaining fifty (50) percent to be set aside and accumulated in a special actuarial account to be used for providing future benefit improvements for members of the general employees' pension plan. In the event that the amount determined in any year represents a deficiency, the deficiency shall be funded from the special actuarial account. The amount to be added to or subtracted from the special actuarial account shall be determined by the board on an annual basis upon receipt of the annual actuarial valuation of the plan. Actuarial experience may be used to fund additional benefits, provided that the present value of such benefits does not exceed the net actuarial experience accumulated from all sources of gains and losses. The subsection and the shared investment returns provided for herein are expressly intended to provide the funds necessary to reach the benefit goals as adopted by the board of the general employees' pension plan which, among others, are as follows: 
(1)  Average final compensation of the three (3) best years of the last ten (10) years of credited service; 
(2)  Increase the benefit accrual rate. 
At the time the special actuarial account is used to fund additional benefits, the amount allocated for such purposes shall not reduce the special actuarial amount balance below a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Code 1963, § 16-15; Ord. No. 39-1991, § 1, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(5), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 18-1993, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 1, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 3, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 2, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 15-29. - Repeal or termination of system—Generally. 
This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to the system and fund, may be modified, terminated or amended in whole or in part; provided that if this article or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1963, § 16-18(1); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(19(1)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 3, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-30. - Same—Continued administration. 
If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this article for the sole benefit of then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future person entitled to receive benefits under one (1) of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any such member. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting (one hundred (100) percent) of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(Code 1963, § 16-18(2); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(19(2)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 4, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-31. - Same—Allocation of assets. 
The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
(2)  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each general employee entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection (3). 
(3)  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection (2) involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the general employee's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the general employee. 
(4)  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection (3), and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city. 
(5)  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection (2), the amounts determined under subsection (3). 
(Code 1963, § 16-18(3), (4); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(19(3)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 2, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 5, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-32. - Benefits not to be reduced. 
No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city council which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(19(3)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-33. - Qualification of system. 
It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified pension plan under the applicable provisions of the code for a qualified plan under code section 401(a) and a governmental plan under code section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 19-1996, § 3, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 6, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-34. - Use of forfeitures. 
Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 19-1996, § 4, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-35. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Prohibited transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, aboard may not engage in a transaction prohibited by code section 503(b). 
(b)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by code section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(c)  Vesting. 
(1)  A member will be one hundred (100) percent vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
(2)  A member will be one hundred (100) percent vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(d)  Electronic forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations section 1.401(a)-21. 
(Ord. No. 48-2009, § 7, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-36. - Benefit freeze. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the system, for all members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on August 26, 2013, and who did not attain age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013: 
(1)  The accrued benefits of all such members shall be frozen on August 26, 2013, and all such members shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in their frozen accrued benefit. 
(2)  Such members shall accrue benefits on and after August 26, 2013, in accordance with section 15-105. 
(3)  The benefits of such members shall be payable in two (2) parts as follows: 
a.  The frozen accrued benefit based on the vested percentage, credited service, average final compensation and other provisions of the system in effect on the day before August 26, 2013, payable at the earlier of age fifty-eight (58) (normal retirement), age forty-eight (48) (early retirement, if elected), or completion of twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age, and separation from city employment; and 
b.  The benefit based on credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on and after August 26, 2013, payable at the earlier of age sixty-two (62) with ten (10) years of credited service, or thirty (30) years of credited service regardless of age, and separation from city employment. Provided, members with ten (10) or more years of service as of August 26, 2013, shall be eligible to receive the benefit based on credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on and after August 26, 2013, upon attaining the earlier of age fifty-eight (58) (normal retirement), age forty-eight (48) (early retirement, if elected), or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age, and separation from city employment. 
(b)  The benefits of members who attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, shall not be frozen, and such members shall continue to accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of the system in effect prior to August 26, 2013, for as long as they are employed in a position covered by the system, however the member's accrued leave balance for vacation or sick leave shall be frozen as of August 26, 2013, and future accrual shall not be considered in the calculation of pensionable earnings. 
(c)  For purposes of determining a member's frozen accrued benefit in accordance with this section, salary shall include any payments of accrued leave that would have been included in salary if the member retired prior to August 26, 2013. However, the member's accrued leave balance shall be reduced by the amount of vacation or sick leave used subsequent to August 26, 2013, and the member's frozen accrued benefit shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 24-2013, § 2, 8-13-13)  
Secs. 15-37—15-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Provisions regarding the appointment, removal, and resignation requirements, § 2-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-41. - Authority vested. 
The sole and exclusive administration and responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of this article are hereby vested in a board of trustees. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(1); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(1)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-42. - Composition. 
The board shall consist of five (5) trustees, as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) general employee members of the retirement system elected by a plurality of the general members who are members of the system. 
(2)  Two (2) trustees, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(3)  One (1) trustee shall be a resident of the city or maintain their principal place of business in the city and chosen by a majority of the previous four (4) trustees. Such person's name shall be submitted to the city council for its consideration. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council shall, in council's discretion, appoint such person to the board as its fifth trustee. 
The two (2) trustee positions whose terms on the board of trustees expire in September 2014 and November 2015 shall, upon expiration, be filled by appointment of the city council as set forth in subsection (2) above. The two (2) trustee positions whose terms on the board of trustees expire in February 2016 shall be filled, upon expiration, by an election of the members of the retirement system as set forth in subsection (1) above. The fifth trustee position set to expire November 2014 shall, upon expiration, be filled as set forth in subsection (3) above. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(1), (2); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(1)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 02-2005, § 2, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 9-23-14)  
Sec. 15-43. - Term of office. 
The fifth trustee appointed to fill the position that expires in November 2014 shall serve a one-year term that shall expire in November 2015, and upon expiration, be filled as set forth in section 15-42 above. Thereafter, the appointed fifth trustee shall serve a three-year term unless the office is sooner vacated and may succeed himself/herself in office. Each elected or appointed trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of three (3) years, unless he/she sooner leaves the employment of the city as a general employee or otherwise vacates his/her office as trustee. Each trustee may succeed himself/herself in office. DROP participants can be elected as and vote for elected trustees. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(3); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(2)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 02-2005, § 3, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 13-2014, § 1, 9-23-14)  
Sec. 15-44. - Meetings; legal status. 
The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. Each board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained in this division, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature and description. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-45. - Filling vacancies. 
If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(5); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(2)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-46. - Compensation, expenses. 
The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(6); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(4)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-47. - Officers. 
The board shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairman and a secretary. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(4)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-48. - Votes by members. 
Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest, provided that the trustee complies with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(8); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(5)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-49. - Board professional advisors. 
The board may utilize the city attorney on a case by case basis or employ independent legal counsel, employ an actuary, and employ a certified public accountant all at the pension fund's expense for the purposes contained in this article, together with such other professional, technical, or other advisors as the board deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(14), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 18-1993, § 2, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-50. - Employment of staff. 
The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the retirement system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the retirement system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(10); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(6)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-51. - Removal of members. 
Any elected trustee who neglects the duties of his office, as determined by the board, may be removed by four (4) concurring votes among the board. Any trustee who fails to attend three (3) or more consecutive regular meetings (not included special or workshop meetings) or who fails to attend more than fifty (50) percent of the regular, special or workshop meetings within a six-month period, shall automatically forfeit membership and appointment or election to the board. The board may authorize a trustee to miss three (3) or more consecutive meetings or more than fifty (50) percent of the regular, special or workshop meetings during a six-month period. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(11); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(7)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 18-1993, § 3, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-52. - Minutes. 
The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings or hearings of the board. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(12); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(4)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-53. - Duties, responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  Determine all questions relating to eligibility and participation. 
(3)  Determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4)  Establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  Distribute to the members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  Receive and process all applications for participation and benefits. 
(7)  Authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  Have actuarial studies and valuations performed, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(Code 1963, § 16-16(13); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(3(7)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 5, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 4-2017, adopted Jan. 10, 2017, deleted § 15-54, which pertained to plan administrator and derived from Ord. No. 10-1992, adopted June 9, 1992; and Ord. No. 51-2002, adopted Nov. 26, 2002.  
Sec. 15-55. - Roster of retirees. 
The plan administrator of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the plan administrator shall keep a record of all members employed by the city in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(13), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-56. - Defenses of claims against trustees. 
To the extent not covered by insurance, and to the extent provided for in F.S. §§ 111.07 and 111.071, the city agrees to provide a defense of civil actions resulting from claims made against members of the board and to provide payment of judgments or settlements resulting from such claims. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(23), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 18-1993, § 4, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Secs. 15-57—15-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 15-66. - Interest of members in the fund. 
All assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan with respect to members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(18(1)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 8, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 19-1996, § 6, adopted August 27, 1996, deleted § 15-67 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertain to liquidation of pension fund assets and derived from Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(18(2)), 6-9-92.  
Sec. 15-68. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from execution, nonassignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city. 
(c)  Exemption from execution, nonassignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Code 1963, § 16-19(3); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(20), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 1-1993, § 3, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 18-1993, § 5, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 9, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-69. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. Such board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 1963, § 16-19(4); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 21, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 4, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-70. - Forfeiture of pension. 
(a)  Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this system, except for the return of his accumulated contributions, if any, but without interest, as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
(1)  The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds. 
(2)  The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from employer. 
(3)  Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee. 
(4)  Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838. 
(5)  The committing of an impeachable offense. 
(6)  The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public agency, for which he acts or in which he is employed, of the right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or employment position. 
(7)  The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any felony defined in F.S. § 800.04, against a victim younger than sixteen (16) years of age, or any felony defined in F.S. ch. 794, against a victim younger than eighteen (18) years of age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment position. 
(b)  Conviction shall be an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the senate of an impeachable offense. 
(c)  Court shall be any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Such member shall be afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(d)  Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions after the member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions, if any, but without interest. The board may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(22), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 10, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 3, 9-27-10)  
Secs. 15-71—15-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FINANCES AND FUND MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 15-81. - Fund established. 
As part of the system there is hereby established the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system, including the assets of the prior general employees pension plan and any assets transferred from the Principal Life Group Annuity Contract GA-39113. 
(Code 1963, § 16-17(1); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(1)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-82. - Custody, supervision of fund. 
The actual custody and supervision of the fund, and assets thereof, shall be vested in the board. Payments of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent, but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(Code 1963, § 16-17(2); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(2)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-83. - Custodian, investment. 
The board shall deposit the funds of the general employees pension plan in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall conform to and be bound by the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of the custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under Investment Advisory Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have full discretion in the investment of all fund assets subject to any guidelines prescribed by the board. 
(Code 1963, § 16-17(3); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(3)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-84. - Commingling of funds. 
All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis, and 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements. 
(3)  Benefit payments. 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city. 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever. 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(Code 1963, § 16-17(4); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(4)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-85. - Powers, authority. 
The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to the fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Notwithstanding any limitation provided for in Florida Statutes to the contrary (unless such limitation may not be amended by local ordinance) or any limitation in prior city ordinances to the contrary, all monies paid into or held in the fund may be invested and reinvested in such securities, investment vehicles or property wherever situated and of whatever kind, as shall be approved by the board, including but not limited to common or preferred stocks, bonds, and other evidences of indebtedness or ownership. 
b.  The board shall develop and adopt a written investment policy statement setting forth permissible types of investments, goals and objectives of investments and setting quality and quantity limitations on investments in accordance with the recommendations of its investment consultants. The investment policy statement shall be reviewed by the board at least annually. 
c.  In addition, the board may, upon recommendation by the board's investment consultant, make investments in group trusts meeting the requirements of Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 81-100, Revenue Ruling 2011-1, IRS Notice 2012-6 and Revenue Ruling 2014-24 or successor rulings or guidance of similar import, and operated or maintained exclusively for the commingling and collective investment of monies, provided that the funds in the group trust consist exclusively of trust assets held under plans qualified under section 401(a) of the code, individual retirement accounts that are exempt under section 408(e) of the code, eligible governmental plans that meet the requirements of section 457(b) of the code, and governmental plans under 401(a)(24) of the code. For this purpose, a trust includes a custodial account or a separate tax favored account maintained by an insurance company that is treated as a trust under section 401(f) or under section 457(g)(3) of the code. While any portion of the assets of the fund are invested in such a group trust, such group trust is itself adopted as a part of the system or plan. 
1.  Any collective or common group trust to which assets of the fund are transferred pursuant to subsection c. shall be adopted by the board as part of the plan by executing appropriate participation, adoption agreements, and/or trust agreements with the group trust's trustee. 
2.  The separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan pursuant to subsection c. shall not be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries of the plan. 
3.  For purposes of valuation, the value of the separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan shall be the fair market value of the portion of the group trust held for the plan, determined in accordance with generally recognized valuation procedures. 
(3)  At least once every three (3) years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  The board may retain in cash or cash equivalents and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(7)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in a form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the trust fund. 
(8)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies of power of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock, or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be in the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(9)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report of any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power herein contained. 
(10)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform, either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(11)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner if prudent. Underpayments shall be made from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(12)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(13)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice of service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(Code 1963, § 16-17(5); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(6)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 18-1993, §§ 6, 7, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 3, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 25-2013, § 2, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 4, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-86. - Delegation of powers, etc. 
Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to such fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 1963, § 16-17(6); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(6)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-87. - Annual audit. 
An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(4(5)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Secs. 15-88—15-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - BENEFITS AND ELIGIBILITY 
 
Sec. 15-96. - Normal retirement. 
(a)  Date. The normal retirement date for members who retired, entered the DROP, or terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit prior to August 26, 2013, and members who are employed on August 26, 2013, and have attained ten (10) or more years of credited service on that date, shall be the first day of the month coincident with, or the next following attainment of the earlier of age fifty-eight (58) and the completion of seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or the completion of twenty-eight (28) years of credited service, regardless of age. A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and each member shall become one hundred (100) percent vested in his accrued benefit on the member's normal retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the normal retirement date. The normal retirement date for members who are employed and have not attained ten (10) or more years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after August 26, 2013, shall be as provided in section 15-105; provided, such members who are employed on August 26, 2013, shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit based on credited service earned prior to August 26, 2013, upon attaining age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age, and separation from city employment. 
(b)  Benefit. A member retiring under this article on or after his normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month next following his retirement and be continued thereafter during member's lifetime, ceasing upon death. The monthly retirement benefit for credited service earned prior to August 26, 2013, and for all years of credited service of members who attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, shall equal two and four hundred eighty-two thousandths (2.482) percent of average final compensation, for each year of credited service. The normal retirement benefit for credited service on and after August 26, 2013, for members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on August 26, 2013, and who have not attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age on that date, and members hired on or after August 26, 2013, shall be as provided in section 15-105. 
(c)  Retirement incentive window. 
(1)  Those members who: 
a.  Have completed twenty-five (25) years of credited service, regardless of age; or 
b.  Are within three (3) years of their early or normal retirement date and have completed eight (8) years of credited service; 
On or before January 15, 1995, may elect to terminate employment between July 15, 1994, and January 15, 1995, and be eligible to receive the pension benefit provided for in paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  Those members eligible to retire pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection (c), shall receive an unreduced monthly benefit determined in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Code 1963, § 16-13(1); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(6(1), (2)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 1-1993, § 1, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 3-1994, §§ 1, 2, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 19-1994, § 1, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 7, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 3-1997, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 2, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 5, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 18-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 8-2001, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 11, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 24-2013, § 3, 8-13-13)  
Sec. 15-97. - Early retirement. 
(a)  Date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the later of the attainment of age forty-eight (48) and the completion of seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service. Early retirement under the plan is retirement from employment with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(b)  Benefit. A member retiring under this article on his early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable for life as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his normal retirement date had he remained a general employee and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (a)(1) of this section, which is reduced by three (3) percent for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes the normal retirement date. 
(c)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Code 1963, § 16-13(2); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(6(3), (4)), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 3-1994, § 3, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 3-1997, § 3, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 6, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 18-2000, § 2, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 8-2001, § 2, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 12, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-98. - Disability. 
(a)  Eligibility. Each member with ten (10) or more years of credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a general employee, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to two and four hundred eighty-two thousandths (2.482) percent of his average final compensation multiplied by his total years of credited service. Terminated persons, either vested or nonvested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(b)  Exclusions. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily for: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while committing a crime. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the armed forces. 
(5)  Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a general employee with the city has terminated. 
(6)  Willful, wanton or intentional misconduct or gross negligence of the member. 
(7)  Injury or disease sustained by the member while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment. 
(8)  A condition preexisting the general employee's membership in the system. No member shall be entitled to a disability pension, whether in line of duty or not in line of duty, because of or due to the aggravation of a specific injury, impairment or other medical condition preexisting at the time of membership in the system, provided that such preexisting condition and its relationship to a later injury, impairment or other medical condition be established by competent substantial evidence. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude a disability pension to a member who, after membership in the system, suffers an injury, impairment or other medical condition different from some other injury, impairment or other medical condition existing at or prior to such membership. 
(c)  Physical examination requirement. A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable and prudent to do so. 
(1)  Any retiree receiving disability benefits under the provisions of this article may be required to submit to and pay the cost of an annual physical examination by his own treating physician in order to provide the board with current information about his physical condition. A disabled retiree may be periodically reexamined by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, at the board's expense, to assist in determining if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is now employable in a fulltime capacity by any employer, the disability benefit shall cease. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the cost of the physical examination and/or reexamination of the member claiming or the retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as, but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
(3)  If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a general employee, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the city, or attained his normal retirement age will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the plan. 
(4)  The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(d)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be on the earlier of the following: 
(1)  The member's normal retirement date. 
(2)  The first day of the month preceding the retiree's date of death. 
(3)  The first day of the month preceding the retiree's recovery as determined by the board. 
(4)  The first day of the month preceding the date the member voluntarily elects to receive his early retirement benefits, however, years of service while receiving disability benefits hereunder shall not be considered in determining the member's early retirement benefit. 
(e)  Benefit offsets. In the event that the disability benefits described herein plus other monthly amounts to which the disabled member is entitled, under worker's compensation, or any other city-financed disability or salary continuation program exceeds one hundred (100) percent of the member's average monthly earnings in effect on the date of disability, the disability benefits provided herein shall be reduced so that the total of all such regular monthly amounts does not exceed one hundred (100) percent of such average monthly earnings. 
(Code 1963, § 16-13(3); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(8), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 1-1993, § 2, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 3-1994, § 4, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 19-1996, §§ 8, 9, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 3-1997, § 4, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 3, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 7, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 18-2000, § 3, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 5, 1-10-17) 
State Law reference— Worker's compensation offset, F.S. § 440.15(12).  
Sec. 15-99. - Preretirement death. 
(a)  Prior to vesting. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not yet vested shall receive a refund of one hundred (100) percent of the member's accumulated contributions, if any. 
(b)  Deceased members vested. The beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested, shall be entitled to a monthly retirement income, determined actuarially, beginning on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of death, which can be provided by fifty (50) percent of the single-sum value of the retirement income to which the member would have been entitled had he retired immediately prior to the date of his death. All computations shall be on the basis of the interest and mortality assumptions used for the actuarial valuation coincident with, or next preceding the member's date of death. 
The normal form of payment of the death benefit is a monthly income which provides monthly income payments for the life of the beneficiary. 
(c)  In lieu of the normal form of payments, fifty (50) percent of the single-sum value of the benefit may be paid on an actuarially equivalent basis to the beneficiary in such other manner and form as the beneficiary may elect and the board may approve, except that no lump sum form of benefit payment shall be permitted. 
(d)  A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in (a), (b) or (c) above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions, if any. 
(Code 1963, § 16-13(4); Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(7), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 4, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-100. - Vesting. 
(a)  If a member terminates his employment as a general employee prior to August 26, 2013, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  If the member has less than seven and one-half (7½) years credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a refund of his accumulated contributions (as defined in section 15-26), if any, or the member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  If the member has seven and one-half (7.5) or more years of credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, based upon his actual years of credited service, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
(b)  Members who terminate employment on or after August 26, 2013, shall be subject to the vesting provisions in section 15-105; provided, members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on August 26, 2013, and who did not attain age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in their frozen accrued benefit which shall be payable as provided in section 15-36. 
(Code 1963, § 16-13(5); Ord. No. 92-1992, § 1(9), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 12-1998, § 5, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 8-2001, § 3, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 4, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 4, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 24-2013, § 4, 8-13-13)  
Sec. 15-101. - Procedure for disability and other claims. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1963, § 16-13(6); Ord. No. 6-1991, § 1, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(12), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 10, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-102. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a)  Each member entitled to an early or normal retirement benefit or a terminated vested member entitled to a future benefit under section 15-104, shall have the right, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, to elect to have his or her benefit payable under any of the options hereinafter set forth in lieu of the benefits provided herein and to revoke any such elections and make a new election at any time prior to the actual commencement of payments. The value of payable optional benefits shall be actuarially equivalent to the value of benefits otherwise payable except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the treasury regulations. The member shall make such an election by written request to the board, such request being retained in the board's files. 
(1)  Option 1. Joint and last survivor option. The member may elect to receive a benefit during his or her lifetime and have such benefit (or designated fraction thereof) continued after his or her death to and during the lifetime of his or her spouse or a relative other than his or her spouse. The election of Option 1 shall be null and void if the designated joint pensioner dies before the member's benefit payments commence. 
(2)  Option 2. Five-year, ten-year or fifteen-year certain and life annuity. The member may elect to receive a reduced benefit payable for life; provided, however, that if the member should become deceased before expiration of the designated certain period, payment will continue to the beneficiary until such guaranteed payments have been made in total, at which time benefits shall cease. 
(3)  Option 3. Social security option. If a member retires prior to the time social security benefits are payable, the retiree may elect to receive an increased benefit until such time as social security benefits shall be assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to the extent possible, a more level retirement benefit during the entire retirement period. 
(4)  Option 4. Partial lump sum option. A member who does not elect to enter the deferred retirement option plan may elect a percentage of benefit in a lump sum as follows: 
a.  Ten (10) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining ninety (90) percent paid under the normal form (life annuity) or as per subsection (1), (2) or (3) above. 
b.  Fifteen (15) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining eighty-five (85) percent paid under the normal form (life annuity) or as per subsection (1), (2) or (3) above. 
c.  Twenty (20) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining eighty (80) percent paid under the normal form (life annuity) or as per subsection (1), (2) or (3) above. 
d.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining seventy-five (75) percent paid under the normal form (life annuity) or as per subsection (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(b)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner or beneficiary, or beneficiaries, to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of the member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one (1) or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner or beneficiary and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated joint pensioner or beneficiary, but only if the designated beneficiary predeceases the member or if the designated beneficiary and the member were married at time of the member's retirement and are divorced subsequent thereto. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(c)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously-designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the plan shall thereupon cease. 
(d)  Upon change of a member's beneficiary or joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the board shall adjust the member's monthly benefit by application of actuarial calculations to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the member's then current benefit. Any such member shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses and shall make repayment of any overage of previously paid pension benefits as a result of such recalculations. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the member, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the member subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 15-103. 
(e)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 15-99. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the plan, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
(3)  If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 15-103. 
(4)  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board in its discretion, may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Code 1963, § 16-14; Ord. No. 39-1991, § 2, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(10), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 11, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 8, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 5, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 13, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 6, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-103. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a member or retiree failed to properly name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in section, or if the beneficiary named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(11), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-104. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of code section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in code section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in code section 415(b)(1)(A) (one hundred sixty thousand dollars ($160,000.00)), subject to the applicable adjustments in code section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
For purposes of code section 415(b), the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to code section 415(n) and to rollover contributions (as defined in code section 415(b)(2)(A)). The "benefit attributable" shall be determined in accordance with treasury regulations. 
(b)  Adjustments to basic limitation for form of benefit. If the benefit under the plan is other than the annual benefit described in subsection (a), then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual benefit, using factors prescribed in treasury regulations. If the form of the benefit without regard to any automatic benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the code section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of benefit as follows: 
(1)  For a benefit paid in a form to which section 417(e)(3) of the code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of: 
a.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit to the member, or 
b.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a five-percent interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Rulings 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code); or 
(2)  For a benefit paid in a form to which section 417(e)(3) of the code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of: 
a.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial experience; 
b.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using a five and one-half-percent interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent revenue ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code); or 
c.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (the thirty-year treasury rate (prior to January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the month prior to retirement, and on and after January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the first day of the plan year with a one-year stabilization period)) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code), divided by one and five one-hundredths (1.05). 
(3)  The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting date in accordance with subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(c)  Benefits not taken into account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the Code and Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of code section 415(b)(1); and 
(3)  That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(d)  COLA effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b) (the "limit"), the following will apply: 
(1)  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first limitation year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost of living adjustments; 
(2)  Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the code section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under code section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
(3)  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any limitation year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost of living increases as required by section 415(b) of the Code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(e)  Other adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age sixty-two (62), the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to the provisions of code section 415(b) of the code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a one hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000.00) annual benefit beginning at age sixty-two (62). 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least fifteen (15) years of credited service as a full-time employee of the fire or police department of the city, the adjustments provided for in (e)(1) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in (e)(1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to section 15-98, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 15-99. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age sixty-five (65), for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age sixty-five (65). This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the secretary of the treasury or his delegate. 
(f)  Less than ten (10) years of participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten (10) years participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten (10). The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten (10) percent of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to section 15-98, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 15-99. 
(g)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in code section 414(j) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all city defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one (1) plan. 
(h)  Ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) limit; less than ten (10) years of service. Notwithstanding anything in this section 15-104, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this subsection (h) of section 15-104 if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the applicable limitation year or for any prior limitation year, and the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated; provided, however, that if the member has completed less than ten (10) years of credited service with the city, the limit under this subsection (h) of section 15-104 shall be a reduced limit equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten (10). 
(i)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(j)  Service credit purchase limits. 
(1)  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one (1) or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in sections 15-112, 15-111 and 15-114, then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
a.  The requirements of code section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of code section 415(b), or 
b.  The requirements of code section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of code section 415(c). 
For purposes of applying subparagraph (j)(1)a., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under code section 415(b)(2)(C) solely by reason of this subparagraph, and for purposes of applying subparagraph (j)(1)b. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the code solely by reason of this subparagraph. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
a.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan; 
b.  Which such member has not received under the plan; and 
c.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause (j)(2)b., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(k)  Contribution limits. 
(1)  For purposes of applying the code section 415(c) limits which are incorporated by reference and for purposes of this subsection (k), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the system, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of code section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under code sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under code section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in code section 3401(a)(2). 
a.  However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under code sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For limitation years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of code section 132(f)(4). 
b.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the limitation year will also include compensation paid by the later of two and one-half (2½) months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the limitation year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
1.  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
2.  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
c.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in code section 415 by using the following methods: 
a.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under code sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
b.  If payment pursuant to subparagraph (k)(2)a. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by code section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
(3)  If the annual additions for any member for a limitation year exceed the limitation under section 415(c) of the code, the excess annual addition will be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program). 
(4)  For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, a member's compensation for purposes of this subsection (k) shall not exceed the annual limit under section 401(a)(17) of the code. 
(l)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to social security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(m)  Effect of direct rollover on 415(b) limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under code section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under code section 417(c) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under code section 415(b). 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(15), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 12, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 25-1999, § 9, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 14, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 25-2013, § 3, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 7, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-105. - Benefits effective August 26, 2013. 
(a)  Effective August 26, 2013. All members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on that date who have not attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7½) years of service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age on that date, and all members hired on or after that date, shall accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of article II, except as otherwise provided in this section 15-105. The provisions of this section shall not apply to members who retired, terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit, entered DROP or attained age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013. 
(b)  Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(1)  Normal retirement date. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of the attainment of age sixty-two (62) and completion of ten (10) years of credited service, or thirty (30) years of credited service regardless of age. Provided, a member with ten (10) or more years of credited service on August 26, 2013, shall be eligible for normal retirement at age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or upon completion of twenty-eight (28) years of credited service, regardless of age. A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and each member shall become one hundred (100) percent vested in his accrued benefit on the member's normal retirement date. 
(2)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring on or after the normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and which shall be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon death. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal two (2.0) percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after August 26, 2013. 
(3)  Early retirement. The early retirement date shall be age fifty-two (52) with ten (10) years of credited service. The benefit shall be actuarially reduced for each year that early retirement precedes the normal retirement date provided in paragraph (1) above. Provided, a member with ten (10) or more years of credited service on August 26, 2013, shall be eligible for early retirement in accordance with the provisions of section 15-97. This provision shall supersede any other provision in conflict with this provision. 
(4)  Disability. A member eligible to receive a monthly pension benefit due to disability pursuant to section 15-98 shall receive a benefit equal to two (2.0) percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after August 26, 2013. This provision shall supersede any other provision in conflict with this provision. 
(c)  [Computing of benefits.] Average final compensation for the purpose of computing benefits based on credited service earned on and after August 26, 2013, means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average salary of the five (5) highest years of the last ten (10) years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, but in no event less than the highest three-year average as of the effective date, whichever is greater. A year shall be twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(d)  Salary. For purposes of this section, salary shall be defined as a member's base pay, excluding overtime and all other forms of compensation. 
(e)  Vesting. If a member terminates employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  With less than ten (10) years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to August 26, 2013), a member shall receive a refund of his accumulated contributions or the member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  With ten (10) or more years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to August 26, 2013) a member is entitled to either: 
a.  A monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the date that the member attains age sixty-two (62) with ten (10) years of credited service or upon completion of thirty (30) years of credited service, regardless of age, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to his normal retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
b.  Refund of member contributions. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (e), members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on August 26, 2013, and who did not attain age fifty-eight (58) with seven and one-half (7.5) years of credited service or twenty-eight (28) years of credited service regardless of age prior to August 26, 2013, shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in their frozen accrued benefit which shall be payable as provided in section 15-36. 
(f)  DROP. No general employee may enter the DROP on or after August 26, 2013. Members already participating in DROP on that date may complete their DROP participation. 
(g)  Defined contribution plan. Simultaneously with the adoption of this ordinance [Ord. No. 24-2013], the City of Titusville has adopted a defined contribution plan and the terms and provisions of said plan are contained within said plan documents and may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 24-2013, § 5, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 5-2017, § 1, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-106. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  Effective date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of code section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of code section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2)  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
(3)  TEFRA section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(3), distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b)  Time and manner of distribution. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
a.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age seventy and one-half (70½), if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
b.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a., the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3)  Death after distributions begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1)  General requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one (1) year. 
b.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to section 15-96, section 15-97, section 15-99, section 15-100, or section 15-102 (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
(2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under section 15-99) is the payment that is required for one (1) payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(d)  General distribution rules. 
(1)  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of code section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
(2)  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in code section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the code and section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to section 15-99. 
(Ord. No. 10-1992, § 1(17), 6-9-92; Ord. No. 19-1996, § 14, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 3, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 15, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 8, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-107. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a)  Rollover distributions. 
(1)  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Eligible rollover distributions. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one (1) of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in code section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in code section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the code; an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the code; an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the code; effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code; a qualified trust described in section 401 (a) of the code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in section 408A of the code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
c.  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by code section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a non-spouse beneficiary may roll over the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
d.  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(b)  Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1)  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2)  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(c)  Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, § 8, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 4, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 16, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 17 of Ord. No. 48-2009, adopted Nov. 24, 2009, deleted § 15-108, which pertained to separation from employment for military service and derived from Ord. No. 19-1996, adopted Aug. 27, 1996, and Ord. No. 51-2002, adopted Nov. 26, 2002.  
Sec. 15-109. - Conditions and eligibility for membership and prior service credit of city attorney. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, city attorney shall mean the person who is employed prior to and on January 1, 1999 in the charter position of city attorney pursuant to an employment agreement with the City of Titusville dated October 23, 1998. 
(b)  Subject to applicable law and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in section 15-26 and section 15-27, the city attorney may elect to become a member of the system, effective January 1, 1999, provided that, such election is made in writing and submitted to the board on or before December 30, 1998. If the election is not made within the time and in the manner specified herein, the right to elect to become a member of the system is terminated. 
(c)  Subject to applicable law, including, but not limited to, section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the city attorney elects to become a member of the system, some of the years or fractional parts of years that the city attorney was employed by the City of Titusville in the charter position of city attorney prior to January 1, 1999 shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
(1)  The city attorney deposits to the fund an amount that is actuarially calculated to fully pay for the cost of the prior service to be credited such that no cost is incurred by the fund for the prior service purchased. 
(2)  The request for the purchase, specifying the number of years, shall be made in writing and submitted to the board on or before December 30, 1998. 
(3)  The maximum prior years of credited service that may be purchased and added under this section is eight (8) years. 
(4)  Payment by the city attorney of the required amount shall be made in one lump sum payment on or before January 15, 1999 and if so received service shall be credited effective January 1, 1999. 
(5)  In the event that the city attorney's employment terminates prior to the date upon which he becomes vested in the system, all amounts paid by him, pursuant to this paragraph (c), shall be refunded at the time of the termination and all years of credited service shall be relinquished for all purposes. Once the city attorney becomes vested in the system, he shall be entitled to benefits as provided for under the system and all amounts paid by him under subsection (c) shall become nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 52-1998, § 12-15-98; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-110. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section 15-110, the following definitions apply: 
DROP refers to the City of Titusville General Employees' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c). 
Total return of the assets, for purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to subsection (c)(2)b.2., for each fiscal year quarter, the percentage increase (or decrease) in the interest and dividends earned on investments, including realized or unrealized gains (or losses), of the total plan assets. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a general employee, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP, prior to August 26, 2013. 
(2)  Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least fifteen (15) business days after it is received by the board. 
(3)  Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2), shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed sixty (60) months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate only once. 
(4)  DROP closed; effective dates. Any eligible member who has not commenced participation in DROP prior to August 26, 2013, shall not thereafter be eligible to participate in DROP. 
(5)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
1.  The end of his permissible period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3); or 
2.  Termination of his employment as a general employee. 
b.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection a.1. above, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2), including monthly benefits and investment earnings and losses or interest, shall cease to be transferred from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid to him in accordance with provisions of subsection (d) when he terminates his employment as a general employee. 
c.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(5) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(6)  Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined on the date of his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. For purposes of determining the accrued benefit, the compensation shall include an amount equal to any lump sum payments which would have been paid to the member and included as salary as defined herein, had the member retired under normal retirement and not elected DROP participation. Member contributions attributable to any lump sums used in the benefit calculation and not actually received by the member shall be deducted from the first payments to the member's DROP account. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system (except for any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment for retirees in the system) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system nor shall he be eligible for disability or pre-retirement death benefits, except as provided for in section 15-113, reemployment after retirement. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a general employee, no amount shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a general employee. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a general employee. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (c)(2), and earnings or interest on those amounts. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement system. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his employment as a general employee and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4), but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a general employee. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b., a member's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with either: 
1.  Interest at an effective rate of six and one-half (6½) percent per annum compounded monthly determined on the last business day of the prior month's ending balance and credited to the member's DROP account as of such date (to be applicable to all current and future DROP participants); or 
2.  Earnings, to be credited or debited to the member's DROP account, determined as of the last business day of each fiscal year quarter and debited or credited as of such date, determined as follows: 
The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be credited or debited at a rate equal to the net investment return realized by the system for that quarter. "Net investment return" for the purpose of this paragraph is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is invested by the board net of brokerage commissions, management fees and transaction costs. 
For purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to this subsection (c)(2)b.2., brokerage commissions, transaction costs, and management fees shall be determined for each quarter by the investment consultant pursuant to contracts with fund managers as reported in the custodial statement. The investment consultant shall report these quarterly contractual fees to the board. The investment consultant shall also report the net investment return for each manager and the net investment return for the total plan assets. 
Upon electing participation in the DROP, the member shall elect to receive either interest or earnings on his account to be determined as provided above. The member may, in writing, elect to change his election only once during his DROP participation. An election to change must be made prior to the end of a quarter and shall be effective beginning the following quarter. 
c.  A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings or interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the net plan return and at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the flat interest rate return, plus interest or earnings earned as of that date plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous quarter or month, as applicable, and prior to distribution. If a member fails to terminate employment after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be credited or debited with earnings or interest, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited while the member is employed by the city. A member employed by the city after the permissible period of DROP participation will be eligible for pre-retirement death or disability benefits, and will accrue additional credited service only as provided for in section 15-113. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a general employee. Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a general employee. 
(2)  Form of distribution. 
a.  Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a lump sum, subject to the direct rollover provisions set forth in subsection (d)(6). Elections under this paragraph shall be in writing and shall be made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3)  Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution of a member's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election on forms designated by the Board to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(5)  Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "minimum distribution of benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
(6)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 15-107. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one (1) or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
(2)  Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare and distribute to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Code and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  The DROP is not a separate retirement plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section 15-110 for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP account distribution if in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
(2)  Notional account. The DROP account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The member has no control over the investment of the DROP account. 
(3)  No employer discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(4)  IRC limit. The DROP account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b). 
(5)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any member. 
(6)  Facility of payment. If a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board shall direct that any benefit due him shall be-only to a duly appointed legal representative. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(7)  Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(8)  Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three (3) years from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made written claim therefore within three (3) months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefore except that, in the event such person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(9)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(10)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
(11)  Construction. 
a.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
b.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section 15-110 are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(12)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(13)  Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Ord. No. 18-2000, § 4, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 6-2001, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 02-2005, § 4, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 5, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 24-2013, § 6, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 9, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-111. - Military service prior to employment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a general employee serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section shall be four (4) years and the maximum combined purchase under this section and sections 15-112 and 15-114 shall be eight (8) years. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting and eligibility for disability benefits. 
(Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 6, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 5, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 15-112. - Prior government service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the years or fractional parts of years that a general employee who was previously a member, but who terminated employment and is not otherwise entitled to credited service for such previous period of employment as a general employee, or the years or fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a full-time employee for any governmental agency in the United States, including, but not limited to, federal, state or local government service, and for which he does not otherwise qualify for and receive credit under this system, shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his or her request for credit, but, in any event, prior to retirement, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The combined total maximum purchase of credit under this section for either service with the city and/or other government service shall be four (4) years. Service other than with the City of Titusville shall count for all purposes except vesting and eligibility for disability benefits. Service with the City of Titusville shall count for all purposes, including vesting. The maximum combined purchase under this section and sections 15-111 and 15-114 shall be eight (8) years. 
(5)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other governmental agency, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from another retirement system or plan as set forth in section 15-104, subsection (l)(2). 
(Ord. No. 51-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 67-2007, § 7, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 48-2009, § 18, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 6, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 10, 1-10-17)  
Sec. 15-113. - Reemployment after retirement. 
(a)  [Reemployment of retiree.] Any retiree who is retired under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided for, may be reemployed by any public or private employer, except the city, and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this system. Reemployment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed by the city in any capacity, shall upon being reemployed, continue receipt of retirement benefits during any such employment period. A retiree who returns to work under the provisions of this section shall not accumulate additional credited service for subsequent periods of employment described in this section, shall not be required to make contributions to the system, nor shall he be eligible for any other benefit other than the retiree's normal retirement benefit. Regardless of any other provision of this system, any retired and reemployed retiree continuing to receive retirement benefits shall not be an active member of the system. 
(c)  After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity, shall discontinue receipt of benefits from the system until the earlier of termination of employment or such time as the reemployed retiree reaches his normal retirement date. A retiree who returns to work under the provisions of this section shall not be eligible for membership in the system, and, therefore, shall not accumulate additional credited service for subsequent periods of employment described in this section, shall not be required to make contributions to the system, nor shall he be eligible for any other benefit other than the retiree's early retirement benefit when he again becomes eligible as provided herein. Retirement pursuant to an early retirement incentive program shall be deemed early retirement for purposes of this section if the member was permitted to retire prior to the customary retirement date provided for in the system at the time of retirement. "Normal retirement date" as used in this subsection shall be the current normal retirement date provided for under this system in effect during the period of reemployment. 
(d)  Reemployment of terminated vested persons. Reemployed terminated vested persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(e)  DROP participants. Members or retirees who are or were in the deferred retirement option plan shall, following termination of employment after DROP participation, have the options provided for in this section for reemployment. 
(Ord. No. 02-2005, § 5, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 4-2017, § 11, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 20-2019, § 1, 5-28-19)  
Sec. 15-114. - Purchase of credited service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any member who has accrued at least five (5) years of credited service under this system shall be permitted to purchase up to four (4) years of additional credited service under this system for periods when there was no performance of service ("air time") provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his or her request for credit, but, in any event, prior to retirement, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  Service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes except vesting and eligibility for disability benefits. The maximum combined purchase under this section and sections 15-111 and 15-112 shall be eight (8) years. 
(Ord. No. 67-2007, § 8, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 23-2010, § 7, 9-27-10)  
Secs. 15-115—15-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE OFFICERS' AND FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION PLAN[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, adopted May 23, 2000, amended art. III in its entirety. The provisions of said ordinance was included as §§ 15-126, 15-127, 15-141—15-151, 15-171—15-176, 15-191—15-195, 15-211—15-221, 15-224—15-233. Further, said ordinance repealed § 15-222 in its entirety. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Insurance premium tax levy for police officers and firefighters pension fund, § 19-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Firefighters retirement plan, F.S. ch. 175; police officers retirement plan, F.S. ch. 185. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-126. - Definitions. 
(a)  [Definitions.] As used herein, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions with interest at the rate of three (3) percent per annum, compounded as of October 1 of each year. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions, without the crediting of interest of three (3) percent per annum. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex (50/50) Mortality Table and an interest rate of eight (8) percent per annum. This definition may only be amended by the city pursuant to the recommendation of the board using the assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to city discretion. 
Average final compensation for members who attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, and for credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013 for all other members, means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average salary of the three (3) years of the last ten (10) years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time police officer or firefighter, whichever is greater. A year shall be twelve (12) consecutive months. Effective retroactively to April 1, 2004 for purposes of determining average final compensation for in-line of duty disability retirees pursuant to subsection 15-214(a), the three (3) best years shall be determined by adding any lump sum amounts received at the time of the disability retirement to the last full year of full-time employment prior to the date of the disabling injury or the date of the onset of a disabling illness, as determined by the board. This alternative method shall only be applied in the event it results in an increased benefit to the disability retiree. Effective June 30, 2013, average final compensation for members who did not attain age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, and members hired on or after that date, shall be defined in accordance with section 15-222. 
Beneficiary means the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided and serve as trustees of the fund. 
City means City of Titusville, Florida. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of continuous uninterrupted service with the city as a police officer or firefighter with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the city as a police officer or firefighter. Credited service shall not be deemed to be interrupted by a member on an authorized unpaid absence for a duration not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days. Upon return to work from an authorized leave of absence which exceeds thirty (30) calendar days, the service date of the member shall be adjusted so that credit is maintained for service which preceded and is subsequent to the authorized leave. 
A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five (5) years after leaving the employ of the police of fire department pending the possibility of being reemployed as a police officer or firefighter, without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the system. If a vested member leaves the employ of the police or fire department his accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed as a police officer or firefighter with the police or fire department within five (5) years, his accumulated contributions, if one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, shall be returned. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed within five (5) years, his accumulated contributions, if more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), will be returned only upon the written request of the member and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. Upon any reemployment, a firefighter or police officer shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service for which he has withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the firefighter or police officer repays into the fund the contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within ninety (90) days after his reemployment. 
The years or fractional parts of a year that a member performs "Qualified Military Service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L.103-353), after separation from employment as a police officer or firefighter with the city to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
(1)  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
(2)  The member returns to his employment as a police officer or firefighter within one (1) year from the earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from active service, unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
(3)  The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this paragraph shall be five (5) years. 
(4)  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA Qualified Military Service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
In the event that a member of this system has also accumulated credited service in another pension system maintained by the city, then such other credited service shall be used in determining vesting as provided for in section 15-215 or for determining eligibility for early or normal retirement. Such other credited service will not be considered in determining benefits under this system. Only his credited service and salary under this system on or after his date of participation in this system will be considered for benefit calculation. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by section 414(u)(12) of the code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under section 3401(h)(2) of the code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under section 415(c) of the code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the city or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Effective date means March 23, 1993. 
Firefighter means an actively employed full-time person employed by the city, including his initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.408, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and to protect property. The term includes all certified, supervisory, and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time firefighters, part-time firefighters, or auxiliary firefighters but does not include part-time firefighters or auxiliary firefighters. 
Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system, including the Principal Life Group Annuity Contract GA-39112. 
Member means an actively employed police officer or firefighter who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for in this article, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Plan year means the twelve (12) month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
Police officer means an actively employed full-time person, employed by the city, including his initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a police officer as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 943.14, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, traffic, or highway laws of the State of Florida. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system or entry into the deferred retirement option plan. 
Salary for members who attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, and for credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013 for all other members, means the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a police officer or firefighter reported on the member's W-2 form plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered, or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions but not including any reimbursement of expenses or payments of expense allowances, including, but not limited to, car allowance, cell phone allowance, clothing allowance, (excluding those allowances covered by any collective bargaining agreement), safety award, travel reimbursement, etc. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with code section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than twelve (12) months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is twelve (12). If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. Effective June 30, 2013, salary for members who did not attain age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, and members hired on or after that date shall be defined in accordance with section 15-222. 
Spouse means the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the City of Titusville Police Officers' and Firefighters' Pension Plan as contained herein and all amendments thereto. 
(b)  Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-126), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 8-1994, § 1, 3-8-94; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 1, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-1997, § 1, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 1, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 65-2007, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 74-2007, § 2, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 1, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 1, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 26-2013, § 1, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 1, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-127. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. All police officers or firefighters who are members as of March 23, 1993, and all future new police officers or firefighters, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. The police chief and fire chief have the option to participate as members in the system or to opt out of membership in the system. 
(b)  Designation of beneficiary. Each police officer or firefighter shall complete a form prescribed by the board providing for the designation of a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-127), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 2, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 21-2019, § 1, 5-28-19)  
Sec. 15-128. - Benefit freeze. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the system, for all members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on June 30, 2013, and who did not attain age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013: 
(1)  The accrued benefits of all such members shall be frozen on June 30, 2013, and all such members shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in their frozen accrued benefit. 
(2)  Such members shall accrue benefits on and after June 30, 2013, in accordance with section 15-222. 
(3)  The benefits of such members shall be payable in two parts as follows: 
a.  The frozen accrued benefit based on the vested percentage, credited service, average final compensation and other provisions of the system in effect on the day before June 30, 2013, payable at the earlier of age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age, and separation from city employment; and 
b.  The benefit based on credited service, average final compensation and the provisions of the system in effect on and after June 30, 2013, payable at the earlier of age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service, or age fifty-two (52) with twenty-five (25) years of credited service and separation from city employment. 
(b)  The benefits of members who attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, shall not be frozen, and such members shall continue to accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of the system in effect on June 30, 2013, for as long as they are employed in a position covered by the system. 
(c)  For purposes of determining a member's frozen accrued benefit in accordance with this section, salary shall include any payments of accrued leave that would have been included in salary if the member retired prior to June 30, 2013. However, the member's accrued leave balance shall be reduced by the amount of vacation or sick leave used subsequent to June 30, 2013, and the member's frozen accrued benefit shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 13-2013, § 2, 6-11-13)  
Secs. 15-129—15-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Provisions regarding the appointment, removal, and resignation requirements, § 2-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-141. - Composition. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective the provisions of this article are hereby vested in a board of trustees consisting of nine (9) trustees, as follows: 
(1)  The police chief; 
(2)  The fire chief; 
(3)  A police major, assistant chief or other police officer designated by the police chief and the city manager; 
(4)  A chief officer or other firefighter designated by the fire chief and the city manager; 
(5)  Two (2) employee members from each of the police and fire departments to be elected as hereinafter provided; 
(6)  One (1) member from Titusville, Florida, selected by majority vote of remaining members. The city council, as a ministerial duty, shall appoint such person to the board as a ninth member. 
(b)  The finance director and personnel director shall serve in an advisory capacity to the board. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(1), (2)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 2, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-142. - Term of office. 
The regular term of office of each elected and citizen trustee shall be four (4) years. Each employee or citizen trustee may succeed himself or herself if reelected or reappointed as hereinafter provided. DROP participants can be elected as but not vote for elected trustees. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(3)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 3, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-143. - Election of elective members. 
Future elective employee trustees shall be elected in the following manner: by vote of all actively employed members of the respective departments who come within the purview of this article at places designated by the board, of which all qualified members entitled to vote shall be notified in person or by written notice at least ten (10) days in advance of said election. The candidate from each department receiving the highest number of votes for office shall be declared elected and shall take office immediately upon commencement of the term of office for which elected or as soon thereafter as he or she shall qualify therefor. An election shall be held not more than thirty (30) days and not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of the term for which a trustee is to be elected. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election procedure for each election. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(4)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-144. - Filling vacancies. 
If a vacancy occurs in the office of trustee, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(5)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-145. - Meetings. 
The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(6)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-146. - Officers; minutes. 
The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary for a term of office determined by the board. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(7)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-147. - Votes by members. 
Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on the board. No proxy voting shall be permitted. Five (5) affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest and shall comply with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(8)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 3, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 15-148. - Removal of members. 
Any elected trustee who neglects the duties of his or her office, as determined by the board, may be removed by eight (8) concurring votes among the board. Any trustee who fails to attend three (3) or more consecutive regular meetings (not including special or workshop meetings) or who fails to attend more than fifty (50) percent of the regular, special or workshop meetings within a six-month period, shall automatically forfeit membership and appointment or election to the board. The board may authorize a trustee to miss three (3) or more consecutive meetings or more than fifty (50) percent of the regular, special or workshop meetings during a six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(9)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-149. - Compensation. 
The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(10)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-150. - Duties, responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4)  To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  To receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7)  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  To have performed actuarial studies and valuations at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(11)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 3, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-151. - Information to city auditor. 
The board shall furnish to the city auditor such available investment and actuarial information regarding the system as shall be requested. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-128(11)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Secs. 15-152—15-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINANCES AND FUND MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 15-171. - Fund established. 
As part of the system, the fund is hereby continued, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system, including the assets of the prior police officers' and firefighters' retirement system and any assets transferred from The Principal Life Group Annuity Contract GA-39112. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-129(1)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-172. - Custody, supervision of fund. 
The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-129(2)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-173. - Deposit of funds. 
All funds of the police officers' and firefighters' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the finance director of the city, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the finance director of the city shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the police officers' and firefighters' retirement system, the board shall deposit the funds of the police officers' and firefighters' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-129(3)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-174. - Commingling of funds. 
All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefit payments; 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-129(4)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-175. - Audit of funds. 
An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-129(5)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-176. - Investment powers and authority. 
The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, to the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Notwithstanding any limitation provided for in F.S. ch. 185 or 175, to the contrary (unless such limitation may not be amended by local ordinance) or any limitation in prior city ordinances to the contrary, all monies paid into or held in the fund may be invested and reinvested in such securities, investment vehicles or property wherever situated and of whatever kind, as shall be approved by the board, including, but not limited to, common or preferred stocks, bonds, and other evidences of indebtedness or ownership. In no event, however, shall more than twenty-five (25) percent of the assets of the fund at market value basis be invested in foreign securities. 
b.  The board shall develop and adopt a written investment policy statement setting forth permissible types of investments, goals and objectives of investments and setting quality and quantity limitations on investments in accordance with the recommendations of its investment consultants. The investment policy statement shall be reviewed by the board at least annually. 
c.  In addition, the board may, upon recommendation by the board's investment consultant, make investments in group trusts meeting the requirements of Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 81-100, Revenue Ruling 2011-1, IRS Notice 2012-6 and Revenue Ruling 2014-24 or successor rulings or guidance of similar import, and operated or maintained exclusively for the commingling and collective investment of monies, provided that the funds in the group trust consist exclusively of trust assets held under plans qualified under section 401(a) of the code, individual retirement accounts that are exempt under section 408(e) of the code, eligible governmental plans that meet the requirements of section 457(b) of the code, and governmental plans under 401(a)(24) of the code. For this purpose, a trust includes a custodial account or a separate tax favored account maintained by an insurance company that is treated as a trust under section 401(f) or under section 457(g)(3) of the code. While any portion of the assets of the fund are invested in such a group trust, such group trust is itself adopted as a part of the system or plan. 
1.  Any collective or common group trust to which assets of the fund are transferred pursuant to subsection c., shall be adopted by the board as part of the plan by executing appropriate participation, adoption agreements, and/or trust agreements with the group trust's trustee. 
2.  The separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan pursuant to subsection c., shall not be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries of the plan. 
3.  For the purposes of valuation, the value of the separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan shall be the fair market value of the portion of the group trust held for the plan, determined in accordance with generally recognized valuation procedures. 
(3)  At least once every three (3) years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. §§ 175.071 and 185.06, to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner if prudent. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to said fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-129(6)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 4, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 4-1999, § 1, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 4, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 66-2007, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 4, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 26-2013, § 2, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 2, 2-14-17)  
Secs. 15-177—15-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
Sec. 15-191. - Member contributions. 
(a)  Amount. Each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of six and one-half (6.5) percent of his salary. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(b)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-130(1)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 3, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 3, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-192. - State contributions. 
(a)  Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the State of Florida, for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for police officer or firefighters of the city shall be deposited in the fund comprising part of this system immediately and under no circumstances more than five (5) days after receipt by the city. 
(b)  Chapter 175 premium tax monies. 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent of the Chapter 175 funds in the "net excess state monies reserve" shall be applied to reduce the unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the plan, and one hundred (100) percent of the annual Chapter 175 premium tax distributions, including the total amount received in fiscal year 2016 and one hundred (100) percent of any future Chapter 175 premium tax distributions received each fiscal year thereafter, shall be applied annually to reduce the city's annual required pension contribution except as set forth in paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  For any year in which the funded ratio (actuarial value of assets divided by the actuarial accrued liability, as reflected in the most recent actuarial valuation) reaches or exceeds ninety (90) percent, fifty (50) percent of the Chapter 175 premium tax distribution received in the following plan year will be used to fund the share plan and each firefighter member shall receive an equal share of the premium tax funds allocated to the share plan in the firefighter member's share account. Each firefighter member's share plan balance will be distributed to the firefighter member within sixty (60) days following retirement, less any administrative expenses. The remaining fifty (50) percent of the premium tax distribution will be used to reduce the city's annual pension contributions. 
(c)  Chapter 185 premium tax monies. 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent of the Chapter 185 funds in the "net excess state monies reserve" shall be applied to reduce the unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the plan, and one hundred (100) percent of the annual Chapter 185 premium tax distributions, including the total amount received in fiscal year 2016 and one hundred (100) percent of any future Chapter 185 premium tax distributions received each fiscal year thereafter, shall be applied annually to reduce the city's annual required pension contribution except as set forth in paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  For any year in which the funded ratio (actuarial value of assets divided by the actuarial accrued liability, as reflected in the most recent actuarial valuation) reaches or exceeds ninety (90) percent, fifty (50) percent of the Chapter 185 premium tax distribution received in the following plan year will be used to fund the share plan and each police officer member shall receive an equal share of the premium tax funds allocated to the share plan in the police officer member's share account. Each police officer member's share plan balance will be distributed to the police officer member within sixty (60) days following retirement, less any administrative expenses. The remaining fifty (50) percent of the premium tax distribution will be used to reduce the city's annual pension contributions. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-130(2)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 4, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-193. - City contributions. 
So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make monthly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the required city contribution, as shown by the applicable actuarial valuation of the system. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-130(3)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 5, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 5, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-194. - Other. 
Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-130(4)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-195. - Shared investment returns. 
Effective with the plan year beginning October 1, 1992, the lesser of: 1) any investment return earned on the assets of the police officers' and firefighters' pension plan (as actuarially determined by a four (4) year moving weighted average) in excess of or less than the expected return on the basis of eight (8) percent per annum, or 2) the net actuarial gain (loss) for the plan year shall be divided such that thirty (30) percent of such excess or deficient earnings or gains (losses) is utilized to adjust the required contribution to be made by the city to the police officers' and firefighters' pension plan as provided in section 15-193 above, and the remaining seventy (70) percent to be set aside and accumulated in a special actuarial account to be used for providing future benefit improvements for members of the police officers' and firefighter's pension plan. In the event that the amount determined above in any year represents a deficiency, the deficiency shall be funded from the special actuarial account. The amount to be added to or subtracted from the special actuarial account shall be determined by the board on an annual basis upon receipt of the annual actuarial valuation of the plan. Actuarial experience may be used to fund additional benefits, provided that the present value of such benefits does not exceed the net actuarial experience accumulated from all sources of gains and losses. At the time the special actuarial account is used to fund additional benefits, the amount allocated for such purposes shall not reduce the special actuarial account balance below a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-130(5)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 26-1999, § 1, 3-31-99; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Secs. 15-196—15-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - BENEFIT AMOUNTS AND ELIGIBILITY 
 
Sec. 15-211. - Retirement dates. 
(a)  Normal retirement date. The normal retirement date for members who retired, entered the DROP, or terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit prior to June 30, 2013, and members who are employed on June 30, 2013 and have attained ten (10) or more years of credited service on that date, shall be the first day of the month coincident with, or the next following attainment of the earlier of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of eight (8) years of credited service or the completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service. A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and each member shall become one hundred (100) percent vested in his accrued benefit on the member's normal retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the normal retirement date. The normal retirement date for members who are employed and have not attained ten (10) or more years of credited service on that date, and members hired on or after June 30, 2013, shall be as provided in section 15-222; provided, such members who are employed on June 30, 2013 shall be eligible to receive their frozen accrued benefit based on credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013 upon attaining age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age, and separation from city employment. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and be continued thereafter in accordance with the optional form of benefit elected, if any. The normal form of benefit is ten (10) years certain and life thereafter. The monthly retirement benefit for credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013, and for all years of credited service of members who attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, shall be equal to three (3) percent of average final compensation, for each year of credited service. The normal retirement benefit for credited service on and after June 30, 2013, for members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on June 30, 2013, and who have not attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age on that date, and members hired on or after June 30, 2013, shall be as provided in section 15-222. 
(c)  Early retirement date. Those members and terminated members who completed ten (10) years of credited service on or before December 22, 1986, may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age forty-five (45) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. Those members and terminated members who completed ten (10) years of credited service after December 22, 1986, may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age fifty (50). 
(d)  Cost of living adjustment created; eligibility; automatic readjustment based on available revenue. 
(1)  All persons currently in the DROP on December 11, 2007, and all persons retiring or entering the DROP on or after December 11, 2007, and before June 30, 2013, shall receive a cost of living adjustment (COLA) equal to one and two hundred seventy-seven thousandths (1.277) percent of the annual retirement benefit. The COLA shall be payable beginning on the October 1 next following the date the member has both terminated employment as a police officer or firefighter and is in receipt of a retirement benefit for a period of not less than one (1) year. The COLA shall be payable to all persons who retire on a normal or early retirement or who retire on a disability retirement provided the disabled member has attained eligibility for early or normal retirement at the date the disability retirement commences. The benefit shall not be payable to terminated vested persons, regardless of the date benefits commence, or to disability retirees who are not eligible for early or normal retirement at the date disability retirement begins. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d)(1) above, effective June 30, 2013: 
a.  The COLA provided in subsection (d)(1) shall apply to all years of credited service of members who attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013; 
b.  For members who did not attain age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, the COLA provided in subsection (d)(1) shall apply only to credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013; and 
c.  Members hired on or after June 30, 2013 shall not be eligible for a COLA. 
(3)  In the event that the total insurance premium tax rebates in any year are reduced such that the original dollar amount attributable to pay for this COLA is not available, the COLA benefit for the following year shall be reduced proportionally to reflect the reduction in the premium tax rebates. 
(4)  In addition, in the event that the actuarial cost of this COLA in any fiscal year is different from the original dollar amount cost of the COLA resulting in a greater or lesser cost to the city (which amount, if greater, is not offset by the adjustment in subsection (d)(3) above), the cumulative amount of any such annual differences in cost shall be debited or credited to the special actuarial account prior to utilizing the special actuarial account provided for in section 15-195, shared investment returns, to fund any other benefit improvement. 
(e)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-131(1)—(3)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1994, § 1, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 6, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-1997, § 2, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 11-1998, § 1, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 26-1999, § 2, 3-31-99; Ord. No. 15-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 7-2001, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 75-2003, § 1, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 64-2007, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 6, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 21-2010, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 22-2010, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 4, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 15-212. - Early retirement benefit. 
(a)  An eligible member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal retirement as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or following attainment of age fifty-five (55) and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (1) above, which is reduced by three (3) percent for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes age fifty-five (55). 
(b)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-131(4)), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 7, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-213. - Pre-retirement death. 
The beneficiary of a vested deceased member who died while actively employed as a police officer or firefighter and whose death was not directly caused by the performance of his duties shall be entitled to a monthly benefit which is the greater of the benefit provided by a) or b) where a) is fifty (50) percent of the member's average final compensation at the date of his death and b) is what would have been the member's accrued benefit. This benefit shall be payable for the life of the beneficiary, but if the beneficiary is anyone other than the member's spouse, the benefit shall cease after twenty-five (25) years of payments. If it is established to the satisfaction of the board that the death was directly caused by the performance of his duties, the death benefit described above shall be payable whether or not the member was vested on his date of death. The beneficiary of a deceased prior member, who was terminated and vested prior to his date of death shall be entitled to a death benefit equal to the member's accrued benefit actuarially reduced. If not eligible for any other benefit provided for in this section, the beneficiary of a deceased member shall receive a refund of one hundred (100) percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-132), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 7, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 64-2007, § 2, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 15-214. - Disability. 
(a)  Disability benefits in-line of duty. Any member who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter, which disability was directly caused by the performance of his duty as a police officer or firefighter, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to three (3) percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be fifty (50) percent of the average final compensation of the member. Terminated persons, either vested or nonvested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(b)  In line of duty presumptions. 
(1)  Presumption. Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering into such service, including cardiogram for police officer members, for all members becoming members after March 23, 1993, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition; and provided further, that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2)  Additional presumption. The presumption provided for in this subparagraph (2) shall apply only to those conditions described in this subparagraph (2) that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 1996. 
a.  Definitions. As used in this subsection (b)(2), the following definitions apply: 
1.  Body fluids means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of blood-borne pathogens, as established by the centers for disease control, apply. For purposes of potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" includes respiratory, salivary and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum and saliva, mucous and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted between persons. 
2.  Emergency rescue or public safety member means any member employed full time by the city as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis and who is not employed elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. ch. 395, or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
3.  Hepatitis means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
4.  High risk of occupational exposure means that risk that is incurred because a person subject to the provisions of this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with his employment: 
i.  Provides emergency medical treatment in a nonhealth-care setting where there is a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
ii.  At the site of an accident, fire or other rescue or public safety operation, or in an emergency rescue or public safety vehicle, handles body fluids in or out of containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments exposed to body fluids; 
iii.  Engages in the pursuit, apprehension and arrest of law violators or suspected law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
iv.  Is responsible for the custody, and physical restraint when necessary, of prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail or other criminal detention facility, while on work detail outside the facility, or while being transported and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
5.  Occupational exposure, in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may place a worker at risk of infection. 
b.  Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, that requires medical treatment, and that results in total or partial disability or death shall be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to the test of his knowledge and belief: 
1.  In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
i.  Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his employment; 
ii.  Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
iii.  Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior, as identified by the Centers for Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States or had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior; or 
iv.  Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
2.  In the case of meningococcal meningitis, in the ten (10) days immediately preceding diagnosis he was not exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an asymptomatic carrier of the disease. 
3.  In the case of tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known by him to have tuberculosis. 
c.  Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which a presumption is granted under this section, if medically indicated in the given circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required by the city to undergo the immunization or prophylaxis unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the presumption. 
d.  Record of exposures. The city shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the disease described in this section and shall immediately notify the member of such exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident report with the city of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
e.  Required medical tests; preemployment physical. In order to be entitled to the presumption provided by this section: 
1.  An emergency rescue or public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have undergone standard, medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable disease for which the presumption is sought, or evidence of medical conditions derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This paragraph does not apply in the case of meningococcal meningitis. 
2.  On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required to undergo a preemployment physical examination that tests for and fails to reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(c)  Disability benefits not-in-line of duty. Any member of the system with ten (10) years or more credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a police officer or firefighter shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to three (3) percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the total years of credited service. Terminated persons, either vested or nonvested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within thirty (30) days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(d)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each police officer or firefighter who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the Armed Forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained after his employment as a police officer or firefighter with the city shall have terminated. 
(5)  For police officer members, injury or disease sustained while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment. 
(e)  Physical examination requirement. A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable and prudent to do so. 
Any retiree receiving disability benefits under the provisions of this article, may be required by the board to submit sworn statements of his condition accompanied by a physician's statement (provided at the retiree's expense) to the board bi-annually and may be required by the board to undergo additional periodic re-examinations by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a police officer or firefighter, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a police officer or firefighter, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that he had at the time he was placed upon pension. In the event the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within thirty (30) days from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
The annual examination and all costs associated with it including, but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations required for submission of the physician's statement shall be borne by the retiree receiving disability benefits. The cost of any additional periodic physical examination and/or reexamination required by the board shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to any additional re-examination required by the board such as, but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a police officer or a firefighter, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the system and no credited service shall be given for periods when disability payments were made to the member. 
The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(f)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the retiree recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery, or 
(2)  If the retiree dies without recovering from disability, the payment due next preceding his death or the one hundred twentieth monthly payment, whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in section 15-216, subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2), which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(g)  Workers' compensation offset. When a retiree is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440, for the same disability, and the total monthly benefits received from both exceed one hundred (100) percent of the member's average monthly wage, as defined in F.S. ch. 440, the disability pension benefit shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the retiree does not exceed one hundred (100) percent of such wage. The amount of any lump sum workers' compensation payment shall be converted to an equivalent monthly benefit payable for ten (10) years certain by dividing the lump sum amount by eighty-three and nine thousand ninety-two thousandths (83.9692). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the disability pension benefit be reduced below the greater of forty-two (42) percent of average final compensation and two (2) percent of average final compensation times years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-133), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 8, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-1997, § 3, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 11-1998, § 2, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 26-1999, § 3, 3-31-99; Ord. No. 15-2000, § 2, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 7-2001, § 2, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 2, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 53-2002, § 2, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 75-2003, § 2, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 8, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 21-2010, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 22-2010, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 5, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-215. - Vesting. 
(a)  If a member terminates his employment as a police officer or firefighter prior to June 30, 2013, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  If the member has less than eight (8) years credited service upon termination, the member shall receive a refund of his accumulated contributions or the member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  If the member has eight (8) or more years of credited service with the city, upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the date that the member attains age fifty-five (55), provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to age fifty-five (55). If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, a police officer or firefighter member who is vested and thereafter terminates his employment as a police officer or firefighter to transfer to a position as a general employee and who becomes a member of the City of Titusville General Employees' Pension Plan, shall be entitled to a benefit from this system, beginning on the date that the member's combined continuous years of credited service from both systems equals twenty-five (25) years. Any break in service shall make this paragraph inapplicable. 
(3)  In the event that a terminated vested person entitled to a benefit pursuant to subsection (2) above is reemployed as a police officer or firefighter and is not otherwise entitled to prior credited service pursuant to section 15-126, such prior credited service may, in any event, be counted upon reemployment for vesting purposes and for eligibility for pre-retirement death benefits pursuant to section 15-213 and for eligibility for disability benefits pursuant to section 15-214. Such prior vested service shall not be utilized for eligibility for normal or early retirement or for benefit calculation for the period of reemployment or for any other purpose other than specified above. 
(b)  Members who terminate employment on or after June 30, 2013, shall be subject to the vesting provisions in section 15-222; provided, members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on June 30, 2013, and who did not attain age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in their frozen accrued benefit which shall be payable as provided in section 15-128. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-134), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 9, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 22-1998, § 1, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 88-2003, § 1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 52-2006, § 1, 10-24-06; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 5, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 15-216. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified herein, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one (1) of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of the retiree and following the death of the retiree, one hundred (100) percent, seventy-five (75) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent or fifty (50) percent of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury Regulations. (See Q&A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6.) 
(3)  If a member retires prior to the time at which social security benefits are payable, he may elect to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as social security benefits shall be assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the social security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(4)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount calculated by combining a joint and survivor optional percentage pursuant to paragraph (b) above with the social security option pursuant to paragraph (c) above. 
(5)  For members who do not participate in the DROP pursuant to section 15-233, the member may elect a percentage of benefit in a lump sum as follows: 
a.  Ten (10) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum benefit with the remaining ninety (90) percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2), (3) or (4) above. 
b.  Fifteen (15) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum benefit with the remaining eighty-five (85) percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2), (3) or (4) above. 
c.  Twenty (20) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum benefit with the remaining eighty (80) percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2), (3) or (4) above. 
d.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum benefit with the remaining seventy-five (75) percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2), (3) or (4) above. 
(b)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner (subsection (a)(2) above) or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system in the event of member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one (1) or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner and the member's retirement income benefits have commenced, the member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. In the absence of proof of good health of the joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(c)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system shall thereupon cease. 
(d)  Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then-current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 15-217. 
(e)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 15-213. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
(3)  If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by member or retiree die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a), the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 15-217. 
(4)  If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 15-211, subsection (a), and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(5)  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board in its discretion, may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-136), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 10, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 75-2003, § 3, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 5, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 64-2007, § 3, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 9, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 6, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-217. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation of beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a), or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree shall be paid, in the discretion of the board, to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-136), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-218. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-137), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 11, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-219. - Reports to division of retirement. 
Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the division of retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 175.261 and § 185.221. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-138), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 12, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-220. - Roster of retirees. 
The plan administrator shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the plan administrator shall keep a record of all police officer or firefighters employed by the municipality in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-139), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-221. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of code section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in code section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in code section 415(b)(1)(A) (one hundred sixty thousand dollars ($160,000)), subject to the applicable adjustments in code section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
For purposes of code section 415(b), the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to code section 415(n) and to rollover contributions (as defined in code section 415(b)(2)(A)). The "benefit attributable" shall be determined in accordance with treasury regulations. 
(b)  Adjustments to basic limitation for form of benefit. If the benefit under the plan is other than the annual benefit described in subsection (a), then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual benefit, using factors prescribed in treasury regulations. If the form of the benefit without regard to any automatic benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the code section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of benefit as follows: 
(1)  For a benefit paid in a form to which section 417(e)(3) of the code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of: 
a.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit to the member; or 
b.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a five-percent interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Rulings 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code); or 
(2)  For a benefit paid in a form to which section 417(e)(3) of the code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of: 
a.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial experience; 
b.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using a five and one-half-percent interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code); or 
c.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (the thirty-year Treasury rate (prior to January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the month prior to retirement, and on and after January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the first day of the plan year with a one-year stabilization period)) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing section 417(e)(3)(B) of the code), divided by 1.05. 
(3)  The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting date in accordance with subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(c)  Benefits not taken into account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under section 415(b)(2) of the code and regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of code section 415(b)(1); and 
(3)  That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(d)  COLA effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b) (the "limit"), the following will apply: 
(1)  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first limitation year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost of living adjustments; 
(2)  Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the code section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under code section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
(3)  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any limitation year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under code section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost of living increases as required by section 415(b) of the code and applicable treasury regulations. 
(e)  Other adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age sixty-two (62), the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to the provisions of code section 415(b) of the code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a one hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000.00) annual benefit beginning at age sixty-two (62). 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least fifteen (15) years of credited service as a full-time employee of the fire or police department of the city, the adjustments provided for in (e)(1) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in (e)(1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to section 15-214, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 15-213. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age sixty-five (65), for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age sixty-five (65). This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the secretary of the treasury or his delegate. 
(f)  Less than ten (10) years of participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten (10) years of participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten (10). The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten (10) percent of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to section 15-214, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 15-213. 
(g)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in code section 414(j) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all city defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one (1) plan. 
(h)  Ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) limit; less than ten (10) years of service. Notwithstanding anything in this section 15-221, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this subsection (h) of section 15-221 if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the applicable limitation year or for any prior limitation year, and the city has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated; provided, however, that if the member has completed less than ten (10) years of credited service with the city, the limit under this subsection (h) of section 15-221 shall be a reduced limit equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten (10). 
(i)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(j)  Service credit purchase limits. 
(1)  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one (1) or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in sections 15-234 and 15-235, then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
a.  The requirements of code section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of code section 415(b), or 
b.  The requirements of code section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of code section 415(c). 
For purposes of applying subparagraph (j)(1)a., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under code section 415(b)(2)(C) solely by reason of this subparagraph, and for purposes of applying subparagraph (j)(1)b. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the code solely by reason of this subparagraph. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
a.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan; 
b.  Which such member has not received under the plan; and 
c.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause (j)(2)b., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(k)  Contribution limits. 
(1)  For purposes of applying the code section 415(c) limits which are incorporated by reference and for purposes of this subsection (k), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the system, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of code section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under code sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under code section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in code section 3401(a)(2). 
a.  However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under code sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For limitation years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of code section 132(f)(4). 
b.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the limitation year will also include compensation paid by the later of two and one-half (2½) months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the limitation year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
1.  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
2.  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
c.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in code section 415 by using the following methods: 
a.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under code sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
b.  If payment pursuant to subparagraph (k)(2)a. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by code section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
(3)  If the annual additions for any member for a limitation year exceed the limitation under section 415(c) of the code, the excess annual addition will be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program). 
(4)  For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, a member's compensation for purposes of this subsection (k) shall not exceed the annual limit under section 401(a)(17) of the code. 
(l)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to Social Security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(m)  Effect of direct rollover on 415(b) limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under code section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under code section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under code section 415(b). 
(Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 3, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 6, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 10, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 26-2013, § 3, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 7, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-222. - Benefits effective June 30, 2013. 
(a)  [Accrual of benefits.] Effective June 30, 2013, all members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on that date who have not attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age on that date, and all members hired on or after that date, shall accrue benefits in accordance with the provisions of Article III, except as otherwise provided in this section 15-222. The provisions of this section shall not apply to members who retired, terminated employment with the right to a deferred vested benefit, entered DROP or attained age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013. 
(b)  Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(1)  Normal retirement date. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of the attainment of age fifty-five (55) and completion of ten (10) years of credited service, or age fifty-two (52) with twenty-five (25) years of credited service. Provided, a member with ten (10) or more years of credited service on June 30, 2013, shall be eligible for normal retirement at age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or upon completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service, regardless of age. A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and each member shall become one hundred (100) percent vested in his accrued benefit on the member's normal retirement date. 
(2)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring on or after the normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement and which shall be continued thereafter during the member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed in any event. The monthly retirement benefit shall equal two and one-half (2.5) percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service earned on or after June 30, 2013. 
(c)  Average final compensation. For the purpose of computing benefits based on credited service earned on and after June 30, 2013, means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average salary of the five (5) highest years of the last ten (10) years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time police officer or firefighter, whichever is greater. A year shall be twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(d)  COLA. Members accruing benefits under this section shall not be entitled to a cost of living adjustment applicable to credited service earned on or after June 30, 2013. 
(e)  Salary. For purposes of this section, salary shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Police officers. A member's base pay, including special duty incentives paid and actual educational incentive pay in a total amount not to exceed six thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($6,750.00) per year, and excluding overtime and all other forms of compensation. 
(2)  Firefighters. A member's base pay, excluding overtime and all other forms of compensation, but including the following types of incentive pay in a total amount not to exceed six thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($6,750.00) per year: 
a.  Educational incentive pay for Associates Degree and/or Bachelors' Degree in Fire Science as provided by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 633.832 as amended from time to time. In the event the State of Florida discontinues this incentive pay, the city shall pay such incentive pay in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month provided the city council approves such payment as a budget item. 
b.  State of Florida Fire Officer One certification pay in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month. 
c.  State of Florida "Pump Officer" certification pay in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. 
d.  State of Florida Paramedic Certification pay in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year, and Solo Paramedic Status pay in the amount of five thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($5,250.00) per year. 
(f)  Vesting. If a member terminates employment, either voluntarily or by lawful discharge, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  With less than ten (10) years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013), a member shall receive a refund of his accumulated contributions or the member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  With ten (10) or more years of credited service (including credited service earned prior to June 30, 2013) a member is entitled to either: 
a.  A monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the date that the member attains age fifty-five (55), provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to age fifty-five (55). If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
b.  Refund of member contributions. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (f), members who are employed and not participating in the DROP on June 30, 2013, and who did not attain age fifty-five (55) with eight (8) years of credited service or twenty-five (25) years of credited service regardless of age prior to June 30, 2013, shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in their frozen accrued benefit which shall be payable as provided in section 15-128. 
(g)  DROP. No police officer may enter the DROP on or after July 2, 2013. No firefighter may enter the DROP on or after July 2, 2013. Members already participating in DROP on that date may complete their DROP participation. 
(h)  Defined contribution plan. Simultaneously with the adoption of this ordinance, the City of Titusville will implement a defined contribution plan and the terms and provisions of said plan are contained within said plan documents and may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13-2013, § 6, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 8, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-223. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 18-1996, § 14, adopted August 27, 1996, deleted § 15-223 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to commencement of benefits and derived from Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-142), 3-23-93.  
Sec. 15-224. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  Effective date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of code section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of code section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2)  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. 
(3)  TEFRA section 242(b)(2) elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(3), distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b)  Time and manner of distribution. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½) or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
a.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age seventy and one-half (70½), if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
b.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2), distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a.) the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3)  Death after distributions begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in section 414(k) of the code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the code and Treasury Regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1)  General requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one (1) year. 
b.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to section 15-211, section 15-212, section 15-213, section 15-215, or section 15-216 (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
(2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under section 15-213) is the payment that is required for one (1) payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(d)  General distribution rules. 
(1)  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of code section 401(a)(9)(C), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q&A-2. 
(2)  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in code section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the code and section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to section 15-213. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-143), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 15, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 7, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 11, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 9, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-225. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Interest of members in system. All assets of the fund are held in trust and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(b)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city council of the city which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(c)  Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified pension plan under the applicable provisions of the code for a qualified plan under code section 401(a) and a governmental plan under code section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(d)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(e)  Prohibited transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by code section 503(b). 
(f)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by code section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(g)  Vesting. 
(1)  A member will be one hundred (100) percent vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
(2)  A member will be one hundred (100) percent vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(h)  Electronic forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations section 1.401(a)-21. 
(i)  Compliance with F.S. ch. 175 and 185. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under F.S. §§ 175.101 and 185.08. Accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 175 and 185, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-144), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 16, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 4, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 12, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-226. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one (1) of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting one hundred (100) percent of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(c)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
(2)  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each police officer or firefighter entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection (3). 
(3)  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection (2) involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the police officer's or firefighter's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the police officer or firefighter. 
(4)  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection (3), and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
(5)  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection (2), the amounts determined under subsection (3). 
If, after twenty-four (24) months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the city or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will effect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-145), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 18-1996, § 17, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 13, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-227. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from execution, nonassignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, to make payments to insurance companies for insurance premiums as permitted by F.S. chs. 175 and 185, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(c)  Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-146), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 8, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 14, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-228. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to readily any person who has heretofore under any prior to existing law been or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-147), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-229. - Forfeiture of pension. 
(a)  Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this system, except for the return of his accumulated contributions, but without interest, as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
(1)  The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds; 
(2)  The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from employer; 
(3)  Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee; 
(4)  Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838; 
(5)  The committing of an impeachable offense; 
(6)  The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public agency, for which he acts or in which he is employed, of the right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or employment position; 
(7)  The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any felony defined in F.S. § 800.04, against a victim younger than sixteen (16) years of age, or any felony defined in F.S. ch. 794, against a victim younger than eighteen (18) years of age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment position. 
(b)  Conviction shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the senate of an impeachable offense. 
(c)  Court shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(d)  Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions after member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions, but without interest. The board may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-148), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 15, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-230. - Defense of claims against trustees. 
To the extent not covered by insurance and to the extent provided for in F.S. §§ 111.07 and 111.071, the city agrees to provide a defense of civil actions resulting from claims made against members of the board and to provide payment of judgments or settlements resulting from such claims. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-149), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-231. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  Rollover distributions. 
(1)  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one (1) of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in code section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in code section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the code; an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the code; an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the code: effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in section 457(e)(1)(A) of the code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code; or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in section 108A of the code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
c.  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee or former employee, it also includes the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by code section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a non-spouse beneficiary may roll over the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
d.  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(b)  Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1)  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the code, from an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the code or from an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2)  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or 408(b) of the code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(c)  Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to roll over the lump sum amount. 
(Ord. No. 8-1993, § 1(15-150), 3-23-93; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 5, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 9, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 16, 11-24-09)  
Sec. 15-232. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the system. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F. S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(c)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (a), a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00)  
Sec. 15-233. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section 15-233, the following definitions apply: 
DROP [means] the City of Titusville Police Officers' and Firefighters' Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
DROP account [means] the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c). 
Total return of the assets [means] for purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to subsection (c)(2)b.2., for each fiscal year quarter, the percentage increase (or decrease) in the interest and dividends earned on investments, including realized and unrealized gains (or losses), of the total plan assets. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a police officer or firefighter, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP, prior to July 1, 2013, for police officers and prior to July 2, 2013, for firefighters. 
(2)  Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least fifteen (15) business days after it is received by the board. 
(3)  Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2), shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed sixty (60) months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate only once. 
(4)  DROP closed; effective dates. The DROP shall be closed to new participants as follows: 
a.  Police officers: Any eligible member who has not commenced participation in DROP prior to July 1, 2013, shall not thereafter be eligible to participate in DROP. 
b.  Firefighters: Any eligible member who has not commenced participation in DROP prior to July 2, 2013, shall not thereafter be eligible to participate in DROP. 
(5)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
1.  The end of his period of permissible participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3); or 
2.  Termination of his employment as a police officer or firefighter. 
b.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection a.1. above, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2), including monthly benefits and investment earnings and losses or interest, shall cease to be transferred from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) when he terminates his employment as a police officer or firefighter. 
c.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(5) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(6)  Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. For purposes of determining the accrued benefit, the member's salary for the purposes of calculating his average final compensation shall include an amount equal to any lump sum payments which would have been paid to the member and included as salary as defined herein, had the member retired under normal retirement and not elected DROP participation. Member contributions attributable to any lump sums used in the benefit calculation and not actually received by the member shall be deducted from the first payments to the member's DROP account. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system while he is a participant in the DROP except for any additional benefits provided under any cost of living adjustment for retirees of the system. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system nor shall he be eligible for disability or per-retirement death benefits, except as provided for in section 15-236, reemployment after retirement. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a police officer or firefighter, no amounts shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a police officer or fighter. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a police officer or firefighter. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (c)(2), and earnings or interest on those amounts. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement system. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his employment as a police officer or firefighter and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4), but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a police officer or firefighter. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b., a member's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be debited or credited with either: 
1.  Interest at an effective rate of six and one-half (6½) percent per annum compounded monthly determined on the last business day of the prior month's ending balance and credited to the member's DROP account as of such date (to be applicable to all current and future DROP participants); or 
2.  Earnings, to be credited or debited to the member's DROP account, determined as of the last business day of each fiscal year quarter and debited or credited as of such date, determined as follows: 
The average daily balance in a member's DROP account shall be credited or debited at a rate equal to the net investment return realized by the system for that quarter. "Net investment return" for the purpose of this paragraph is the total return of the assets in which the member's DROP account is invested by the board net of brokerage commissions, management fees and transaction costs. 
For purposes of calculating earnings on a member's DROP account pursuant to this subsection (c)(2)b.2., brokerage commissions, transaction costs, and management fees shall be determined for each quarter by the investment consultant pursuant to contracts with fund managers as reported in the custodial statement. The investment consultant shall report these quarterly contractual fees to the board. The investment consultant shall also report the net investment return for each manager and the net investment return for the total plan assets. 
Upon electing participation in the DROP, the member shall elect to receive either interest or earnings on his account to be determined as provided above. The member may, in writing, elect to change his election only once during his DROP participation. An election to change must be made prior to the end of a quarter and shall be effective beginning the following quarter. 
c.  A member's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings or interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the quarter immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the net return and at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation for participants electing the flat interest rate return, plus interest or earnings earned as of that date plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous quarter or month, as applicable, and prior to distribution. If a member fails to terminate employment after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be credited or debited with earnings or interest, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited while the member is employed by the police department or fire department. A member employed by the police department or fire department after the permissible period of DROP participation will be eligible for pre-retirement death or disability benefits, and will accrue additional credited service only as provided for in section 15-236, Reemployment after retirement. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a police officer or firefighter. Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a police officer or firefighter. 
(2)  Form of distribution. 
a.  Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a lump sum, subject to the direct rollover provisions set forth in subsection (d)(6). Elections under this paragraph shall be in writing and shall be made in such time or manner as the board shall determine. 
b.  If a member dies before his benefits commence, his DROP account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3)  Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution of a member's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election, on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(5)  Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (d), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "Minimum Distribution Of Benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
(6)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 15-231. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one (1) or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
(2)  Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare and distribute to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or file with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Code and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  The DROP is not a separate retirement plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section 15-233 for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP account distribution is in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
(2)  Notional account. The DROP account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The member has no control over the investment of the DROP account. 
(3)  No employer discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(4)  IRC limit. The DROP account distribution, alone with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b). 
(5)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any member. 
(6)  Facility of payment. If a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board shall direct that any benefit due him shall be made only to a duly appointed legal representative. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(7)  Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(8)  Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three (3) years from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made written claim therefor within three (3) months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(9)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each member or retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(10)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
(11)  Construction. 
a.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
b.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section 15-233 are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(12)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(13)  Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Ord. No. 4-1999, § 2, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 17-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 5-2001, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 6, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 10, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 64-2007, § 4, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 7, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 10, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-234. - Military service prior to employment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a police officer or firefighter serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city police or fire department shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member did not receive credited service for the time spent in the Armed Forces from any other private, governmental or military retirement or pension system. 
(2)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of credited service. 
(3)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(4)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given or the member may elect to make payment for the requested credited service over a period of time as provided for in paragraph (5) below. 
(5)  In lieu of the lump sum payment provided for in paragraph (4) above, a member may elect to make payments over a period of time in order to fully pay the amount provided for in paragraph (2). The payment plan provided for in this paragraph shall be subject to the following terms: 
a.  The principal amount to be paid shall be determined as set forth in paragraph (2) above. 
b.  The original principal amount shall be amortized over the period beginning with the first payment and ending no later than twenty-four (24) months from the date of the first payment and shall be reamortized annually to reflect changes in the interest rate provided for in subparagraph c. below. 
c.  Payments shall consist of principal, interest and a one (1) percent per annum administrative fee, with interest adjusted annually to be equal to the fund's rate of investment return for the prior year, but not less than three (3) percent, or eighteen (18) percent per annum simple interest, whichever is less. 
d.  Payments shall be made by payroll deduction from each paycheck on an after-tax basis. 
e.  In the event that a member dies, retires (including entry into the deferred retirement option plan (DROP)) or otherwise terminates his employment, without having made full payment of the principal amount necessary to receive all credited service requested, the member shall receive so much of the credited service requested, determined using procedures established by the actuary, which could be purchased with the amount of principal paid by the member to the date of his death or termination of employment. 
f.  In the event that the member's employment is terminated for any reason and he is not entitled to any benefit from the plan other than the return of the amounts he has had deducted from his paycheck as his normal contribution to the plan, the amounts which the member has paid pursuant to this subsection to purchase additional credited service, shall be returned to him, less all interest paid and less the one (1) percent administrative fee. 
(6)  The maximum credit under this section shall be four (4) years and shall not count toward vesting or eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. 
(Ord. No. 16-2000, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 52-2002, § 7, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 15-235. - Prior police or fire service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in section 15-126, the years or fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a police officer or firefighter with the city during a period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, or the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a full-time police officer or firefighter for any other municipal, county or state law enforcement agency or special district fire department in the State of Florida shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six (6) months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one (1) lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given or the member may elect to make payment for the requested credited service over a period of time as provided for in paragraph (4) below. 
(4)  In lieu of the lump sum payment provided for in paragraph (3) above, a member may elect to make payments over a period of time in order to fully pay the amount provided for in paragraph (1). The payment plan provided for in this paragraph shall be subject to the following terms: 
a.  The principal amount to be paid shall be determined as set forth in paragraph (1) above. 
b.  The original principal amount shall be amortized over the period beginning with the first payment and ending no later than twenty-four (24) months from the date of the first payment and shall be reamortized annually to reflect changes in the interest rate provided for in subparagraph c. below. 
c.  Payments shall consist of principal, interest and a one (1) percent per annum administrative fee, with interest adjusted annually to be equal to the fund's rate of investment return for the prior year, but not less than three (3) percent, or eighteen (18) percent per annum simple interest, whichever is less. 
d.  Payments shall be made by payroll deduction from each paycheck on an after-tax basis. 
e.  In the event that a member dies, retires (including entry into any deferred retirement option plan (DROP)) or otherwise terminates his employment, without having made full payment of the principal amount necessary to receive all credited service requested, the member shall receive so much of the credited service requested, determined using procedures established by the actuary, which could be purchased with the amount of principal paid by the member to the date of his death or termination of employment. 
f.  In the event that the member's employment is terminated for any reason and he is not entitled to any benefit from the plan other than the return of the amounts he has had deducted from his paycheck as his normal contribution to the plan, the amounts which the member has paid pursuant to this subsection to purchase additional credited service, shall be returned to him, less all interest paid and less the one (1) percent administrative fee. 
(5)  The combined total maximum purchase of credit under this section for either service with the city and/or other government service shall be four (4) years, Service other than with the City of Titusville shall count for all purposes except vesting and eligibility for not-in-line of duty disability benefits. Service with the City of Titusville shall count for all purposes, including vesting. 
(6)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other municipal, county or state law enforcement agency or special district fire department, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan as set forth in section 15-221, subsection (l)(2). 
(7)  For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a firefighter as provided for in this section, in addition to service as a firefighter in this state, credit may be purchased by the member in the same manner as provided above for federal, other state, county or municipal service if the prior service is recognized by the Division of State Fire Marshal, as provided under F.S. ch. 633, or the firefighter provides proof to the board that such service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a firefighter under section 15-126, definitions. 
(8)  For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a police officer as provided for in this section, in addition to service as a police officer in this state, credit may be purchased by the member in the same manner as provided above for federal, other state, county or municipal service if the prior service is recognized by the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission within the Department of Law Enforcement, as provided under F.S. ch. 943, or the police officer provides proof to the board that such service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a police officer under section 15-126, definitions. 
(Ord. No. 52-2002, § 8, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 18-2006, § 11, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 17, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 6-2017, § 11, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 15-236. - Reemployment after retirement. 
(a)  Any retiree under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided for, may be reemployed by any public or private employer, except the city, and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this system. Reemployment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal (or early) retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed as a police officer or firefighter and, by virtue of that reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, shall upon being reemployed, discontinue receipt of benefits. Upon reemployment, the member shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service (and early retirement reduction factor, if applicable) as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period and not including any period of DROP participation), and credited service (and early retirement reduction factor, if applicable) as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received during a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the retiree may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable only to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(c)  Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system who is reemployed by the city in a position other than as a police officer or firefighter, shall upon being reemployed, continue receipt of benefits for the period of any subsequent employment period. Former DROP participants shall begin receipt of benefits under these circumstances. 
(d)  After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity, shall discontinue receipt of benefits from the system. If the reemployed person, by virtue of his reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, that person shall accrue a second benefit as provided for in subsection (2) above and benefit payments shall remain suspended during any such subsequent employment period. If the reemployed person is not eligible to participate in this system, that person's pension benefit payments shall be suspended until the earlier of termination of employment or such time as the reemployed retiree reaches the date that he would have been eligible for normal retirement under this system had he continued employment and not elected early retirement. "Normal retirement" as used in this subsection shall be the current normal retirement date provided for under this system. 
(e)  Reemployment of terminated vested persons. Reemployed terminated vested persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(f)  DROP Participants. Members or retirees who were in the deferred retirement option plan shall have the options provided for in this section for reemployment. 
(Ord. No. 18-2006, § 12, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 15-237. - Supplemental benefit component for special benefits; Chapters 175 and 185 share accounts. 
There is hereby established a defined contribution plan component (share plan) to provide special benefits to police officers and firefighters in addition to the benefits provided for in the previous sections of this plan, such benefits to be funded solely and entirely by F.S. Chs. 175 and 185, premium tax revenues that are allocated to the share plan by agreement of the city and unions representing police officers and firefighters. Amounts allocated to the share plan shall be further allocated to the members in a manner to be agreed upon by the city and unions representing police officers and firefighters. 
(Ord. No. 6-2017, § 12, 2-14-17)  
Chapter 16 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Hazardous waste clean up and disposal requirements, § 9-11; license required for private refuse collection and disposal, § 11-406 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 21; code enforcement board, §§ 14.10—14.40, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; hazardous and toxic materials management, § 45.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; location of dumpsters, § 53.55, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FRANCHISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 35-1997, § 1, adopted October 28, 1997, amended §§ 16-1, 16-2 by creating a new article entitled "franchise," §§ 16-1—16-15. Formerly, such sections pertained to §§ 10-1, 10-12 of the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 2-1991, §§ 1, 10, 1-8-91 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Purpose and findings. 
The city finds that it owns and maintains various streets, roads, and rights-of-way within the city limits of the City of Titusville which substantial public funds are expended for the maintenance and improvements thereon. That the city finds that it is necessary to permit and allow for the collection and disposal of a variety of types of solid waste, refuse, recyclable materials and other waste generated within the city limits of the City of Titusville. That the collection and disposal of said solid waste and materials is transported over the streets, roads, and rights-of-way maintained by the city. 
The city finds that it is necessary and in the public interest to regulate the collection and disposal of solid waste, refuse, and recyclable materials over the streets, roads, and rights-of-way of the city. That the city finds that it is necessary, in accordance with applicable law, to development and implement programs to return valuable materials to productive use in accordance with Chapter 403, Florida Statutes, and to conserve energy and natural resources. The city further finds that the establishment of various recycling programs is required by applicable Florida law and is necessary and beneficial to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
That the city further finds that it is in the public interest that for the use of the various streets, roads, and rights-of-way inside the city limits of the City of Titusville that a franchise fee should be imposed upon various collectors or haulers of various solid waste, refuse, recyclable materials and other waste generated in the city limits of the City of Titusville. The city further finds that in accordance with Chapter 166 and Chapter 180, Florida Statutes, Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963, the Florida Constitution, and Chapter 403, Florida Statutes, and other applicable law, that the city is permitted and authorized to impose and charge a reasonable franchise fee for the use of its streets, roads, and rights-of-way for the collection and disposal of solid waste, refuse, recyclable materials and other wastes within the city limits of the City of Titusville. 
The city further finds that it in the best interest of the citizens to impose a franchise fee and regulate said businesses and entities in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aluminum cans shall mean all soft drink, beverage or beer cans that are one hundred (100) percent aluminum. Additionally, recyclables in this category shall include any food can or specialized food containers that are one hundred (100) percent aluminum. 
Biohazardous waste shall mean any solid waste or liquid waste which may present a threat of infection to humans and as further defined in F.A.C. Rule 17-712. 
Bulky items shall mean abandoned automobiles, discarded household appliances and furniture, tree stumps, large tree limbs and similar heavy materials. 
Bundle shall mean a package containing rubbish only, weighing not over fifty (50) pounds and not exceeding four (4) feet in its longest dimension, and placed for collection immediately adjacent to a standard container. 
Commercial refuse shall mean wastes from wholesale, retail or service establishments, including restaurants, hotels, motels, shopping centers, office buildings, travel trailer parks, lodge buildings and warehouses. It also includes restaurant or cafeteria wastes from industrial concerns. 
Computer printout shall be defined according to Circular PS-89, "Paper Stock Standards and Practices," effective April 1, 1986, except as follows: computer printout must be laser and groundwood free. 
Consumer shall mean any person, firm or public or private corporation served by the franchisee. 
Director or director of public works shall mean the person who has the authority and responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and shall be appointed by and accountable to the city manager. 
Franchise means a franchise contract granted by the city containing specific provisions of the franchise and includes the provisions contained in this article. 
Franchise area means the entire city limits of the City of Titusville and any portion thereof subsequently annexed. 
Franchisee means any natural person or persons, partnerships, domestic and foreign corporations, associations, joint venture or organization of any kind, which has been legally granted a franchise by the city. 
Franchise fee means the percentage as specified by this chapter of franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of the franchise within the city limits of the City of Titusville. 
Garbage shall mean materials resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food; market wastes; trimmings and other discarded matter from meat or produce, including containers in which packages, and any other matter, of any nature whatsoever, which is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects; and any bottles, cans or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects. 
Glass shall mean clear, green, brown colors of glass bottles, jars and containers. It shall exclude mirrors, ceramics, plate glass, window glass, auto glass and kitchen glassware. 
Gross revenue shall mean all revenues or receipts received by the franchisee from any customer within the city limits of the City of Titusville. 
Hazardous or toxic substances shall mean those substances as defined and/or listed as hazardous or toxic materials in 40 CFR. 
Industrial refuse shall mean solid wastes resulting from erecting, removing, repairing or razing buildings, industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, wood, plastics, metal scrap, chemicals, etc. (excludes restaurant wastes from an industrial firm when handled separately). 
Institutional wastes shall mean refuse from schools, hospitals, research institutions, nonprofit organizations, public buildings and churches. 
Newsprint shall mean old newspapers, including the normal percentage of rotogravure and colored sections; collected and packed loose as received, tied in twine, in paper bags or corrugated boxes. 
Plastics shall mean plastic carbonated beverage containers, bottles or jugs and plastic milk containers. This excludes juice, water, liquor, sports drink and other drink containers as well as dish soap, clothes detergent, food containers or any other plastic containers or plastic bags. Also excluded are automotive/maintenance or other plastic containers that contained hazardous or toxic materials such as motor oil, transmission and brake fluid, windshield washer fluid, gas treatment containers, pool supplies and chemicals, or garden pesticide containers. 
Recovered materials shall mean metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile or rubber materials that have known recycling potential, can be feasibly recovered, and have been diverted and source separated or have been removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the materials require subsequent processing or separation from each other, but does not include materials destined for any other use that constitute disposal. 
Refuse shall mean all solid wastes, garbage and rubbish. 
Rubbish shall mean solid wastes or refuse, excluding garbage and bulky items, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible trash, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, plastics, yard clippings, wood, glass and similar materials. 
Solid wastes shall mean garbage, rubbish, refuse, bulky items and other discarded solid or liquid materials, including materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from community activities. 
Used oil shall mean any oil which has been refined from crude oil or synthetic oil and, as a result of use, storage, or handling has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss of its original properties, but which may be suitable for further use and is economically recyclable. 
Waste shall mean all forms of solid wastes and recycled materials or other waste generated within the city limits of the City of Titusville. 
White ledger shall be defined according to Circular PS-89, "Paper Stock Standards and Practices," effective April 1, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-3. - Grant of franchise. 
The city council is hereby authorized to grant a franchise for the collection and disposal of any and all form of waste. It is acknowledge that the city, department of public works, solid waste fund, presently operates an exclusive franchise within the city limits of the City of Titusville for the collection and disposition of solid waste, refuse, recyclable materials and other waste generated within the city limits of the City of Titusville, except as provided herein. 
That for the privilege of operating upon the streets, roads, and rights-of-way within the city limits of the City of Titusville, any person desiring to collect waste as hereinafter authorized shall first obtain a franchise from the city before commencing operation. 
The city, department of public works, solid waste fund, shall retain all rights to collect all waste and recyclable materials except as provided in section 16-31 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-4. - Franchise applications. 
(1)  Application for franchise. All applicants desiring to obtain a franchise to collect waste within the city limits of the City of Titusville, as authorized by section 16-31, shall submit an application on a form on file with the city manager or his designee which shall include information consisting of as a minimum the following: 
a.  A detailed description of the waste or materials to be transported, recovered and the types of equipment (brand name, model number, and date of equipment) utilized in the collection of the waste. 
b.  Proof of commercial driver's license (CDL) for all employees driving vehicles, to the extent applicable. 
c.  Proof of compliance with the requirements of Florida Statutes concerning commercial driver's license, workmen's compensation and insurance requirements including valid certificate of insurance for each vehicle. 
d.  The location of any and all disposal facilities or processing facilities for the disposal of any waste or waste collected within the city limits of the City of Titusville and all facilities processing said waste which meet the requirements of Chapter 403, Florida Statutes, to the extent applicable. 
e.  Proof of insurance as required herein. 
f.  Payment of an application fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-5. - Hours of operation. 
All franchisees and collectors of waste shall collect waste between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. All waste collected, spilled or scattered by the collector will be immediately retrieved, collected, hauled and transported. Materials spilled or scattered shall be immediately retrieved and collected by the franchise holder. Prior to the installation of any container for the purpose of collecting waste, the applicant shall disclose the location of said container in order to ensure compliance with applicable zoning regulations, buffering, blockage of fire lanes, or other code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-6. - Vehicles. 
Vehicles used to collect or transport waste, shall be clean and the exterior of the vehicle shall be washed weekly, including areas inside the vehicle carrying materials or payloads, and sanitized with a disinfectant and deodorant. All waste collected shall meet all applicable local, state and federal requirements, and be discharged in accordance with applicable standards. Each vehicle used in the collection or disposal of waste shall have clearly identified the name of the company collecting said waste, the phone number of the hauler. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-7. - Containers. 
The size and frequency of the service containers shall be sufficient to ensure storage and disposal of all materials and in full compliance with all provisions of the ordinance of the city and applicable law. All containers shall be maintained free of rust, broken hinges, broken doors and shall be maintained. All containers shall be kept painted or if aluminum or stainless steel maintained in accordance with manufacturers specifications. 
Container lids shall remain closed and containers shall not be overfilled. In the event containers are overfilled and cannot be safely dumped, the applicant will notify the customer and schedule service to meet the needs of the customer. All containers shall be placed in a location in compliance with applicable codes and accessible to the collector. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-8. - Littering. 
Franchisee shall not overload or release litter in violation of the Florida Anti-Litter Law, Florida Statutes 403.413 (1996). If any material collected litters or is released upon the streets, highways or property other than that of the collector, the collector shall immediately stop the vehicle and retrieve the litter. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-9. - Insurance. 
The franchisee shall obtain and maintain throughout the term of the franchise not less than the insurance coverage as set forth herein. All insurance coverages shall be carried with a company or companies having a best rating of "A" or greater. 
(1)  Workmen's compensation. The collector shall fulfill and comply with all requirements of Florida Workmen's Compensation including all legal requirements for occupational diseases. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability. The collector shall maintain comprehensive general liability insurance covering its operation within the city limits of the City of Titusville in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death per incident and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage. The city shall be named as an additional insured for comprehensive general liability insurance and coverage for the duration of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-10. - Inspection. 
The city reserves the right to conduct periodic inspection of franchisee's vehicles and equipment to ensure compliance with the Code. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-11. - Franchise fee. 
In consideration for the issuance of a franchise for the operation of the franchisee's business across the streets, roads, and rights-of-ways within the city limits of the City of Titusville, the franchisee shall pay to the city an amount which will be equivalent to ten (10) percent of the franchisee's gross revenue from receipts from customers generated within the geographic limits of this franchise on a monthly basis. Payments to the city for said franchise shall be made monthly on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of each calendar month with respect to franchisee's gross revenues during the preceding calendar months. Such payment shall be based upon the franchisee's gross revenues during the preceding calendar months. Failure to pay said fee when due shall be a default and the franchisee shall pay interest of one and one-half (1½) percent per month monthly on any delinquent account. The franchisee shall maintain complete records and accounts showing dates and payments received by the franchisee from consumers or customers within the city limits of the City of Titusville. A monthly summary report showing gross revenues received by the franchisee from its operations within the City of Titusville during the preceding month and year and such other information as the city shall request with respect to properties or customers served within the city limits shall be made available by the franchisee. A duly authorized representative of the city shall the right and power and authority to inspect and audit the records of the franchise holder that will show or demonstrate the gross revenues received by the franchisee on an annual basis for the life of the franchise. In the event the franchise audit reveals that the franchisee has failed to pay to the city an amount for gross revenues by more than five (5) percent in any monthly period, the franchise holder shall pay the cost of the audit including any administrative fees incurred by the city in conducting said audit. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-12. - Use of streets. 
By this franchise, the city grants to the franchisee the right and privilege to utilize the streets, roads, and rights-of-ways of the city and to ingress and egress properties within the city limits for purposes of conducting its business. In the event the franchisee causes any damage to any of the streets, roads, and rights-of-ways of the city, the franchisee shall immediately repair the same at no cost to the city. In the event the franchisee fails and refuses to repair said streets, roads, and rights-of-ways after demand by the city, the city may proceed with making said repair and billing the franchisee for said work. The franchisee shall immediately pay said cost of repair and in the event of failure or refusal to pay the same, the franchise will be subject to termination. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-13. - Termination. 
In the event the franchisee, during the term and provision of any franchise agreement shall fail to abide by any terms and provisions of the franchise or this article, then in that event, the franchise shall be subject to revocation after notice by the city and an opportunity to cure within ten (10) days after receipt of said notice. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-14. - Existing permits. 
By adoption of this article, a franchise is hereby deemed to be issued to the city, department of public works, solid waste fund, for the collection and disposal of all refuse within the city limits including recycling materials, except as provided herein. That the city shall be subject to the payment of the franchise fee as herein provided effective with the first billing cycle during the month of November 1997. 
Any existing collectors who have been issued in accordance with sections 11-406 through 11-413 of the Code of Ordinance of the City of Titusville, for the fiscal year commencing October 1, 1997 through September 30, 1998, an occupational license shall have its license prorated as of the effect date of this article, and will be entitled to a refund of the balance of the fiscal year. All existing collectors shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article to apply for and obtain a franchise as required in this article to continue collection and operation within the city. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 16-15. - Depositing trash on streets or in gutters or in stormwater system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drain, deposit, place or otherwise discharge onto any street, gutter, ditch, lake, river, body of water, or any natural outlet or stormwater system within the city, or to cause or permit to be drained, deposited, placed or otherwise discharged into such waters, any organic or inorganic matter which causes or tends to cause pollution. Polluting matter includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Acids or alkalis. 
Animal carcasses. 
Antifreeze, and other automotive products. 
Chemicals. 
Chemically treated cooling water. 
Construction materials. 
Degreasers, solvents. 
Dyes (without prior written permission of the administrator). 
Heated water. 
Laundry waste. 
Lawn clippings, leaves, branches, etc. 
Paints. 
Pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers. 
Pet waste. 
Petroleum products, including but not limited to oil, gasoline, and grease. 
Recreational vehicle waste. 
Refuse. 
Sanitary sewage. 
Silt. 
Soaps. 
Steam cleaning waste. 
Any groundwater which contains phosphorous or nitrogen concentrations greater than the surface water into which the groundwater is discharged. 
Any water which exceeds the state surface water standards. 
Solids in such quantities or of such size, capable of causing interference or obstruction to the flow in the city's stormwater system. 
Toxic or poisonous solids or liquids. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to wash any public or private streets, sidewalks or parking areas into a gutter, outlet or stormwater system, unless all visible debris and sediments have been removed prior to washing. If the removal of the debris and sediments is not feasible (as determined by the city manager or designee), then the street, etc. may only be washed with the designee's prior written approval, which may include requirements to clean the affected drainage pipelines or provide treatment of washwater runoff to prevent downstream pollution. Only water may be used for washing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 35-1997, § 1, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 44-2004, § 1, 7-27-04)  
Secs. 16-16—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste private haulers, license required, § 11-406 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Collection by city; exceptions. 
All waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city. No other person shall collect, or convey over any of the streets, roads and right-of-ways of the city, or dispose of any waste accumulated within the city limits, except for the following categories of waste and only after obtaining a franchise: 
(1)  Medical waste. Any person, business or establishment creating or generating bio-hazard or medical waste. 
(2)  Greases and oils. Any person, business or establishment creating or generating cooking oils, cooking grease, or cooking lubricants. 
(3)  Construction materials. Any construction debris, trash or solid waste generated by the erecting, removing, or demolition of any building or structure. (example: rolloff containers) 
(4)  Nonresidential recyclable materials. Commercial, industrial, schools, and other nonresidential establishments which generate paper, corrugated cardboard for recycling purposes. 
The city expressly recognizes that the above waste may be collected and removed by other franchisees and haulers and are not expressly preempted to the city. All other waste are expressly preempted to the city. 
The city expressly recognizes that pursuant to Chapter 403.7046, Florida Statutes, that commercial establishments that generate source-separated recovered materials as defined in Chapter 403.703, Florida Statutes (1996), may sell or otherwise convey its recovered materials to any properly certified recovered materials dealer who has complied with the provisions of Chapter 403, Florida Statutes. That any commercial establishment that sells or otherwise conveys its recovered materials to a certified dealer shall, at its premises, source-separate its recovered materials. 
In addition, to the extent that a certified dealer asserts an exemption by applicable law from obtaining and paying a franchise fee, the certified dealer shall pay a registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the city for each fiscal year in connection with the operation of the city's registration program. 
The dealer shall also provide the information as provided for in Chapter 403.7046(3)(b), Florida Statutes (1996). 
Any property owner who does not contract with a third party for collection and disposal of the waste described in section 16-31(1), (2), (3) and (4) may dispose of said waste without obtaining a franchise. 
(Code 1963, § 10-2; Ord. No. 2-1991, § 2, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 35-1997, § 2, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 8-1998, § 1, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 16-32. - Public service. 
All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city, except as exempted by sections 16-31 and 11-406. 
(Code 1963, § 10-4; Ord. No. 2-1991, § 4, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-33. - Certain acts and practices prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to dispose of any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, burning substance or any dangerous or highly corrosive material, used oil or biohazardous waste in any recycling container which might be detrimental or harmful to any person. The city will not be responsible for the collection or disposal of these materials or of special industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6(l), 1-8-91)  
Secs. 16-34—16-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES 
 
Sec. 16-46. - Separation of refuse. 
Garbage and rubbish shall be placed and maintained in separate containers. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(a); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-47. - Preparation of refuse. 
(a)  Garbage. All garbage before being placed in containers for collection shall have drained from it all free liquids. Unless newspaper and magazines are containerized, they must be tied. 
(b)  Rubbish. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(b); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-48. - Refuse containers—Generally. 
Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises in sufficient number to hold all waste that accumulates between collections and shall be properly maintained. Each container shall be durable, metal, plastic or rubber, rust resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight, rodentproof, shall have tightfitting covers and be easy to clean. Disposable plastic bags (with or without sack holders) of approved type, size and material designed for refuse storage and disposal, are acceptable and may be used in lieu of the above-mentioned containers to contain garbage and rubbish for storage and pickup. Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this article or that has ragged or sharp edges or any defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The director shall refuse collection services for failure to comply with such notice. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-49. - Same—Garbage. 
Garbage containers shall be equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting covers, except plastic sacks, and shall have a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons nor less than ten (10) gallons nor weigh more than fifty (50) pounds when filled. Disposable bags shall be in perfect condition and securely sealed. Overloading shall be avoided to minimize accidental opening during normal handling. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(1); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-50. - Same—Rubbish and bulky items. 
Rubbish shall be containerized and shall be placed in a container of a kind suitable for storage and collection purposes and shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds per container for collection. Tree and plant waste and trimmings and bulky household items which cannot be containerized shall be stacked in a neat manner beside the rubbish containers. Tree limbs shall not be over four (4) feet in length or twenty-four (24) inches in diameter. This limitation shall not apply to Christmas trees. Any bulky items or rubbish requiring special equipment for loading shall be the responsibility of the owner to dispose of, and the city shall not be responsible for removing such items. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(2); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-51. - Same—Commercial waste. 
(a)  Commercial businesses dealing in food waste products. All restaurants or commercial businesses dealing in food waste products shall be required to utilize city-furnished mechanical containers. Existing restaurants or commercial businesses dealing in food waste products not having space available for city-furnished mechanical containers shall be required to furnish their own containers. 
(b)  Other commercial establishments. Other commercial establishments which generate more than two (2) cubic yards per week of refuse shall be required to use a city-owned commercial container. Commercial waste containers for mechanical pickup will be furnished by the city. Size of container and frequency of pickup will be determined by the director of public works, in accordance with local and state health laws, and volume of refuse and trash generated. Deposit on commercial containers must be paid in advance, and any increase in size of the container or frequency of pickup will increase fees, charges and deposit, according to the fee schedule contained in sections 16-117 through 16-120. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(3); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-52. - Same—Multifamily. 
It is mandatory that multifamily developments with thirteen (13) or more units be serviced by city-owned containers of the proper number, size, and collection frequency as determined by the director of public works, except as provided herein. If, in the judgment of the director of public works, sufficient operational difficulties exist, multifamily developments of thirteen (13) or more units may be serviced through the use of individual containers. Multifamily developments with less than thirteen (13) units will be serviced as covered under section 16-116, unless the owner thereof requests and receives approval for service with city-owned containers of the proper number, size and collection frequency as determined by the director. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(4); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-53. - Care of city-owned containers. 
The users are responsible for the care of city-owned containers other than normal wear and tear. Each establishment shall be responsible for cleaning private or city-owned containers. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(5); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-54. - Access to containers. 
Upon the closing of the business day prior to the scheduled collection day, users will locate containers either private or city-owned, in such locations as shall be readily available for pickup. Users shall be responsible to provide a clear access to either private or city-owned containers, on their scheduled collection days. If a container is not readily accessible when the collection vehicle arrives, collection will not be made until the next scheduled day unless arrangements are made for an extra collection at the rates shown in sections 16-117 through 16-120. If city-owned containers are placed within an enclosure that has a gate, arrangements may be made for collection vehicle driver to open the gate upon arrival at rates shown in sections 16-117 through 16-120. The user would then be responsible to close the gate. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(6); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-55. - Use of city-owned containers by others prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the duly authorized owner or user to place any refuse in city-owned containers. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(7); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-56. - Toxic or hazardous wastes. 
Toxic or hazardous wastes may not be collected, transported or disposed of by the city. All toxic and hazardous wastes shall be stored, transported and disposed of in compliance with the regulations of federal, state and local governments and their regulatory agencies. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(c)(8); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-57. - Storing of refuse—Public places. 
No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon private property whether owned by such person or not, except in proper containers for collection. No person shall throw or deposit refuse in any lake, stream, drainage ditch, stormwater conveyance or other body of water. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(d)(1); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-58. - Same—Unauthorized accumulation. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or rubbish on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(d)(2); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-59. - Same—Placement for pickup. 
Garbage, rubbish and bulky items which are to be picked up by the city shall be containerized and placed on the parkway next to the curb or roadway, and not in the street in front of the residence or establishment in which accumulated by 6:30 a.m., so as to be in place prior to arrival of collection crews. If a physician's statement certifying that no one in the household is able to carry such wastes to the curbside has been filed with the director, the container shall be placed at the side yard, outside of any fence, so as to be readily accessible for pickup. Failure to place wastes at the proper location prior to arrival of the crew will relieve the city of making such collection. All solid waste and recycling containers shall be placed on the parkway no sooner than 5:00 p.m. on the day before collection and shall be removed from the parkway no later than 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(d)(3); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-60. - Certain acts and practices prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to dispose of any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, burning substance or any dangerous or highly corrosive material, used oil or biohazardous wastes in any refuse container which might be detrimental or harmful to any person or persons. The city will not be responsible for the collection or disposal of these materials or of special industrial wastes. Damage to city-owned containers as a result of the above will be repaired at the expense of the user. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(e); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-61. - Mandatory service. 
All owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, operators, of residential units, multi-dwelling units and commercial units, occupied or unoccupied, operating and nonoperating, shall be required to receive solid waste collection services from the city as described in this chapter and shall be required to subscribe to and pay for the service or the availability of solid waste collection services. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(f); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-61 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-62. - Prima facie evidence. 
Any place of abode or any place of business occupied or in operation where food is prepared or is capable of being prepared, or waste is produced, shall be prima facie evidence that garbage and/or rubbish is being produced and accumulated on such premises and the owner, tenant, establishment or person occupying such premises shall pay the prescribed fees for garbage and/or rubbish removal and disposal services, from the premises. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to inspect such premises and cause to be removed therefrom, any and all refuse found thereon, at the expense of the owner, tenant, establishment or person occupying such premises. This section shall likewise apply to the duties of such director to report to the proper authorities any violation of this article; to institute and prosecute any owner, tenant, establishment or person occupying such premises found or suspected of being in violation thereof and to appear as a witness in any action pertaining to violation of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(g); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91)  
Sec. 16-63. - Special pickup. 
Bulky items such as furniture, household appliances, tree stumps and large tree limbs, excluding Christmas trees, (not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in diameter or four (4) feet in length), and similar heavy material will be picked up at curbside. The disposal of amounts exceeding the capacity of the city's yard waste collection vehicles (approximately twenty (20) cubic yards loose) will be the responsibility of the owner. If the owner wishes the city to dispose of amounts in excess of twenty (20) cubic yards, the fee for such disposal shall be based on the current burdened labor rate and reasonable hourly equipment charges. These fees may be suspended by the city manager in the event of a hurricane or similar natural disaster. Undeveloped properties are not subject to any solid waste collection or disposal fees. Therefore, solid waste which may be generated by these properties are the responsibility of the owner for disposal. If the owner wishes the city to collect this solid waste, the owner must contact the city and request same. There will be a minimum charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per collection. Amounts in excess of twenty (20) cubic yards shall be subject to charges as provided in article III. Failure to pay these fees shall result in the imposition of a lien against the undeveloped property being served. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5(h); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 5, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-63 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Secs. 16-64—16-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-76. - Frequency of collection. 
(a)  Residential. Garbage and rubbish accumulated by residences shall be collected twice each week. 
(b)  Restaurants and commercial businesses dealing in food waste products. Restaurants and commercial businesses dealing in food waste products shall be required to have a collection frequency as determined by the director based on a volume and consideration of any public health related factors and shall utilize city-owned mechanical containers. Existing restaurants and commercial businesses dealing in food waste products where a city-owned mechanical container cannot be located shall be required to furnish their own container and pickup frequency shall be determined by the director with fees adjusted proportionately in accordance with section 16-116. 
(c)  Other commercial and industrial establishments. Other commercial and industrial establishments and businesses shall have garbage and rubbish collection at least twice a week, and a greater frequency may be established by the director to protect public health. If a frequency of collection is established in excess of twice each week, the fee established in section 16-116 for non-city furnished containers shall be proportionately adjusted in accordance with the frequency of collection. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6(a); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-76 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-77. - Builders and tree surgeons. 
Builders, building contractors and privately employed tree trimmers and tree surgeons must remove all trash and debris from the premises upon which they are working at their own expense, which shall include limbs, tree trunks, roots, concrete slabs, concrete blocks, bricks, building debris and all other materials used by the constructors in the course of building and/or alterations. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6(b); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-77 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-78. - Industrial and commercial solid waste. 
(a)  Collection and transportation. The producers of industrial or commercial wastes, or the owners of premises upon which industrial or commercial waste is produced who personally collect, convey and dispose of such waste shall do so as specified in sections 11-406 et seq. and 16-54 and in accordance with the rules of the department of health and rehabilitation services 10-D, 13, 14, and 15. 
(b)  Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under section 11-406 et seq. shall be made in accordance with regulations as established by director of public works and in accordance with state and county disposal regulations. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6(c); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-78 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-79. - Special pickup. 
Commercial and industrial establishments may request special pickup of rubbish or bulky items in excess of two (2) cubic yards which cannot be containerized. Any bulky items or rubbish that require special equipment for loading shall be the responsibility of the owner and the city shall not remove such items. Any special pickup item in excess of twenty (20) cubic yards shall be the responsibility of the owner or as provided in section 16-63. If a commercial or industrial establishment desires special pickup service, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to call the director and request such service. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6(d); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-79 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-80. - Refuse property of city. 
Ownership of refuse material collected by the city shall be the property of the city when collected by the city and shall become the property of the county once disposed of on the county land disposal site. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6(e); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-80 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-81. - Temporary city-owned containers. 
Temporary city-owned containers will be placed at the rates specified in section 16-117 with a minimum charge as established for a special trip. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6(f); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-81 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Secs. 16-82—16-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COLLECTION OF RECYCLING MATERIALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Collection of recyclable materials by private haulers, § 11-408. 
 
Sec. 16-91. - Separation of recycling materials. 
In those households participating in the recycling program, recycling materials shall be separated from regular household solid waste and rubbish and placed in the separate recycling container as provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2-1991, § 4(g), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-91 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-92. - Preparation of recycling materials. 
(a)  All recyclable materials shall be placed in one (1) recycling container. The container shall be placed at curbside by 6:30 a.m. and shall be separate and apart from any other containers on the specified collection day. Recyclable materials accumulated by residents shall be collected once each week. 
(b)  The recyclable materials shall be prepared as follows: Newspapers shall be placed in the recycling bin loose or bundled, tied or placed in paper bags or corrugated boxes. Glass bottles and jars shall be rinsed out and the lids removed; labels do not need to be removed. Aluminum cans shall be rinsed free of any liquid. Plastic containers shall be rinsed out and the lids removed; labels do not need to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6(h), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-92 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-93. - Recycling containers. 
(a)  One (1) plastic eighteen-gallon capacity container, used for the storage/collection of recyclable materials, shall be provided by the city to each owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises where trash can service is provided. Customers utilizing dumpsters for their garbage service will be provided other specialized containers for use in storage/collection of recyclable materials. These containers will be provided in phases as determined by the city. 
(b)  The city will provide up to three (3) replacement recycling bins for bins that are stolen or misplaced. A charge of five dollars and eighty-nine cents ($5.89) per recycling container will be charged to each customer upon issuance of a fourth recycling bin to the same owner/address. 
(Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6(i), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-93 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-94. - Recyclable material ownership. 
(a)  Material placed at curbside in recycling containers for collection shall become the property of the city. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, other than authorized by the city, to collect or pick up or cause to be picked up any recyclable material so placed. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to issue, at no charge, a permit for a nonprofit, charitable organization to collect recyclable materials for fund-raising purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6(j), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-94 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-95. - Care of city-owned containers. 
Exclusive of normal wear and tear, the users are responsible for the care of the city-owned recycling containers. The abuse or use of recycling containers for purposes other than as provided herein is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2-1991, § 6(k), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-95 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Secs. 16-96—16-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RATES, CHARGES, BILLING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 16-116. - Fees. 
The following monthly service charges shall be made to each account for the service or the availability of service whether vacant or occupied, operating or non-operating. Any residential customer who requests that service be interrupted for any length of time will pay the monthly collection service availability charge during that period of interruption. Any owner or agent who attempts to circumvent this charge by closing their account (and requesting deposit refund) at time of temporary departure and then returning as a new customer will be held liable for the monthly collection service availability charge during the disconnected period of time. A uniform schedule of rates and charges for the use or availability of refuse collection services is as follows: 
(1)  Residential (which includes single-family and multi-family) refuse collection service availability charge. 
RESIDENTIAL RATE PATH ($/HH/MO) 
FOR BILLS RENDERED ON OR AFTER 
	Service 	Oct. 1, 2018 
Single Family 	Refuse 	$11.95 
	Recycling 	1.03 
Multifamily 	Refuse 	8.97 
	Recycling 	0.77 
 
(Code 1963, § 10-7; Ord. No. 40-1990, § 1, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 30-1995, § 1, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 37-1998, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 57-2003, § 1, 9-25-03; Ord. No. 61-2004, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 25-2011, § 1, 9-14-11; Ord. No. 30-2013, § 1, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 19-2016, § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 28-2017, § 1, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 42-2018, § 1, 9-13-18) 
Cross reference— Private solid waste haulers, § 11-406 et seq.  
Sec. 16-117. - Solid waste commercial dumpster monthly rates. 
COMMERCIAL RATE 
FOR BILLS RENDERED ON OR AFTER 
	Service 	Oct. 1, 2018 
Dumpster ($/yd) 	Refuse 	$3.67 
	Recycling 	0.10 
Can Service ($/yd) 	Refuse 	24.02 
	Recycling 	2.06 
Dumpster Rental ($/month) 	All sizes 	26.12 
 
Shared dumpsters: Commercial customers will be allowed to share dumpsters, if required. Shared dumpster accounts shall be charged fractions of the total monthly dumpster fees, subject to at least the commercial can charge. If a fraction of the total monthly dumpster fees is greater than the commercial can charge, the shared dumpster accounts will each be charged that fraction. If the fraction of the monthly dumpster fees is less than the commercial can charge, shared dumpster accounts will each be charged the commercial can charge. 
(Code 1963, § 10-8(a); Ord. No. 40-1990, § 2, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 30-1995, § 1, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 31-1999, § 1, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 57-2003, § 1, 9-25-03; Ord. No. 61-2004, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 39-2008, § 1, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 25-2011, § 2, 9-14-11; Ord. No. 30-2013, § 1, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 19-2016, § 2, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 28-2017, § 2, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 42-2018, § 2, 9-13-18)  
Sec. 16-118. - Extra charges for special services. 
Users shall be responsible to provide a clear access to either private or city-owned containers on their scheduled collection days. If a container is not readily accessible when collection vehicle arrives, collection will not be made until the next scheduled day unless arrangements are made for an extra collection at the rates set forth below. If city-owned containers are placed within an enclosure that has a gate, arrangements may be made for collection vehicle driver to open gate upon arrival at rates shown in subsection (2) of this section. The user would then be responsible to close the gate. 
Requested extra collection, or when a return trip is requested due to container being blocked. 
Cubic 
Yards 	When 
Truck 
There 	Special 
Trip 
2 	$4.60 	$15.60 
4 	9.20 	20.20 
6 	13.80 	24.29 
8 	18.40 	29.39 
 
(Code 1963, § 10-8(b); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 7(b), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 30-1995, § 1, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 57-2003, § 1, 9-25-03)  
Sec. 16-119. - Container deposit. 
The following deposits are required for the containers: 
Container 
 Size 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
2 cubic yards 	$70.00 	$110.00 	$145.00 	$180.00 	$215.00 
4 cubic yards 	145.00 	215.00 	290.00 	360.00 	435.00 
6 cubic yards 	215.00 	325.00 	435.00 	545.00 	650.00 
8 cubic yards 	290.00 	435.00 	580.00 	725.00 	870.00 
 
(Code 1963, § 10-8(c); Ord. No. 2-1991, § 7(c), 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-119 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-120. - Recycling surcharge. 
A recycling charge shall be charged commercial garbage users who utilize city-furnished dumpsters on a per-unit-of-garbage basis. The per-unit charge will be thirty-three cents ($0.33) per cubic yard. The calculation of the recycling surcharge monthly fee will be based upon the size of the container multiplied by the number of pickups per week, multiplied by fifty-two (52) weeks, divided by twelve (12) months, and multiplied by the thirty-three cent ($0.33) unit charge. For example, a two-yard container picked up four (4) times per week will be calculated as follows: 
2 × 4 × 52 ° 12 × $0.33 
(Code 1963, § 10-8(d); Ord. No. 40-1990, § 2, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 30-1995, § 1, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-120 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-121. - Deposits. 
The city shall refuse service for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and garden trash until the deposit required in sections 16-116 and 16-119 are paid. The director of public works shall determine the category and deposit based upon the number and type of containers and the number of collections. Should an individual case not regularly fall within one (1) of the above categories, the director of public works is authorized to establish a proper and equitable deposit fee. 
The city shall place all deposits into a separate non-interest bearing account. 
Residential. Deposits for single-family residents, duplexes, triplexes, and other residential complexes with no master meter will be retained by the city for a period of thirty-six (36) months, at which time it may be credited to the active account, providing the customer's payment record justifies such return and the utility service at that location or any location serviced for the customer has not been terminated because of non-payment during the preceding thirty-six-month period. Once a deposit has been refunded, the individual customer shall be considered credit established until such time as the utility service is discontinued for non-payment. At which time a new deposit must be placed by the customer before the re-establishment of an account. Upon the closing of an account, the deposit shall be applied to the final bill. 
Commercial. Deposits will be retained by the city until final settlement of the customer's account, at which time such deposit shall be applied to the final bill. 
Deposit transfer. A deposit may be transferred from one (1) service location to another providing the service remains in the name of the person or entity that made the initial deposit. If a person or entity has more than one (1) utility deposit with the city for service at two (2) or more locations, such deposits may be applied against any delinquent existing account in the same depositor's name. The city shall not allow another utility account to be opened by the customer at another location until all amounts owed have been paid in full. 
(Code 1963, § 10-9; Ord. No. 2-1991, § 8, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-121 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Sec. 16-122. - Refuse collection bills; date payable; delinquent accounts. 
(a)  The bills for refuse services shall be submitted monthly on the same bills as the charges for water service, and/or sewer services; provided, however, that the charges for refuse collection shall be made a separate item on the bill. 
(b)  Bills are due when rendered and become delinquent if not paid within fifteen (15) days after the bill has been mailed or presented to the customer for payment. Water and wastewater service may not be discontinued until ten (10) working days after a written notice of the delinquency in payment has been mailed or presented to the customer. A charge of ten dollars ($10.00) or ten (10) percent of the delinquent amount, whichever is greater, will be levied for this notice. Water and wastewater service shall be restored only after the city has received payment for all past-due bills, current bills and a reconnect charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) from the customer. There shall be no liability of any kind against the city for the discontinuance of water and wastewater service to a customer for that customer's failure to pay the bills on time. Partial payment of a bill of the solid waste, recycle, water and wastewater service rendered will not be accepted by the city, except by the city's agreement thereof. 
(c)  The collection of solid waste and recycling materials shall be considered as a "utility" with all the rights and privileges as any other utility operated by the city. Nonpayment of the solid waste collection fees and recycling fees as described in this chapter shall constitute nonpayment of a utility account and subject the delinquent customer to discontinuance of all utility services. 
(d)  Any unpaid refuse collection and recycling fees shall constitute a lien against the property, which lien shall be prior to all other liens on such property except the liens of state, county and municipal taxes and shall be on a parity with the lien of such state, county and municipal taxes. Such lien, when delinquent for more than thirty (30) days, may be foreclosed by the city in the manner provided by the laws of the state for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. The attorney's fees and cost of foreclosure of such lines shall be taxable. 
(e)  In the case that a tenant in possession of any premises or buildings and shall pay such refuse and recycling fees, it shall relieve the land owner from such obligation; but the city shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of such charges. No change of ownership or occupancy shall affect the obligation to pay and the failure of any owner to learn that he has purchased property with a lien shall not affect the obligation to pay. 
(Code 1963, § 10-10; Ord. No. 2-1991, § 9, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 35-1997, § 3, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 37-2001, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 37-2001, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, states that the provisions of § 16-122 shall take effect for all bills rendered on or after Oct. 1, 2001.  
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Curfew enforced during emergency declared by the mayor, § 8-3; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; stormwater management, § 42.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; streets, sidewalks and bicycle facilities, § 51.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for owners of adjacent real property to construct or authorize construction of buildings, structures, including basketball goals, skateboard ramps or other similar recreational appurtenances, fences, swimming pools, parking lots or any other facility encroaching in or upon any public street, public alley, right-of-way or drainage right-of-way dedicated to the public use or otherwise acquired by the city; provided further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve the owners and tenants of such buildings, structures, including such items as basketball goals, skateboard ramps or other similar recreational appurtenances, fences, swimming pools, etc., of any negligence on their part on account of such encroachment. Portable basketball goals shall be exempt from this requirement, provided the goal is placed outside of the lane of travel by motor vehicles and removed from the right-of-way when not in use. This exception applies to local residential streets only. The owner and participate assumes all liability for any accidents or injuries incurred by anyone utilizing a portable basketball goal within the right-of-way. 
(b)  Special permits, cost of which is covered under section 47-291 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Volume II, shall be required in order to protect the general public safety and welfare for each of the following activities: 
(1)  Excavation, cut or fill of earth or debris on public lands. 
(2)  Curb cuts or openings onto public streets from private property; that is, a driveway for vehicles. 
(3)  Obstructing streets and sidewalks. 
(4)  Lay out and establish new streets. 
(c)  The city engineer is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 22-1; Ord. No. 22-1992, § 1, 10-13-92; Ord. No. 3-2000, § 1, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 17-2. - Littering; protection of trees, shrubs. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, place, dump, or deposit any bottles, broken glass, cans, ashes, paper, brush, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or otherwise litter streets, street rights-of-way or the sidewalks of the city, except as provided in chapter 16, solid waste collection regulations of this Code. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to remove, cut, mar, deface or destroy any trees, plants or shrubbery, which are either planted or natural growths within the rights-of-way of the streets and highways in the city, and which are maintained by the city as part of its beautification program. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 22-6(1), (2))  
Sec. 17-3. - Permission for certain plantings. 
Any person planting any tree, shrubbery or any plant of any kind in a street right-of-way that is more than three (3) feet in height at ground level, or has a projected growth of more than three (3) feet in height, shall prior to planting same obtain the consent of the building department. 
(Code 1963, § 22-6(3); Ord. No. 6-2000, § 1, 3-28-00)  
Secs. 17-4—17-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes established, § 9-8; restrictions on parking recreational vehicles and other vehicles on public lands at certain times, § 12-13; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 13-56 et seq.; depositing litter in streets prohibited, § 16-2; permit required for excavation in the streets, § 21-81; stormwater management utility, § 21-266 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-31. - Excavations, cut or fill of earth; permit required. 
Any person performing any construction or repair work involving the tearing up and relaying of any street or part of street or to obstruct, dig up or into or in any way disturb any street or part of street, or excavate, cut or fill with earth or debris whether on public land or private land, including removal of earth from ditches, in the city shall first procuring from the city engineer a special permit therefor. The permit herein provided for shall be issued under such conditions as may be prescribed by the city engineer and shall accurately describe the portion of the street or other area to be affected and shall make provision for the replacement of that part of the street which is to be replaced in the same condition as when disturbed and shall state a definite time within which the permit shall be operative. An adequate bond to insure completion of such work acceptable to the city engineer shall be posted with the city. 
(Code 1963, § 22-2)  
Sec. 17-32. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks; permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or cause or allow to be placed or deposited, on any street, avenue, alley, public right-of-way, or sidewalk, park or other public space within the limits of the city, any building material whatsoever, or any other articles or things, including such items as rocks, landscape logs, railroad cross-ties, concrete bollards or blocks, plants, trees, or other similar items used for decorative purposes, to delineate parking spaces or to deter motorists from driving off the pavement, which may obstruct or hinder the traffic thereon, without a special permit from the city engineer. Such permit shall state clearly what space will be allowed on which the same may be placed or deposited, the length of time the permit shall remain in force, and the terms and conditions upon which such materials or other articles or other things may be placed thereon. 
(b)  When in the discretion of the city engineer it becomes necessary for the protection of pedestrians, the person erecting or repairing any building shall cause a shed to be erected over the sidewalk adjoining the property upon which the building is being constructed or repaired, the construction of which shed shall be in accordance with plans approved by the city engineer and the same shall be maintained thereafter during the construction or repair of the building, but under no condition shall the sidewalks be so obstructed as not to allow pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1963, § 22-3; Ord. No. 22-1992, § 2, 10-13-92)  
Sec. 17-33. - Vacating and abandoning streets and alleys. 
(a)  The city council is hereby authorized to vacate, abandon, discontinue, or close any existing roadway, street or alley and to renounce and disclaim any right of the city and the public in and to any land, delineated on any recorded map or plat as a roadway, street or alley after review pursuant to this section and section 31-31(c) of the Land Development Regulations in Volume II. The procedure to be followed shall comply with the provisions of F.S. ch. 335 and F.S. § 336.10, as nearly as practicable. Requests for such vacations of rights-of-way shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be accompanied with a filing fee as required in section 47-296(a), Land Development Regulations in Volume II. In the event the city council elects to proceed without advertising the application for vacating and no public hearing is held upon the application, then, in that event, the filing fee shall be refunded to the applicant. In addition, a courtesy notice will be sent to the property owners, as shown on the latest Brevard County as valorem tax roll, located within five hundred (500) feet of the portion of right-of-way to be vacated. In addition, notice shall be posted on the subject right-of-way at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
(b)  An application for vacation of a right-of-way, to include a request to vacate, abandon, discontinue, or close any existing roadway, street or alley and to renounce and disclaim any right of the city and the public in and to any land, delineated on any recorded map or plat as a roadway, street or alley, shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for their review and recommendation to the city council. The city council shall, in its discretion, determine whether the right-of-way serves a public purpose and if the proposed vacation is in the public interest, taking into consideration factors affecting the public health, safety or welfare including the following: 
(1)  Whether the vacation is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Whether the right-of-way is being used for the benefit of the public and the likelihood that the right-of-way may be needed for public use in the future. This review shall also include an evaluation of any impacts the proposed vacation may have on adjacent wetlands, environmentally sensitive lands and the city stormwater system. 
(3)  No right-of-way giving access to any publicly accessible waters in the city shall be closed, vacated or abandoned except in those instances wherein the applicant offers to trade or give to the city comparable land or lands for a right-of-way or public easement that provides access to the same body of water. Such access shall not create a hardship on the user. 
(4)  The nature and degree of any impacts the proposed vacation might have on utilities, adjacent rights-of-way, properties abutting and utilizing the right-of-way and the delivery and provision of public services. 
(5)  Whether the proposed vacation will adversely impact historic areas recognized by the city through zoning, neighborhood plans or historic designation. 
(c)  When determined by the city council, a vacation, termination, abandonment, or permanent closure may be approved conditions upon certain conditions precedent occurring. 
(Code 1963, § 22-5; Ord. No. 49-2014, § 1, 10-28-14) 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission review of new streets, § 31-31(c), Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; fees, § 47-296(a), Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Secs. 17-34—17-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 17-56—17-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL YACHT BASIN 
 
Sec. 17-66. - Mooring. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to moor, dock, anchor or otherwise leave for more than twenty-four (24) hours any boat, ship or vessel in the city municipal yacht basin as shown on the map which is on file with the city clerk, unless such person has the permission of the city manager. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 15-40)  
DIVISION 3. - MANAGED MOORING FIELD 
 
Sec. 17-67. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The foregoing recitals are hereby adopted as the legislative findings of the city council of the City of Titusville. 
(b)  The city council finds that the secure and proper mooring of vessels within a permitted mooring field is necessary for the prevention of potential hazards to surrounding vessels and structures, and that the mooring field program is appropriate to protect against the potential hazards posed to public health and safety by reason of wastewater, other discharges, and other negative impacts associated with derelict vessels within city waters. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Derelict vessel means any vessel as defined by F.S. § 327.02, and any amendments thereto, which is left, stored or abandoned in a wrecked, junked or substantially dismantled condition on the waters within the municipal boundaries of the City of Titusville or which is located in a mooring field or at the City of Titusville Municipal Marina without the consent of the City of Titusville or which is docked or grounded at or beached upon the private property of another without the consent of the owner of the property or which is grounded at or beached on public property without the consent of the public owner of the property. 
Dinghy means a vessel of a maximum length not exceeding sixteen (16) feet and which serves as a tender vessel to a larger moored or anchored vessel. 
Marina manager means the marina manager of the city. The marina manager shall have all rights, powers and duties as provided under the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
Mooring field means a location for the mooring of vessels as defined and described in the Titusville Mooring Field Location Map incorporated herein by reference as amended from time to time, on file with the city clerk. 
Operate means to be in charge of or in command of or in actual physical control of a vessel upon the waters of this state or to exercise control over or to have responsibility for a vessel's navigation or safety while the vessel is underway upon the waters of this state or to control or steer a vessel being towed by another vessel upon the waters of the state. 
Person means an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
Seaworthy means a vessel which has available an operational means of navigation and propulsion which is capable of staying fully afloat without external assistance. 
Vessel is synonymous with boat as referenced in Section 1(b), Article VII of the Florida Statutes Constitution and includes every description of watercraft, barge and airboat, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-69. - Establishment of mooring field. 
The city hereby establishes a mooring field for the mooring of vessels within the municipal boundaries of the city. The dimensions and locations for said mooring field are hereby established and are as described on the Titusville Mooring Field Location Map, as amended from time to time, on file with the city clerk's office which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-70. - Designation of authority for management of mooring field. 
(a)  The city manager or his or her designee shall undertake the development, construction, maintenance, repair, and operation of the mooring field and shall direct the enforcement of rules and regulations regarding the mooring field established hereby. The city manager may appoint a marina manager to undertake, under the supervision of the city manager, all duties related to the management of the mooring field and enforcement of the rules and regulations hereby adopted including, but not limited to: 
(1)  To enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To coordinate removal from the mooring field all vessels and floating structures not properly anchored, docked or moored, as determined by the marina manager. 
(3)  To represent the city as its agent in the execution of all city docking and mooring field agreements or licenses. 
(4)  To inspect the y-valves and marine sanitation devices and seal the y-valves as soon as possible after entry of a vessel to a mooring field. 
(b)  The city manager, or marina manager, has the authority to coordinate the removal of all vessels, floating structures, ground tackle or any other equipment or materials located within a designated mooring field prior to the installation of a mooring field. The owners of such vessels, floating structures, ground tackle or any other equipment or materials shall be responsible for their removal. The city shall attempt to give reasonable notice to owners of those vessels, floating structures, ground tackle or any other equipment or materials to allow for voluntary removal. If the city is unable to contact the owner of those vessels, floating structures, ground tackle or any other equipment or materials, the city may remove and impound those vessels, floating structures, ground tackle or any other equipment or materials and dispose of them as nuisances in accordance with state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-71. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city council hereby approves the rules and regulations as contained in the City of Titusville Mooring Field Management Plan incorporated herein by reference and on file with the city clerk's office and the city marina. Any amendments to the plan may be implemented by resolution. All vessels shall abide by the rules and regulations as contained in the City of Titusville Mooring Field Management Plan, other rules and regulations as implemented by the marina manager for the mooring field, and all state, federal, and local laws and rules as applicable. 
(b)  Private moorings and anchorages and obstructions prohibited. No person may place private moorings or anchorage facilities or any obstruction to navigation or other obstruction of any kind in the mooring field. 
(c)  All vessels desiring to use the city mooring field shall first register with the marina manager pursuant to the registration policies and procedures as approved and implemented by the marina manager and shall pay the applicable registration fees as determined by the city manager or his designee. Only seaworthy and registered or documented vessels shall be allowed use of the city mooring field. 
(d)  Removal and impoundment of dangerous or hazardous vessels. Any vessel, due to fire, explosion, accident, or negligence, which in the determination of the city manager or his or her designee creates an immediate danger to life or property, hazard to navigation or imminent environmental hazard shall be subject to immediate removal and impoundment of the vessel, and costs incident thereto shall be borne by the vessel owner. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-72. - Denial of mooring request; removal of vessel. 
(a)  No abandoned, derelict or wrecked vessel, or moored vessels which fail to comply with the conditions set forth herein, shall be allowed in or upon the mooring field. The marina manager shall determine whether any vessel is abandoned, derelict, wrecked, or in noncompliance with the rules and regulations set forth herein and, if so determined, may deny the requested mooring and, if necessary, take steps for removal of the vessel from the mooring field as follows: 
(1)  To the extent possible and as soon as possible, notify the owner or other responsible party of the determination and the basis for the denial or order for removal as applicable, specifying the remedy required and the time frame for completion of said remedy; and 
(2)  If the owner or responsible party fails to remedy the condition or remove the vessel, in the manner and time as directed, the marina manager may choose to remove, or cause to be removed, the vessel and shall notify the registered owner and any other party known by the city to have an interest in the vessel in writing of this action. The responsible party shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs incurred in the removal. If the responsible party fails to reimburse the city for the costs of removal, the city may place a lien on the responsible party's real and personal property for the costs incurred by the city. The city may foreclose the lien, or seek a judgment as provided by law. Notwithstanding the above, if the city manager or his designee determines that a vessel is an imminent risk to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, or is likely to immediately damage private or public property or is an immediate hazard to navigation, the city may take all necessary steps to immediately remove, or cause to be removed, the vessel without written communication. 
(b)  The owner of a vessel whose request for mooring has been denied, or whose vessel has been ordered to be removed from the mooring field, may request a review of the marina manager's decision before the city manager in writing. The request must be in writing and must be received by the city manager within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the notice. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-73. - Fees. 
All fees for use of the designated mooring field shall be set by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-74. - Trespassing vessels and dinghies. 
Use of mooring fields without permission is prohibited. A person shall commit a trespass on city property by placing, tying, attaching or securing a vessel or dinghy to a mooring ball located in a city mooring field without the permission of the marina manager. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 17-75. - Penalties. 
In addition to the penalties set forth herein, offenses under this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 8-2011, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Secs. 17-76—17-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-80. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited in the future as the City of Titusville's Telecommunications Right-of-Way Regulation Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-81. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the use of the public rights-of-way within the city, to adopt and administer reasonable regulations consistent with state and federal law, including F.S. §§ 337.401, 361.01 and 337.29(3), and the city's home-rule authority in accordance with the provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, to provide for the payment of compensation and other consideration by a telecommunications service provider to the city for the cost of regulating and maintaining the public rights-of-way and for the privilege of using the public rights-of-way within the city for constructing and maintaining telecommunications facilities, and to establish the reasonable regulations concerning the use of the public rights-of-way by all telecommunications service provider granted after the effective date of this article [December 12, 2000]. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-82. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined or in any permit that might be granted shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and, if not defined, as defined by Florida Statutes; and, if not defined therein, be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
City means the City of Titusville, Florida, an incorporated municipality of the State of Florida, in its present form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, or enlarged form. 
Gross receipts means all cash, credits or property of any kind or nature, with deductions for bad debt expense, reported as revenue items to the registrant's audited income statements arising from, or attributable to recurring local service revenues of registrant within the city. The city reserves the right to amend the definition contained herein as permitted by applicable law. The definition herein shall not be applicable as of October 1, 2001, or such other date as provided by law, provided that F.S. § 337.401, is amended effective October 1, 2001, as set forth in Chapter 00-260, Laws of Florida, 2000. 
Law means any local, state or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, guideline or other requirements, as amended, now in effect or subsequently enacted or issued including, but not limited to, the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub L. No. 104-104 § 101(a), 110 Stat. 70 codified at 47 U.S.C., and all orders, rules, tariffs, guidelines and regulations issued by the Federal Communications Commission or the governing state authority pursuant thereto. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative, but shall not mean the city. 
PSC means the Florida Public Service Commission. 
Public rights-of-way means the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface of any public road, street, highway, alley, boulevard, concourse, driveway, freeway, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel, park, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, court, lane, path, way, drive, circle, public easement, public place, or any other property in which the city holds any kind of property interest or over which the city exercises any type of lawful control and may lawfully grant access to, pursuant to applicable law, but shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property except as described above and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant or facility owner means a telecommunications company that has registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Registration and register means the process described in section 17-83 whereby a telecommunications service provider provides certain information to the city. 
Recurring local service revenues means revenues from the monthly recurring charges for local service, including, but not limited to, (1) recurring basic area revenues derived from the provisions of flat-rated basic area services; (2) recurring optional extended area revenues derived from the provision of optional extended area services; (3) local private line revenues derived from local services which provide communication between specific locations, either through dedicated circuits, private switching arrangements, predefined transmission paths, whether virtual or physical, or any other method of providing such services; (4) revenues from the sale of local services for resale; and (5) other local service revenues from the provision of secondary features that are integrated with the telecommunications network, including, without limitation, services such as call forwarding, call waiting, and touch-tone line service. Except as provided herein, revenues from all recurring local services provided by a registrant over a telecommunications facility or system in the public rights-of-way shall constitute a recurring local service revenues subject to this article. Recurring local service revenues do not include revenues from (1) toll charges for the transmission of voice, data, video, or other information; (2) access charges paid by carriers for origination and/or termination of toll telephone service as defined in F.S. § 203.012(7), or other charges required by the Federal Communications Commission which are directly passed through to end users; (3) interstate service; (4) ancillary services such as directory advertising, directory assistance, detailed billing services, inside wire maintenance plans, bad check charges, and the non-recurring charges for installation, move, changes or termination services; (5) cellular mobile telephone or telecommunications services; or specialized mobile telephone or telecommunications services; or specialized mobile radio, or pagers or paging service, or related ancillary services; (6) public telephone charges collected on site; (7) teletypewriter or computer exchange services as defined in F.S. § 203.012(6), or (8) local message rated (message, unit or time basis) and minutes of use charges in excess of the minimum flat-rated charges for similar services. This definition shall not be applicable as of October 1, 2001, or such other date as provided by law, provided that F.S. § 337.401, is amended October 1, 2001, as set forth in Chapter 00-260, Laws of Florida, 2000. 
Telecommunications shall mean the transmission between or among points specified by the user of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications company has the meaning set forth in F.S. § 364.02(12), as amended. The term "telecommunications company" does not include an open video system. 
Telecommunications facility, facilities or systems means cables, conduits, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, handholes, manholes, vaults, equipment, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and related facilities located, to be located, used, or to be used, by a telecommunications service provider in the public rights-of-way of the city and used or useful for the transmission of telecommunications services. 
Telecommunications services shall including, without limitation, local service, toll service as defined in F.S. § 203.012(7), telegram or telegraph service, teletypewriter service, private communication service as defined F.S. § 203.012(4), or any other provision of two-way communications services to the public for hire. "Telecommunications service", as contemplated herein, does not include the provision of service via an open video system, which shall require separate authorizations from the city. 
Telecommunications service provider shall refer to any person providing telecommunications services, as defined herein, through the use of a telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-83. - Registration. 
(a)  Each telecommunications service provider that desires to erect, construct, install, maintain, repair, expand, or use any telecommunications facility in, or under, public right-of-way in the City of Titusville shall first register with the city in accordance with this article. As to toll service providers, such registration shall be accepted by the city as a resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Any telecommunications service provider desiring to use the public right-of-way shall file a registration with the city, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Identity of the applicant and name, address and telephone number of applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration; 
(2)  General description of the various system(s) using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between the system(s) as well as a statement of whether the applicant is or expects to be a local service provider and/or a toll service provider; 
(3)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this article, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; 
(4)  A copy of federal and/or state certification authorizing the applicant to provide telecommunications service; 
(5)  An annual bond or corporate guarantee in the minimum sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, in accordance with section 17-90 of this article. 
(c)  The city will review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review will be by the city manager or a designee. If the applicant submits the information in accordance with subsection (b) above, the registration shall be effective and the city shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the city determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (b) above, the city shall notify the applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The city shall so reply to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city noticing that it will no longer provide local service or toll service using public rights-of-way within the city and will no longer need to pull permits to perform work in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A registration shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public right-of-way. Registrants may only occupy public rights-of-way for telecommunications facilities. Registration does not excuse a telecommunications service provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment before locating its facilities on another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a provider from complying with all applicable city ordinances, including this article. 
(e)  Each application for registration, transfer or renewal shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount equal to the city's costs and expenses incurred in connection with approving the registration, transfer or renewal. If the application fee is insufficient to cover all costs or expenses incurred by the city in connection with approval of the registration, transfer or renewal, the applicant shall reimburse the city for any such costs and expenses in excess of the application fee. This application fee may be credited against fees due under section 17-84. In no event shall the fees be in excess of eight hundred dollars ($800.00). 
(f)  Registration with the city shall be non-exclusive. Registration does not establish any priority for the use of the public right-of-way by a registrant or any other registrants. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional city ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted during the term of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-84. - Fees and payments. 
(a)  In consideration for the rights, privileges and permission granted hereunder, a registrant shall pay to the city a sum equal to one (1) percent of gross receipts of the registrant on recurring local service revenues for services provided within the corporate limits of the city. Included within such one (1) percent maximum fee or consideration are all taxes, licenses, fees, in-kind contributions accepted pursuant to F.S. § 337.401(5), and other impositions except ad valorem taxes and amounts for assessments for special benefits, such as sidewalks, street pavings, and similar improvements, and occupational license taxes levied or imposed by the city upon a registrant. In the event that applicable law currently permits or is amended to permit the city to collect a fee higher than one (1) percent, or permits the city to calculate the fee on revenues not specified herein, the registrant agrees to increase, following written notice from the city, its fee payments to the city to that higher amount on the effective date of such law. In the event applicable law is amended to require the city to collect a fee lower than the current statutory limit, the city shall take all necessary steps to conform the requirements hereof to applicable law. All of the aforestated payments shall be made to the city quarterly, with such payments made within twenty (20) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Payments received after the 21st day shall be subject to interest at the maximum allowed by law, and late charges of one and one-half (1½) percent per month. 
(b)  In the event a telecommunications company provides telecommunications services as defined in toll services in F.S. § 203.012(7) or other services, as a condition for granting permission to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city, the registrant shall pay to the city annually no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile of any cable, fiber optic, or other pathway that makes physical use of the public rights-of-way. The city may adopt additional fees or other consideration, provided that any fee or other consideration imposed by the city in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner and shall not exceed the sum of: 
(1)  Costs directly related to the inconvenience or impairment solely caused by the disturbance of the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  The reasonable cost of the regulatory activity of the city; and, 
(3)  The proportionate share of cost of land for such street, alley or other public way attributable to utilization of the public rights-of-way by a telecommunications service provider. 
The fee or other consideration imposed pursuant to this subsection shall not apply in any manner to any telecommunications company, which provides telecommunications services as defined in F.S. § 203.012(3), for any services provided by such telecommunications company. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the city shall at all times require the maximum compensation allowed under applicable law. 
(d)  Except to the extent prohibited by applicable law: (1) the fee payments to be made pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a tax; (2) such fee payments shall be in addition to any and all taxes of a general applicability; (3) a registrant shall not have or make any claim for any deduction or other credit of all or any part of the amount of the fee payments from or against any of city taxes of other fees or charges of general applicability which a registrant is required to pay to the city, except as required by law; and (4) the fee specified herein is consideration for use of the public rights-of-way, including all public easements, for the purpose of installing and maintaining a telecommunications facility. 
(e)  Registrant shall not enter into any transaction or arrangement which has the effect of circumventing payment of required fees and/or evasion of payment of fees by non-collection, non-reporting of gross receipts, collection of revenues by its parent, affiliates or subsidiaries, bartering or any other means which evade the actual collection of revenues subject to the fee by registrant. 
(f)  The payments required under this section shall not apply as of October 1, 2001, or such other date as provided by law, provided that F.S. § 337.401, is amended effective October 1, 2001, as set forth in Chapter 00-260, Laws of Florida, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-85. - Reporting and records. 
(a)  The city may, at its option, upon sixty (60) days notice to the registrant, but in no event more often than once per year, examine the records and accounting files, and such other books and records, if such records relate to the calculation of fee payments or any other payments due to the city under the terms of this article. The examination of such books, accounts, records or other materials necessary for determination of compliance with the terms, provisions and requirements of this article shall be during regular hours of business of the registrant at an office of the registrant located within the city, or at another location satisfactory to the city. In the event that the city, pursuant to an audit, determines that there exists a discrepancy in the amount of paid and the amount owed to the city by the registrant in excess of two (2) percent, registrant shall pay all costs, fees and expenses of the audit. Registrant shall pay interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum on the amount underpaid or not paid calculated from the date the amount was due through to the date it was finally paid. Both the underpayment and interest, and payment of any costs, fees and expenses hereunder, shall be paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of demand from the city. This section shall not apply for periods after October 1, 2001, or such other date as provided by law, provided that F.S. § 337.401, is amended effective October 1, 2001, as set forth in Chapter 00-260, Laws of Florida, 2000. 
(b)  Upon request, a registrant shall provide the following documents to the city as received or filed: 
(1)  Any pleadings, petitions, notices, applications, communications, reports and documents, which may directly impact the obligations under this article and which are reasonably necessary for the city to protect its interests under this article; 
(2)  Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. 
(c)  In addition, the city may, at its option, and upon reasonable notice to the registrant, inspect the facilities in the public rights-of-way to ensure the safety of its residents. 
(d)  The city shall keep any documentation, books and records of the registrant confidential to the extent required under Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-86. - Underground installation; relocation. 
(a)  To the extent required by section 39-111 of the Code of Ordinances of the city, and not inconsistent with applicable FPSC rules and regulations, a registrant shall install its facilities underground. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, or any other applicable City Code or regulation, this requirement shall not apply to existing aboveground facilities or to the relocation of existing aboveground facilities. 
(b)  Every registrant which places or constructs telecommunications facilities underground shall maintain appropriate participation in the regional notification center for subsurface installations. 
(c)  Any telecommunications facilities heretofore or hereafter placed under any public rights-of-way that is found by the city to be unreasonably interfering in any way with the convenient, safe or continuous use or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of such public rights-of-way shall, upon thirty (30) days written notice to the registrant or its agent, be removed or relocated by such registrant at its own expense except as explicitly provided under F.S. § 337.403. The city manager may waive or extend the time within which a registrant shall remove or relocate a telecommunications facility, for good cause shown. 
(d)  The registrant shall not in any way displace, damage, or destroy any sewer, water main, pipe or any other facilities belonging to the city, or to any third party who placed such facilities therein by express authority of the city and in compliance with all of the requirements which accompany such express authority. The registrant shall be liable to the city or the third party owner, as the case may be, for the costs of any repairs made necessary by any such displacement, damage or destruction, and the registrant shall pay such costs upon demand. In the case of an emergency, the city may commence repairs without any prior notice to the registrant. The term emergency shall mean a condition that may affect the public's health, safety or welfare. In the event of an emergency, the city shall cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, plus a sum equal to ten (10) percent of the cost against the registrant, and require reimbursement within ten (10) days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. Rates for labor and equipment shall be in accordance with the city's labor and equipment burden rate plus benefits. In all other non-emergency circumstances, the registrant shall be given prior written notice. If such repairs are not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within the thirty (30) calendar days after receiving notice, the city may cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, plus a sum equal to ten (10) percent of the cost against the registrant, and require reimbursement within ten (10) days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. Rates for labor and equipment shall be in accordance with the city's labor and equipment burden rate plus benefits. 
(e)  Subject to F.S. § 337.403, whenever an order of the city requires such removal or change in the location of any telecommunications facility from the public rights-of-way, and the facility owner fails to remove or change the same at its own expense to conform to the order within the time stated in the notice, the city may proceed to cause the telecommunications facility to be removed. The expense incurred, except as provided in F.S. § 337.403(1)(a)—(c), shall be paid out of any money available, and such expense shall be charged against the owner of the telecommunications facility and levied, collected and paid to the city. 
(f)  Subject to F.S. § 337.403, whenever it shall be necessary for the city to remove or relocate any telecommunications facility, the owner of the telecommunications facility, or the owner's chief agent, shall be given notice of such removal or relocation and an order requiring the payment of the costs thereof, and shall be given reasonable time, which shall not be less than twenty (20) days nor more than thirty (30) days in which to file an appeal with the city manager to contest the reasonableness of the order. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the city manager shall place the matter on a council agenda for consideration within forty-five (45) working days. Should the owner or the owner's representative not appear, the determination of the cost to the owner shall be final, in accordance with F.S. § 337.404. 
(g)  A final order of the city shall constitute a lien on any property of the owner and may be enforced by filing an authenticated copy of the order in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county wherein the owner's property is located. 
(h)  The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city manager, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, may determine to be necessary or appropriate in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall attempt to notify the owner of the facility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the owner of the facility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(i)  Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city, the owner of the facility shall notify the city within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice, the city may direct the facility owner to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility by the owner of the facility, such owner, by its notice of abandonment to the city, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the city, another utility or person. 
(j)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a facility owner agrees to provide the city, within thirty (30) days of filing or receipt of such, any document that may prevent compliance with the requirements of a permit in connection with the installation, construction or maintenance of its facilities, or use of facilities in the public right-of-way. This obligation shall only extend to such work in the public right-of-way for which a facility owner has applied for, or obtained a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-87. - Use of rights-of-way. 
(a)  A facility owner agrees at all times to comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state statutes and local laws including, but not limited to, applicable zoning regulations not inconsistent with state and federal laws. 
(b)  Except in the case of an emergency, which shall include without limitation an out-of-service condition affecting 911 service, and which shall require subsequent notification to the city, no telecommunications service provider shall construct any facility under or within any public right-of-way which disrupts the public rights-of-way without first filing an application with and obtaining a permit from the city, pursuant to applicable permitting requirements of the city except as otherwise provided in this article. In case of the repair of an existing facility, the city may impose lesser requirements than those set forth herein. Unless otherwise required by City Code, no permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  As part of any permit application, the facility owner shall provide a proposal for construction of the telecommunications facility that sets forth at least the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed facility, including a description of the feet of plant to be installed, where it is to be located, and the approximate size of facilities and equipment that will be located in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the system will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods and/or techniques), the time required to construct the system, a maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way, including information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, if available (such information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other users of the public rights-of-way). Also, if appropriate, given the system proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way. Such plan shall include the timetable for construction for each phase of the project, and the areas of the city, which will be affected. 
(d)  The city may request such additional information as it finds reasonably necessary to review an application for a permit to perform work in the public rights-of-way. The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the public rights-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of permittees to occupy and use the public rights-of-way. The city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the public rights-of-way, but may prohibit or limit placement of new or additional facilities in any public rights-of-way, for the protection of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined by the city to be in the public interest. 
(e)  All facilities shall be installed, located and maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e. directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching and/or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever feasible. The city manager may promulgate such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of a telecommunications facility in the public rights-of-way, as may be consistent with applicable law. 
(f)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during construction, maintenance and repair of the telecommunications facilities. 
(g)  In the event that at any time during the term of the rights granted herein, the city shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of, any public rights-of-way, upon reasonable notice by the city, the facility owner shall make any necessary removals, relaying and relocations of its telecommunications facilities at its own expense, in accordance with applicable law. 
(h)  A facility owner shall obtain any and all required permits and pay any and all required fees before commencing any construction on or otherwise disturbing any public rights-of-way as a result of its construction, except as provided herein. The facility owner shall, at its own expense, restore such property to as good a condition as existed prior to commencement of work. If such restoration is not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner to the city within thirty (30) calendar days after completion of construction, the city may, after prior written notice to registrant, cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, plus a sum equal to ten (10) percent of the cost against the registrant, and require reimbursement within ten (10) days after the submission of the bill by the city of registrant. Rates for labor and equipment shall be in accordance with the city's labor and equipment burden rate plus benefits. A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities on public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from negotiating with a facility owner for the installation of a city conduit in any open trench that may be permitted, or prohibit a facility owner from exercising its rights under 47 U.S.C. Section 224. 
(i)  All on-going installation, construction and maintenance of a telecommunications facility located in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the city's periodic inspection, upon no less than three (3) days written notice to the facility owner, for compliance with this article, or any applicable provisions of the City Code and/or administrative regulations. 
(j)  A facility owner shall not place its facilities so as to interfere unreasonably with any other person lawfully using the public rights-of-way of the city. 
(k)  A facility owner shall cooperate with the city by providing timely and complete information requested under this subparagraph. A facility owner shall, upon request by the city and at no cost to the city, deliver to the city upon completion of any installation or construction of new facilities, as-built plans showing the exact location of such facilities. Such plans shall be provided in digitized format showing the three-dimensional location of the facilities based on the city's geographical database datums, or other format acceptable to the city manager. At no cost to the city, the facility owner shall provide such other information, as may be requested, showing the exact location of its facilities and structures, including, but not limited to, maps, geographical information, systems, plats, construction documents, drawings and any other information the city may find reasonably necessary. Unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law, registrant shall at all times comply with section 19-1 of the City Code. In no event shall any proprietary confidential information be required to be disclosed pursuant to this section, except that the location of the telecommunications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way shall not be deemed proprietary confidential information. 
(l)  Subject to subsection (m) below, the city manager or a designee may suspend a permit for work in the public rights-of-way for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in this article or other applicable provisions of the City Code or regulations governing use of public rights-of-way; or, 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the city; 
(3)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the city; 
(4)  Failure of registrant, its employees, agents or subcontractors to (a) place barricades or signs around the work area, (b) take reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or (c) repair, replace and restore any sidewalk, street, alley, pavement, water, sewer or other utility line or appurtenance, soil, landscaping, dirt or other improvement, property or structure of any nature. In the event of such failure, the city may perform the work utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, plus a sum equal to ten (10) percent of the cost against the registrant, and require reimbursement within ten (10) days after the submission of the bill by the city to registrant. Rates for labor and equipment shall be in accordance with the city's labor and equipment burden rate plus benefits. 
(m)  Final, written decisions of the city suspending a permit or denying an application for a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decisions to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The city council shall hear the appeal no later than forty-five (45) days from the end of the thirty (30) day appeal period, unless waived by the registrant. Upon correction of any violation that gave rise to a suspension or denial of permit, the suspension or denial shall be lifted. 
(n)  In the event registrant desires to use its existing facilities or to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or non-utility services to existing or potential consumers or resellers, by providing cable services, or any other services other than the provision of telecommunications service, or for providing any other use to existing or potential consumers, a registrant shall seek such additional and separate authorization from the city for such activities as may be required by applicable law. In the event that a registrant is acting in its proprietary function as a retail provider of telecommunications equipment or appliances, registrant shall seek the appropriate permits and licenses from the city. 
(o)  To the extent that a registrant leases or otherwise uses the facilities of an entity that is duly registered or otherwise authorized to place and maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, registrant shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will impede the lawful exercise of the city's rights, including requiring the removal of such facilities from the public rights-of-way of the city, regardless of the effect on registrant's ability to maintain its own telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city. 
(p)  The termination of a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the city council. The city may declare the registration terminated and revoke and cancel all privileges granted under that registration if (a) a federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification to provide telecommunications service, (b) the registrant's use of the public right-of-way presents a serious danger to the general public or other users of the right-of-way, or (c) the registrant abandons its facilities. Upon termination, the registrant shall be obligated to cease using its facilities for the purpose authorized by the registration. Prior to such termination by the city resulting from a violation of any of the provisions of this subparagraph, the registrant shall be notified by the city manager with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to such violation, and describing the action of the city with respect thereto. The registrant shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice within which to cure the violation, or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the city council, to accomplish the same. In the event of such termination, the registrant shall, within a reasonable time following such termination, remove or abandon the facilities and take such steps as are necessary to render every portion of the facilities remaining within the public rights-of-way of the city safe. If the registrant has either abandoned its facilities or chooses to abandon its facilities, the city may either (1) require the registrant's bonding company to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to its proper condition or (2) the city may require that some or all of the facilities be removed and the public rights-of-way restored to its proper condition at the registrant's expense, utilizing city employees, agents or contractors, and charge any and all costs, plus a sum equal to ten (10) percent of the cost against the registrant, and require reimbursement. Rates for labor and equipment shall be in accordance with the city's labor and equipment burden rate plus benefits. The obligations of the registrant hereunder shall survive the termination of the registration. In the event of a termination of registration, this provision does not permit the city to cause the removal of any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the registrant holds a valid certification with the governing federal and state telecommunications agencies and is properly registered with the city, for such certificated service, under this article. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-88. - Compliance with other laws; police power. 
A telecommunications service provider shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. A telecommunications service provider shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercises of the police power of the city, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-89. - Transfer of control; sale or assignment. 
(a)  If the registrant transfers or assigns its registration incident to a sale or other transfer of the registrant's assets, the transferee or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. Written notice of any such prospective transfer or assignment shall be provided to the city at least twenty (20) days in advance of such transfer. In order for the transfer of registration to be effective, the registrant must be in current compliance with this article and must provide written notice which includes the identity of the prospective transferee or assignee, evidence of insurance coverage and acknowledgment as required in section 17-83 of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this article, pledges in trust or mortgages or other hypothecations of the assets of the registrant to secure the construction, operation or repair of its telecommunications facilities may be made to any person without notice to the city. Any mortgage, pledge, lease or other encumbrance of the telecommunications facilities shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city by virtue of this article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-90. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A facility owner shall at all times maintain the following liability insurance coverage insuring the registrant and naming the city, its officers, boards, members, agents, and employees as additional insureds, and workers' compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida law and general comprehensive liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the telecommunications facilities, and the conduct of registrant's business in the city, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damage in any one (1) incident; 
(2)  Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal bodily injury to any one (1) person; and, 
(3)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal bodily injury in any one (1) accident. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the State of Florida; shall be with sureties with a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition except as provided in (d) below. The city may require coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing liability exposure and limits or where required by law. A registrant may provide a portion of the insurance coverage required by section 17-90(a) through excess or umbrella policies of insurance and where such policies are in a form acceptable to the city's risk management. 
(c)  A registrant shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance which certificates shall indicate evidence of payment of the required premiums and shall indicate that the city, its officers, boards, members, agents and employees are listed as additional insureds. In the event of a potential claim such that the city claims insurance coverage, the facility owner shall immediately respond to all reasonable requests by the city for information with respect to the scope of the insurance coverage. 
(d)  All insurance policies shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days' prior written notice has been given to the city. A registrant shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the registrant has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the city, which complies with this article. A registrant that elects to self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by this section is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under this section. A registrant that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to the city to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this section, such as evidence that the registrant is a "private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act. For purposes of this section, "self-insure" shall also include a registrant, which insures through a "captive insurer" as defined in F.S. § 628.901. 
(e)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of its telecommunications system or facilities, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a facility owner's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence of the city. In addition, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any telecommunications service provider seeking initial or renewal registration on or after the effective date of this article shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, boards, members, agents and employees, from any claim arising by a third party under federal or state law, provided, however, that the registrant's obligations shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence of the city. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings, claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the registrant to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or providers of telecommunications services, and claims against the registrant for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. The city agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of the city receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the city's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this provision shall be construed or interpreted (1) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida, (2) as consent by the city to be sued, and/or (3) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-91. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Except in the case of an emergency, which shall include without limitation an out-of-service condition affecting 911 service, prior to performing any work in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall establish in the city's favor a construction bond in an amount specified in an engineering permit or other authorization as necessary to ensure the registrant's faithful performance of the construction or other work in the public rights-of-way, in accordance with the City Code and/or regulations. The amount of the construction bond shall be as set forth in the engineering permit, and may be modified in the city manager's reasonable discretion, based on the cost of the restoration to take place in the public rights-of-way, and any previous history of the registrant concerning construction within the public rights-of-way of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a construction bond hereunder shall only be required to the extent that the cost of the construction or other work exceeds the amount recoverable against the security bond. 
(b)  In the event a registrant subject to such a construction bond fails to complete the work in a safe, timely and competent manner in accordance with the provisions of the permit, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
(c)  No less than six (6) months after the completion of the construction of the telecommunications facility and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond, the city may eliminate the bond. However, the city may subsequently require a new bond for any subsequent work in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall provide that: 
This bond may not be cancelled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by certified mail/return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew. 
(e)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this article, or at law or equity. 
(f)  The rights reserved to the city under this section are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-92. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity or provided in this article, the city may apply any one (1) or combination of the following remedies in the event a registrant violates this article, or applicable law or order related to use of the public rights-of-way: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or other law applicable to users and/or occupants of the public rights-of-way, may result in imposition of penalties to be paid by the registrant to the city in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(2)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Before imposing a fine pursuant to this section, the city manager shall give written notice of the violation and its intention to assess such penalties, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such notice, the registrant shall have thirty (30) days to cure the violation to the city's satisfaction and the city shall make good faith reasonable efforts to assist in resolving the violation. If the violation is not cured within that thirty (30) day period, the city may collect all fines owed, beginning with the first day of the violation, though any means allowed by law. 
(c)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person(s) bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(e)  In any proceeding before the city where there exists an issue with respect to a registrant's performance of its obligations pursuant to this article, the registrant shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms of the article. The city may find a registrant that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this article in default and apply any one (1) or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized by this article. 
(f)  The city manager or a designee shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this article, and is authorized to give any notice required by law. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-93. - Security fund. 
At the time of the registrant's application, the registrant shall file with the city, for city approval, an annual bond or corporate guarantee in the minimum sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the city attorney. The bond or guarantee shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this article. The bond or guarantee shall be furnished annually and shall provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this article, subject to section 17-92, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the registrant, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. In lieu of the bond or guarantee required by this section, the city may in its reasonable discretion accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent company, if the registrant is a publicly traded company and maintains an insurance rating of no less than A-1. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-94. - Force majeure. 
In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the facility owner's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such owner uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article, causes or events not within a facility owner's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, agents or contractors. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-95. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  This article shall be applicable to all telecommunications facilities permitted to be placed in the public rights-of-way, on or after the effective date of this article [December 12, 2000], and shall apply to all existing telecommunications facilities utilizing the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this article, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law, but shall not operate to impair rights expressly granted by prior city ordinance for the duration of such authorization. In the event of any inconsistency between the terms and provisions of this article and an existing franchise or other authorization, the existing franchise or other authorization shall prevail for the duration of such franchise or other authorization. Providers with existing lines and cables have one hundred and twenty (120) days from the effective date of this article to comply with the terms of this article, or be in violation thereof. 
(c)  The city reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this agreement. Registrant agrees to advise the city of any such suits. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-96. - Existing franchise agreements. 
This article shall apply only to telecommunications service providers who do not have a current franchise agreement with the city, or whose franchise does not contain conflicting language. In no way shall this article supercede any prior franchises. 
(Ord. No. 50-2000, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 17-97. - Waiver of permit fees. 
Effective October 1, 2001, the city hereby elects not to require the imposition and collection of permit fees from providers of communications services to use or occupy the city's road or rights-of-way for the installation of communication services as defined in the Communications Services Tax Simplification Law. The city does hereby impose in lieu of the collection of permit fees, the sum or rate of twelfth-one hundred (0.12) percent of additional tax added to the total rate for the local communications services tax, as computed, pursuant to [F.S.] ch. 202.20(1) and (2) for the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-2001, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational license tax, § 11-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Taxation and finance, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; public service tax, F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232; ad valorem tax procedure, F.S. ch. 192 et seq.; occupational license tax, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ASSESSMENT FOR PUBLIC STREETS 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Authority. 
The City of Titusville, pursuant to Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, Article VIII, Section 2(b) of the Constitution of the State of Florida and the Charter of the City of Titusville, Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of Florida 1963, has the authority to impose special assessments for the paving and repaving of public streets. The city council desires to establish a uniform procedures for the paving and repaving of public streets pursuant to the above authorities. This procedure is hereby recognized as an alternative method, pursuant to applicable law, and the city council reserves the right to utilize other methods as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 11-1997, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 19-2. - City assessment. 
The city retains the full power and authority and discretion to pay all of the costs of paving and repaving of a public street, or alternatively, retains the full power and authority to impose such assessments as it deems appropriate. The city council retains the power and authority, in its discretion, to impose an assessment and create any assessment projects for the paving and repaving of public streets and to impose assessments upon abutting property owners whether petitioned by the abutting property owners or not. 
(Ord. No. 11-1997, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 19-3. - By petition. 
The city council may upon the receipt of a petition signed by a majority of the abutting property owners initiate an assessment project to pave or repave a public street. The city reserves the right and authority to determine which street or streets will be paved or repaved and to determine the priority of the paving and repaving, even though the city has received a petition. Upon the receipt of a petition, and if funding is available, and the city council determines the priority of the assessment project, the city may initiate the paving or repaving of a public street. The city first will determine the validity of the petition, that is whether or not a majority of the abutting property owners have signed the petition. Upon review of the petition by the city manager or his designee, the city manager shall present said petition to the city council to determine whether or not it desires to initiate an assessment project. 
(Ord. No. 11-1997, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 19-4. - Assessment procedure. 
Upon determination by the city council that it desires to initiate an assessment project, the city council, pursuant to Sections 145 and 146 of the City Charter (which provisions are incorporated by reference), shall adopt a resolution of necessity and establish a public hearing to hear objections or protests prior to proceeding with the project in accordance with the above procedure. 
After public hearing, if the city desires to proceed with the project, the city council, pursuant to Section 148 of the City Charter (which provision is incorporated by reference), shall adopt a resolution to proceed with the project. 
After adoption of the resolution to proceed, the city shall initiate bids for the project in accordance with Section 149 (which provision is incorporated by reference) of the City Charter. The cost of the project shall be determined in accordance with Section 150 (which provision is incorporated by reference) of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 11-1997, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 19-5. - Imposing assessments. 
Upon completion of the project an assessment roll and notice shall be prepared in accordance with Section 152 (which provision is incorporated by reference) of the City Charter and a hearing to confirm the assessment shall be held in accordance with Section 154 (which provision is incorporated by reference) of the City Charter. The city council hereby adopts by reference Sections 155, 156, 157, 158, 159 and 160 of the City Charter as being included as a part of this article for determining the process and procedure for collection and assessment and foreclosure of said assessments as provided for therein. The city council shall act as an equalization board for purposes of hearing appeals from property owners regarding their assessment. 
(Ord. No. 11-1997, § 1, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 19-6. - Method of assessment. 
For purposes of paving and repaving projects initiated under this article, one hundred (100) percent of the cost of the improvement, including administrative and engineering costs, shall be assessed in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Local streets. 
a.  Assessment shall be made on the basis of the front footage of the property abutting the public street. The assessment will be apportioned by the abutting property owners paying one hundred (100) percent (fifty (50) percent each side) of the cost. Pursuant to Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963, the city may impose mandatory assessments in the event it determines that a local street or streets are in such a condition that it is necessary to immediately improve the public street(s) by repaving. 
b.  Corner parcels or lots shall be assessed for the improvement or repaving on the basis of one hundred (100) percent along each side of the lot. The assessment for corner parcels or lots may be reduced by the city council acting as an equalization board depending upon the following factors: Size of the parcel or lot in relation to others within the same subdivision; traffic volumes on the intersecting streets; and such other factors as may impact the benefit received by the corner parcel or lot owner. The purpose of this provision is to determine the assessable front footage on corner parcels of lots. This front footage will then be used to compute the property owner's assessment which will be apportioned as in subsection 19-6(1)a. above. 
c.  Residential cul-de-sac lot owners on the turn-around portion of the street shall pay the average front footage of property on the remainder of the street unless the turn-around property frontage is higher in which case the higher frontage will apply. 
d.  Residential flag lot owners shall be assessed on the average front footage of all lots abutting the street. The intent of this provision is to address the typical flag lot configuration consisting of a flag lot with a narrow access stem (typically twenty-five (25) feet wide) and an abutting lot which has substantial frontage on a public street. For example, a flag lot access stem twenty-five (25) feet wide would be added to an abutting lot with one hundred eighty-five (185) feet of frontage. The resulting total of two hundred ten (210) feet would then be divided by the two (2) lots and each lot owner would be assessed for one hundred five (105) feet of frontage. 
e.  The above procedure applies to local streets as designated by the city pursuant to its comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
(2)  Collector streets. Any street classified as a major or minor collector shall be assessed on the following basis: 
a.  Abutting properties shall pay one hundred (100) percent (fifty (50) percent each side) of the full cost of paving of repaving. 
(3)  Arterial streets. The city shall pay the full cost of repaving any arterial streets. 
(4)  Double frontage lots. The assessment of double frontage lots shall be considered on a case-by-case basis with consideration being given to whether or not the rear portion of the lot can be developed or accessed for development. 
(Ord. No. 11-1997, § 1, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 22-1997, § 1, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 14-2000, § 1, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 45-2000, § 1, 11-14-00)  
Secs. 19-7—19-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICES TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1993, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former art. II, §§ 19-26—19-33, which pertained to similar subject matter. Section 1 of said Ord. No. 32-1993 added a new art. II, §§ 19-26—19-37, to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Public service tax, F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232. 
 
Sec. 19-26. - Levy of tax—Electricity, oil, gas. 
There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase in the city of electricity, fuel oil, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and telecommunications services a tax on the charge made by the seller thereof, monthly, or for any period of less than one (1) month in which the seller shall collect and receive payment from the purchaser from each of such services or commodities, of ten (10) percent of the aggregate charges within the period in the case of each such service, which tax, in every case shall be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such electricity, fuel oil, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) service, within the corporate limits of the city at the time of paying the charge therefor. However, fuel oil shall be taxed at a rate not to exceed four cents ($0.04) per gallon. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-27. - Same—Water. 
There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase in the city of water a tax on the charge made by the seller thereof monthly or for any period of less than one (1) month in which the seller shall collect and receive payment from the purchaser from water services of ten (10) percent of the aggregate charges within the period in the case of water service which tax, in every case, shall be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city, to the seller of such water services within the corporate limits of the city at the time of paying the charge therefor. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-28. - Exclusions. 
There is excluded from the tax levied and imposed on fuel oil under this article: 
(1)  The purchase of special fuels as defined in F.S. ch. 209. 
(2)  The purchase of fuel oil for use in the propulsion of ships, motor vessels, motorboats, aircraft, railroad trains and other media of transportation. 
(3)  The purchase of fuel oil for use as fuel in the operation of internal-combustion engines. 
(4)  The purchase of fuel oil by a public or private utility including municipal corporations and rural cooperative associations for use as fuel in the generation of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-29. - Duty of seller to collect taxes. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of water, electricity, fuel oil, metered and bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) service, to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month unto the city clerk as tax collector of the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of water, electricity, fuel oil, metered and bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) service, without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such sale or sales unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same has been actually paid to the seller and the city manager of the city shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected charges. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the sellers' charge and the tax hereby imposed is hereby required on account of the sale for which such charge is made or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-30. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article have the meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Telecommunication services means: 
(1)  Local telephone service, toll telephone service, telegram or telegraph service, teletypewriter or computer exchange service, or private communication service. 
(2)  Cellular mobile telephone or telecommunication service or specialized mobile radio, and pagers and paging service, including but not limited to "beepers" and any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communication; but does not include services or equipment incidental to telecommunication services enumerated in this paragraph such as maintenance of customer premises equipment, whether owned by the customer or not, or equipment sales or rental for which charges are separately stated, itemized, or described on the bill, invoice, or other tangible evidence of the provision of such service. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-31. - Telecommunication service—Levy of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase within the city of telecommunication service as defined F.S. § 166.231(9)(a)2, which originates and terminates in this state, a tax of seven (7) percent of the total charge for such service, provided within the municipality or, if the location of the telecommunications service provided cannot be determined, the total amount billed for such telecommunications service to a telephone or telephone number, a telecommunications number or device, or a customers' billing address located within the municipality, excluding public telephone charges collected on site, charges for any foreign exchange service or any private line service except when such services are used or sold as a substitute for any telephone company switched service or dedicated facility by which a telephone company provides a communication path, access charges, and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. However, telecommunications service as defined in F.S. § 203.012(5)(b) shall be taxed only on the monthly recurring customer service charges excluding variable usage charges. A purchase is within the city if the communication originates or terminates within the city and is billed to a purchaser, telephone or telephone number, or telecommunication number or device within the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every seller of telecommunication service within the corporate limits of the city to collect from the purchaser thereof for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied at the time of collecting the selling price thereof, and to report and pay on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month to the director of finance, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect for any telecommunication service without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting for such telecommunication service where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay for such telecommunication service, the seller shall have the right and is hereby authorized and empowered to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-32. - Same—Records to be kept by seller; inspection of records; transcripts. 
(a)  Each and every seller of telecommunications service shall keep complete records showing all purchases of such utility services, which records shall show the price charged upon such purchase, the period of time covered thereby, the amount of tax levied and imposed hereunder, the date of payment thereof, and other related information that may be required to verify proper collection and remittance of said taxes. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized officers or agents of the city during business hours on all business days and shall be available upon sixty (60) days' notice or written notice as required by law, whichever is greater. Information provided to the city shall be exempt from public records procedure, pursuant to F.S. § 166.231(9)(3). 
(b)  Records not located within the municipal limits of the city shall be furnished by the seller to the city within fourteen (14) days of written demand. Should the seller not comply with the written demand, the city may authorize an agent or officer of the city to conduct an audit at the location where said records are maintained at the seller's expense. 
(c)  Each seller shall comply with all reporting rules, regulations, policies, and procedures which the director of finance may determine necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-33. - Administrative costs. 
For the purpose of compensating the seller of telecommunication service, the seller shall be allowed one (1) percent of the amount of the tax collected in the form of a deduction from the amount collected. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-34. - Records to be kept by seller; inspection; transcripts. 
Each and every seller of water, electricity, fuel oil, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and telecommunications services shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or services, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof and the date of payment thereof, and such records shall be kept for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and such duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-35. - Governmental agencies exempt from tax. 
The United States of America, state, county, city and their commissions and agencies and recognized churches in this state for use exclusive for church purposes are hereby exempted from the payment of the taxes imposed and levied hereby. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-36. - Provision for monthly payments. 
In all cases, where the seller of water, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) or telecommunications services collects the price thereof at monthly periods the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Sec. 19-37. - Penalty for violation. 
Any purchaser wilfully violating or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller wilfully violating the provisions hereof, or any officer, agent or employee of any seller wilfully violating the provisions hereof, shall upon conviction be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 32-1993, § 1, 9-28-93)  
Secs. 19-38—19-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Police officers and firefighters pension plan, § 15-126 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 19-56—19-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY INSURANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Insurance premium tax, F.S. § 175.101. 
 
Sec. 19-71. - Tax imposed; amount. 
There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business property insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in the amount of 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property and casualty insurance policies covering property within the city. 
(Code 1963, § 24-21)  
Sec. 19-72. - Time of payment. 
The license or excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on the first day of March of each year hereafter. 
(Code 1963, § 24-22)  
Secs. 19-73—19-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CASUALTY INSURANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Casualty insurance premium tax, F.S. § 185.08. 
 
Sec. 19-86. - Tax imposed; amount. 
There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of casualty insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city, which tax shall be in the amount of eighty-five hundredths (0.85) percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies, covering property within the city. 
(Code 1963, § 24-26)  
Sec. 19-87. - Time of payment. 
The license or excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on the first day of March of each year hereafter. 
(Code 1963, § 24-27)  
Secs. 19-88—19-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT; AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 19-100. - Short title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as Ordinance No. 3-1995, "Economic Development Ad Valorem Tax Exemption Regulations of Titusville, Florida." 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95)  
Sec. 19-101. - Enactment and authority. 
Pursuant to Article II, Section 3 of the State Constitution and in accordance with F.S. chs. 163, 166, 192, 196, and 214, and Florida Department of Revenue Rules, Chapter 12D-7, Florida Administrative Code, incorporated municipalities are authorized and empowered to adopt, amend or revise and enforce an ordinance relating to economic development ad valorem tax exemptions, after the electors of such municipality, voting on the question in a referendum, authorize the adoption of such ordinance. In a referendum held November 8, 1994, the voters of Titusville, Florida authorized the city council to grant economic development ad valorem tax exemptions. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95)  
Sec. 19-102. - Jurisdiction. 
The area subject to this ordinance shall be all of the city limits of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95)  
Sec. 19-103. - Intent and declaration. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city council (hereinafter referred to as "council") of the City of Titusville, Florida (hereinafter referred to as "city"), in enacting this ordinance to provide an incentive to those new or expanded businesses which make a positive contribution to the economy of the City of Titusville in terms of new jobs and improvements to real and personal property. 
(b)  The intent of the council is to promote the economy by creating jobs in Titusville in such a way so as not to disadvantage existing businesses while recognizing that productive competition assists in economic growth. 
(c)  The council desires to provide incentives to businesses of diverse industries, with the exception of retail operations, having a positive impact on the City of Titusville. The council declares that the provision of ad valorem tax exemptions pursuant to this ordinance serves the public purpose of fostering economic growth in Titusville, all to the benefit of the City of Titusville residents and visitors. 
(d)  The granting of, or the denial of, exemptions will be conducted on a rational, nonarbitrary, nondiscriminatory basis by the council, in furtherance of the economic development goals of Titusville. Any and all exemptions granted must result in an economic benefit to the city. To this end, prior to any grant of an exemption, the council will take into full consideration the factors set forth in section 19-106 of this ordinance. Since the intent of the council is to promote economic growth through attracting businesses and encouraging expansions that support the city and its existing businesses, these factors will be considered on a case-by-case basis to determine that the economic benefit test is met. In addition to these factors, the council is interested in the purchasing power created by the new business as it desires to prompt other sales in the city resulting in an increase to income, all to the benefit of the public of the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95)  
Sec. 19-104. - Definition of terms. 
The following words, phrases, and terms shall have the same meanings attributed to them in current Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Applicant means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who files an application with the council seeking an economic development ad valorem tax exemption. 
Business means any activity engaged in by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other business organization or entity, with the object of private or public gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect. 
Council means the city council of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
Department means the Florida Department of Revenue. 
Enterprise zone means an area designated as an enterprise zone pursuant to F.S. § 290.0065. 
Expansion of an existing business as defined in F.S. § 196.012(15), means: 
(1)  a.  [A] business or organization establishing ten (10) or more new jobs to employ ten (10) or more full time employees in this state, paying an average wage for such new jobs that is above the average wage in the area, and which principally engages in any one (1) or more of the following: Manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; or 
b.  Any business or organization establishing twenty-five (25) or more new jobs to employ twenty-five (25) or more full time employees in this state, the sales factor of which, as defined by F.S. § 220.15(5), for the facility with respect to which it requests an economic development ad valorem tax exemption is less than one-half (0.50) for each year the exemption is claimed; or 
c.  Any business located in an enterprise zone or brownfield area that increases operations on a site located within the same zone or area collocated with a commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business or organization under common control with the same business or organization. 
(2)  Any expansion of an existing business must increase operations on a site collocated with a commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business under common control with the same business, resulting in a net increase in employment of not less than ten (10) percent or an increase in productive output of not less than ten (10) percent or an increase in productive output or sales of not less than ten (10) percent. The ten (10) percent requirement does not apply to enterprise zones. 
Improvements means physical changes made to raw land, and structures placed on or under the land surface. 
New business as defined in F.S. § 196.012(14), means: 
(1)  a.  A business or organization establishing ten (10) or more new jobs to employ ten (10) or more full time employees in this state, paying an average wage for such new jobs that is above the average wage in the area, and which principally engages in any one (1) or more of the following: Manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; or is a target industry business as defined in F.S. § 288.106(2)(q). 
b.  A business or organization establishing twenty-five (25) or more new jobs to employ twenty-five (25) or more full time employees in this state, the sales of factor of which, as defined by F.S. § 220.15(5), for the facility with respect to which it requests an economic development ad valorem tax exemption is less than one-half (0.50) for each year the exemption is claimed; or 
c.  A[n] office space in this state owned and used by a a business or organization newly domiciled in this state; provided such office space houses fifty (50) or more full time employees of such business or organization; or 
d.  A business located in an enterprise zone or brownfield area; or 
e.  A business or organization that is situated on property annexed into the city and that, at the time of annexation, is receiving an economic development ad valorem tax exemption from the county under F.S. § 196.1995. 
(2)  Any new business must first begin operation on a site clearly separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business. 
Sales factor means as defined in F.S. § 202.15(5), the sales factor is a fraction the numerator of which is the total sales of the taxpayer in this state during the taxable year or period and the denominator of which is the total sales of the taxpayer everywhere during the taxable year or period. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 26-2015, § 1, 8-11-2015)  
Sec. 19-105. - Economic development ad valorem tax exemption established. 
(a)  There is herein established an economic development ad valorem tax exemption (hereinafter the "exemption"). The exemption is a local option tax incentive for new or expanding businesses which may be granted or refused at the sole discretion of the council. 
(b)  The exemptions shall not accrue to improvements to real property made by or for the use of new or expanding businesses when such improvements have been included on the tax rolls prior to the effective date of the ordinance specifically granting a business an exemption as provided in subsection 19-107(g) herein. 
(c)  Any exemption granted may apply up to one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of all improvements to real property made by or for the use of a new business and of all tangible personal property of such new business, or up to one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of all added improvements to real property made to facilitate the expansion of an existing business and of the net increase in all tangible personal property acquired to facilitate such expansion of an existing business, provided that the improvements to real property are made or the tangible personal property is added or increased on or after the effective date of the ordinance specifically granting a business an exemption as provided in subsection 19-107(g) herein. Property acquired to replace existing property shall not be considered to facilitate a business expansion. 
(d)  The exemption may be for a period up to ten (10) years from the date that the exemption takes effect. 
(e)  No exemption shall be granted for the land upon which new or expanded businesses are to be located. 
(f)  The exemption applies only to taxes levied by the city. The exemption does not apply to taxes levied by the county, school district, or water management district, or to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to Sections 9 and 12, Article VII of the State Constitution. 
(g)  The ability to receive an exemption for the period granted is conditioned upon the applicant's ability to maintain the new business or the expansion of an existing business as defined in section 19-104 herein throughout the entire period. The applicant shall be required to submit a report on an annual basis to the council evidencing satisfaction of this condition. The report shall be made in such form as attached hereto and made a part hereof as exhibit "A." In addition, any business granted an exemption shall furnish to the council or its designee, such information or report as the council or its designee may reasonably deem necessary for the purpose of determining continued performance by the business of the conditions stated in the ordinance and the representations made in the application process. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 7-2010, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" is not included herein but is available for public inspection in city offices.  
Sec. 19-106. - Application for exemption. 
(a)  Any eligible person, firm, partnership or corporation which desires an exemption shall file with the council a written application prescribed by the department (DR-418) or such other form as the department requires, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein as exhibit "B." 
(b)  The application shall request that the council adopt an ordinance granting the applicant the exemption and shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The name and location of the new business or the expansion of an existing business; 
(2)  A description of the improvements to the real property for which an exemption is requested and the date of commencement of construction of such improvement; 
(3)  A description of the tangible personal property for which an exemption is requested and the dates when such property was or is to be purchased; 
(4)  Proof, to the satisfaction of the council, that the applicant meets the criteria for a new business or for an expansion of an existing business as defined in section 19-104 hereof; 
(5)  The following information: 
a.  The anticipated number of employees and the expected time schedule for job creation; 
b.  The expected number of employees who will reside in the City of Titusville; 
c.  The average wage of the employees and whether the jobs are full-time or part-time; 
d.  The type of industry or business; 
e.  The environmental impact of the business; 
f.  The anticipated volume of business or production; 
g.  Whether relocation or expansion would occur without the exemption; 
h.  The cost and demand for services; 
i.  The source of supplies (local or otherwise); and 
j.  Whether the business will be or is located in a community redevelopment area. 
(6)  Other information deemed necessary or appropriate by the council. 
(c)  If a new [business] is locating to, or an expansion of an existing business is occurring in, a community redevelopment area, the community redevelopment agency overseeing such area shall be provided a copy of the application for review and comment. 
(d)  The application shall be filed on or before March first of the year in which an exemption is requested. 
(e)  Upon submittal of the application, the city manager or his designee shall review same, and within ten (10) days of submission, notify the applicant of any facial deficiencies. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 26-2015, § 2, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 19-107. - City council's consideration of application. 
(a)  The council shall take action on the application, including the enactment of the required ordinance should the council decide to grant the application, within ninety (90) days from the date a fully completed application is received. During this ninety-day period, interested agencies and parties shall have an opportunity to review and comment on the application. Time is of the essence in consideration of the application. 
(b)  The threshold for eligibility is whether the business meets the definition of a new business or of an expansion of an existing business as provided in section 19-104, and one (1) which is not an ineligible business or industry as defined in paragraph (d) of this section. 
(c)  The next level to determine eligibility is the council's consideration of the information in the application to determine whether the economic benefit test is met. In considering the application, the council must take into account the following: 
(1)  The total number of net new jobs to be created by the applicant; 
(2)  The average wage of the new jobs; 
(3)  The capital investment to be made by the applicant; 
(4)  The type of business or operation and whether it qualifies as a targeted industry; 
(5)  The environmental impact of the proposed business or operation; 
(6)  The extent to which the applicant intends to source its supplies and materials within the city; and 
(7)  Any other economic-related characteristics or criteria deemed necessary by the council. 
(d)  Any existing business in violation of any federal, state, or local law or regulation is not eligible for an exemption. 
(e)  Before the council takes action on an application, the council shall deliver a copy of the same to the property appraiser for review. After careful consideration, the property appraiser shall report to the council the fiscal impact of granting the exemption. 
(f)  The property appraiser's report shall include the following: 
(1)  The total revenue available to the city for the current fiscal year from ad valorem tax sources, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual total available revenue cannot be determined; 
(2)  The amount of revenue lost to the city for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions previously granted, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual revenue lost cannot be determined; 
(3)  An estimate of the amount of revenue which would be lost to the city for the current fiscal year if the exemption applied for was granted had the property for which the exemption is requested otherwise been subject to taxation; and 
(4)  A determination as to whether the property for which an exemption is requested is to be incorporated into a new business or the expansion of an existing business, or into neither, which determination the property appraiser shall also affix to the face of the application. Upon request, the department will provide the property appraiser such information as it may have available to assist in making this determination. 
(g)  The council recognizes that a community redevelopment area's funding may be impacted should an exemption be granted in such an area. Therefore, should the council receive an objection to the exemption in the form of a resolution duly adopted by a community redevelopment agency, the council shall not grant said exemption unless a feasible funding alternative is agreed upon by the council and the community redevelopment agency, which shall be decided on a case-by-case basis. 
(h)  After consideration of the application and the report of the property appraiser on the application, the council may choose to adopt an ordinance granting the exemption to a new or expanding business. If granted, the ordinance shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the new business or expansion of an existing business; 
(2)  The total amount of revenue available to the city from ad valorem tax sources for the current fiscal year, the total amount of the revenue lost to the city for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions currently in effect, and the estimated amount of revenue attributable to the exemption granted to the new or expanding business; 
(3)  The expiration date of the exemption, which is ten (10) years or less (depending upon the duration of the exemption granted) from the date that the exemption takes effect; and 
(4)  A finding that the business meets the definition of a new business or an expansion of an existing business as set forth in section 19-104 herein. 
(i)  No precedent shall be implied or inferred by the granting of an exemption to a new or expanding business. Applications for exemptions shall be considered by the council on a case-by-case basis for each application, after consideration of the application and the property appraiser's report on the application. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 2, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 7-2010, § 1, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 26-2015, § 3, 8-11-15)  
Sec. 19-108. - Application fee. 
No fee shall be charged for processing the economic development ad valorem tax exemption application and preparing, implementing, and monitoring any exemption ordinance adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95)  
Sec. 19-109. - Revocation of exemption or recovery of funds. 
Should any new business or expansion of an existing business fail to file the annual report or any other report required in subsection 19-105(g), or fail to continue to meet the definition of a new business or an expansion of an existing business, and/or fail to fulfill any other representation made to the council during the application process, the council may adopt an ordinance revoking the ad valorem tax exemption effective the end of the current year said ordinance is adopted. Further, the council may recover any taxes waived. Despite an applicant's failure to fulfill previous representations made to council, the council may take into consideration any information it deems relevant, including, but not limited to, economic hardship based on current market and economic conditions, and may continue the tax exemption, provided the applicant continues to maintain the new or expansion business as defined in section 19-104. The applicant must submit a letter with the annual report stating such hardships and the future ability to meet exemption requirements. Should said exemption be continued, applicant must provide clear data with the subsequent annual report to show they are meeting the intent of the executing ordinance and application. Nothing herein shall prohibit a business from reapplying for an ad valorem tax exemption pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 7-2010, § 1, 6-8-10)  
Sec. 19-110. - Appeals. 
The decision of the council not to grant an exemption to a particular business is subject only to a judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 3-1995, § 1, 1-10-95)  
Sec. 19-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 26-2015, adopted Aug. 11, 2015, deleted § 19-111, severability, which derived from Ord. No. 3-1995, adopted Jan. 10, 1995.  
Sec. 19-112. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 26-2015, adopted Aug. 11, 2015, deleted § 19-112, repeal of laws in conflict, which derived from Ord. No. 3-1995, adopted Jan. 10, 1995.  
Secs. 19-113—19-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 19-125. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the city in accordance with section 6(f), article VII of the Florida Constitution and section 196.075, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
Sec. 19-126. - Application. 
The additional homestead exemption provided by this article shall apply only to taxes levied by the City of Titusville exclusive of voter-approved ad valorem taxes. This additional homestead exemption shall apply for each year commencing for the tax year 2004 and each year thereafter unless terminated by the city council prior to December 1 in any year for the succeeding tax year. 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
Sec. 19-127. - Eligibility. 
Any person who has attained the age of sixty-five (65) and meets the eligibility requirements set forth in section 196.075, Florida Statutes, may apply for and receive an additional homestead exemption as provided in this article. Receipt of the additional homestead exemption provided for in these sections shall be subject to the provisions of this article and section 196.075, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
Sec. 19-128. - Amount of exemption. 
The additional homestead exemption provided by this article shall be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
Sec. 19-129. - Sworn statement of income. 
Any taxpayer claiming an additional homestead exemption under this article is annually required to submit to the Brevard County Property Appraiser, not later than March 1st, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the department of revenue. The form shall be supported by copies of any documents required by the department of revenue and the property appraiser. If the sworn statement is filed timely, the taxpayer shall have three (3) additional months, until June 1st, to provide the required supporting income documentation to the property appraiser if more time is needed. 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
Sec. 19-130. - Express reservation of repeal. 
The city council hereby reserves the right to repeal, in part or in its entirety, the additional homestead exemption provided in this article. Nothing herein shall be construed as creating a vested or other legal or equitable right to the additional homestead exemption provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
Sec. 19-131. - Additional provisions/conflicts. 
The provisions of section 196.075, Florida Statutes, and other statutory references contained therein, are hereby fully incorporated in this article by this reference. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the Florida Statutes incorporated herein, then the provisions contained in the Florida Statutes shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 46-2000, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 74-2003, § 2, 11-11-03)  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE PROTECTION ASSESSMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Annual rate resolution means the resolution described in section 19-162 hereof, establishing the rate at which a fire protection assessment for a specific fiscal year will be computed. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which a fire protection assessment is imposed or reimposed. 
Assessed property means all parcels of land included on the assessment roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the fire protection services, programs or facilities identified in the initial assessment resolution or a subsequent preliminary rate resolution. 
Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to a fire protection assessment approved by a final assessment resolution pursuant to section 19-166 hereof or an annual rate resolution pursuant to section 19-168 hereof. 
Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel, or property of any kind, including mobile homes. This term shall include the use of land in which lot or spaces are offered for use, rent or lease for the placement of mobile homes, travel trailers, or the like for residential purposes. 
Certificate of occupancy means the written certification issued by the city that a building is ready for occupancy for its intended use. For the purposes of this article, a set up or tie down permit or its equivalent issued for a mobile home shall be considered a certificate of occupancy. 
City means the City of Titusville, Florida. 
City clerk means the clerk of the city council. 
City council means the city council of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
City manager means the chief administrative officer of the city, designated by the city council to be responsible for coordinating fire protection assessments or such person's designee. 
County means Brevard County, Florida. 
Final assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 19-152.6 hereof which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition of fire protection assessments. 
Fire protection assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the city council against assessed property to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire protection services, facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of the assessed property. 
Fire protection assessed cost means the amount determined by the city council to be assessed in any fiscal year to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of fire protection services, facilities, or programs which provide a special benefit to assessed property, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(a)  The cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or improvement; 
(b)  The costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase; 
(c)  The cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; 
(d)  The cost of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; 
(e)  The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(f)  The cost of all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and franchises of any nature whatsoever; 
(g)  The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(h)  The cost of salaries, volunteer pay, workers' compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; 
(i)  The cost of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; 
(j)  The cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; 
(k)  The cost of engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; 
(l)  The costs of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the city to provide fire protection services; 
(m)  All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the fire protection assessments, including any service charges of the tax collector, or property appraiser and amounts necessary to offset discounts received for early payment of fire protection assessments pursuant to the uniform assessment collection act or for early payment of fire protection assessments collected pursuant to section 19-182 herein; 
(n)  All other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the acquisition, provision, or construction of fire protection services, facilities, or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the city council by subsequent resolution; 
(o)  A reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and uncollectible fire protection assessments; and 
(p)  Reimbursement to the city or any other person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the city or such person in connection with any of the foregoing components of fire protection assessed cost. 
In the event the city also imposes an impact fee upon new growth or development for fire protection related capital improvements, the fire protection assessed cost shall not include costs attributable to capital improvements necessitated by new growth or development that will be paid by such impact fees. The fire protection assessed cost shall also not include costs for the provision of emergency medical services by the city. 
Fiscal year means that period commencing October 1st of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30th, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city. 
Government property means property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the State of Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district or a municipal corporation. 
Initial assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 19-162 hereof which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of the fire protection assessed cost for which an assessment is to be made and for the imposition of a fire protection assessment. 
Maximum assessment rate means the highest rate of a fire protection assessment established by the city council in an initial assessment resolution or preliminary rate resolution and confirmed by the city council in the final assessment resolution or annual rate resolution. 
Ordinance means this fire protection assessment ordinance. 
Owner shall mean the person reflected as the owner of assessed property on the tax roll. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, organization, corporation, association, or any other legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
Preliminary rate resolution means the resolution described in section 19-168 hereof initiating the annual process for updating the assessment roll and directing the reimposition of fire protection assessments pursuant to an annual rate resolution. 
Property appraiser means the Brevard County Property Appraiser. 
Tax collector means the Brevard County Tax Collector. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-152. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this article. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-153. - General findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(a)  Pursuant to Article VIII, section 2(b), Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the city council has all powers of local self government to perform municipal functions and to render municipal services in a manner not inconsistent with law, and such power may be exercised by the enactment of city ordinances. 
(b)  The city council may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the city council may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in (a), (b), (c), and (d) of section 166.021(3), Florida Statutes. The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3), are not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to fire protection services, facilities or programs of the city. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Provide procedures and standards for the imposition of citywide fire protection assessments under the general home rule powers of a municipality to impose special assessments; 
(2)  Authorize a procedure for the funding of fire protection services, facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the city; and 
(3)  Legislatively determine the special benefit provided to assessed property from the provision of the city's fire protection services. 
(d)  The annual fire protection assessments, to be imposed using the procedures provided in this article, shall constitute non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning and intent of the uniform assessment collection act. 
(e)  The fire protection assessments to be imposed using the procedures provided in this article are imposed by the city council, not the Brevard County Board of County Commissioners, the property appraiser or the tax collector. The duties of the property appraiser and tax collector under the provisions of this article and the Uniform Assessment Collection Act are ministerial. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-153. - Legislative determinations of special benefit. 
It is hereby ascertained and declared that the fire protection services, facilities, and programs provide a special benefit to property because fire protection services possess a logical relationship to the use and enjoyment of improved property by: 
(1)  Protecting the value and integrity of the improvements and structures through the provision of available fire protection services; 
(2)  Protecting the life and safety of intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of property; 
(3)  Lowering the cost of fire insurance by the presence of a professional and comprehensive fire protection program within the city; and 
(4)  Containing the spread of fire incidents occurring on vacant property with the potential to spread and endanger the structures and occupants of improved property. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Secs. 19-154—19-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 19-161. - General authority. 
(a)  The City Council is hereby authorized to impose an annual fire protection assessment to fund all or any portion of the fire protection assessed cost upon benefited property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of fire protection services, facilities, or programs. All fire protection assessments shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this section 19-52 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The amount of the fire protection assessment imposed in a fiscal year against a parcel of assessed property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the fire protection assessed cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by fire protection services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require the imposition of fire protection assessments against government property or institutional property that is exempt from ad valorem taxation under Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-162. - Initial proceedings. 
The initial proceeding for the imposition of a fire protection assessment shall be the adoption of an initial assessment resolution by the city council: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the fire protection services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the fire protection assessed cost to be assessed; 
(3)  Describing the method of apportioning the fire protection assessed cost and the computation of the fire protection assessment for specific properties; 
(4)  Establishing an estimated assessment rate for the applicable fiscal year; 
(5)  Establishing a maximum assessment rate, if desired by the city council; and 
(6)  Directing the city manager to: 
a.  Prepare the initial assessment roll, as required by section 19-163 hereof; 
b.  Publish the notice required by section 19-164 hereof; and 
c.  Mail the notice required by section 19-165 hereof using information then available from the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-163. - Initial assessment roll. 
(a)  The city manager shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the initial assessment roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A summary description of all assessed property conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(3)  The amount of the fire protection assessment to be imposed against each such parcel of assessed property. 
(b)  The initial assessment roll shall be retained by the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the fire protection assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-164. - Notice by publication. 
(a)  Upon completion of the initial assessment roll, the city manager shall publish, or direct the publication of, once, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice stating that at a meeting of the city council on a certain day and hour, not earlier than twenty (20) calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special meeting, the city council will hear objections of all interested persons to the final assessment resolution which shall establish the rate of assessment and approve the aforementioned initial assessment roll. 
(b)  The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  A geographic depiction of the property subject to the fire protection assessment; 
(2)  A brief and general description of the fire protection services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(3)  The rate of assessment including a maximum assessment rate in the event one (1) was adopted; 
(4)  The procedure for objecting provided in section 19-166 hereof; 
(5)  The method by which the fire protection assessment will be collected; and 
(6)  A statement that the initial assessment roll is available for inspection at the office of the city manager and all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of assessed property at the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-165. - Notice by mail. 
(a)  In addition to the published notice required by section 19-164, the city manager shall provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of the proposed fire protection assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the fire protection assessment. 
(b)  Such notice shall include: 
(1)  The purpose of the fire protection assessment; 
(2)  The rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of property, including a maximum assessment rate in the event one was adopted; 
(3)  The unit of measurement applied to determine the fire protection assessment; 
(4)  The number of such units contained in each parcel of property; 
(5)  The total revenue to be collected by the city from the fire protection assessment; 
(6)  A statement that failure to pay the fire protection assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the property; 
(7)  A statement that all affected owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the city council within twenty (20) days of the notice; and 
(8)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(c)  The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the hearing to each owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the United States Postal Service. The city manager may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire protection assessment imposed by the city council pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-166. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
(a)  At the public hearing as noticed pursuant to sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the city council, the city council shall receive any oral or written objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city council adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(1)  Confirm, modify, or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the city council; 
(2)  Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Establish a maximum assessment rate that may be imposed in the event such rate was adopted; 
(4)  Approve the initial assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(5)  Determine the method of collection. 
(b)  The adoption of the final assessment resolution by the city council shall constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the fire protection services, facilities, or programs to be provided or constructed and a legislative determination that the fire protection assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. 
(c)  All written objections to the final assessment resolution shall be filed with the city manager at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual rate resolution for the initial fiscal year in which fire protection assessments are imposed or reimposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-167. - Effect of final assessment resolution. 
The fire protection assessments for the initial fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the final assessment resolution. The adoption of the final assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property; the method of apportionment and assessment; the initial rate of assessment; the maximum assessment rate, if any; the initial assessment roll; and the levy and lien of the fire protection assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within twenty (20) days from the date of the city council action on the final assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by the final assessment resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in Section 19-162 hereof is used to collect the fire protection assessments, such other official as the city council by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-168. - Adoption of annual rate resolution. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt an annual rate resolution during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which a fire protection assessment is imposed hereunder. 
(b)  The initial proceedings for the adoption of an annual rate resolution shall be the adoption of a preliminary rate resolution by the city council: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the fire protection services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the fire protection assessed cost to be assessed for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(3)  Establishing the estimated assessment rate for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(4)  Establishing or increasing a maximum assessment rate, if desired by the city council; 
(5)  Authorizing the date, time, and place of a public hearing to receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of the annual rate resolution for the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(6)  Directing the city manager to: 
a.  Update the assessment roll; 
b.  Provide notice by publication and first class mail to affected owners in the event circumstances described in subsection (f) of this section so require; and 
c.  Directing and authorizing any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary or convenient by the city. 
(c)  The annual rate resolution shall: 
(1)  Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming fiscal year; and 
(2)  Approve the assessment roll for the upcoming fiscal year with such adjustments as the city council deems just and right. The assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the initial assessment resolution, or any subsequent preliminary rate resolution, together with modifications, if any, that are provided and confirmed in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from providing annual notification to all owners of assessed property in the manner provided in sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof or any other method as provided by law. 
(e)  The city council may establish or increase a maximum assessment rate in an initial assessment resolution or preliminary rate resolution and confirm such maximum assessment rate in the event notice of such maximum rate assessment has been included in the notices required by sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof. 
(f)  In the event: 
(1)  The proposed fire protection assessment for any fiscal year exceeds the rates of assessment adopted by the city council including a maximum assessment rate, if any, that were listed in the notices previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof; 
(2)  The purpose for which the fire protection assessment is imposed or the use of the revenue from the fire protection assessment is substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof; 
(3)  Assessed property is reclassified or the method of apportionment is revised or altered resulting in an increased fire protection assessment from that represented by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof; or 
(4)  An assessment roll contains assessed property that was not included on the assessment roll approved for the prior fiscal year, notice shall be provided by publication and first class mail to the owners of such assessed property as provided by law. 
Such notice shall substantially conform to the notice requirements set forth in sections 19-164 and 19-165 hereof and inform the owner of the date, time, and place for the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire protection assessment imposed by the city council pursuant to this article. 
(g)  As to any assessed property not included on an assessment roll approved by the adoption of the final assessment resolution or a prior year's annual rate resolution, the adoption of the succeeding annual rate resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such assessed property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the assessed property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate of assessment, the establishment or increase of a maximum assessment rate, the assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the fire protection assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within twenty (20) days from the date of the city council action on the annual rate resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any fire protection assessment not challenged within the required 20-day period for those fire protection assessments previously imposed against assessed property by the inclusion of the assessed property on an assessment roll approved in the final assessment resolution or any subsequent annual rate resolution. 
(h)  The assessment roll, as approved by the annual rate resolution, shall be delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in section 19-182 hereof is used to collect the fire protection assessments, such other official as the city council by resolution shall designate. If the fire protection assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or abated by the court, an adjustment shall be made on the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-169. - Lien of fire protection assessments. 
Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all fire protection assessments shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims, until paid. The lien for a fire protection assessment shall be deemed perfected upon the city council's adoption of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a fire protection assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for a fire protection assessment collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 19-182 shall be deemed perfected upon the city council's adoption of the final assessment resolution or the annual rate resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property on such date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-170. - Revisions to fire protection assessments. 
If any fire protection assessment made under the provisions of this article is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city council is satisfied that any such fire protection assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city council has failed to include or omitted any property on the assessment roll, which property should have been so included, the city council may take all necessary steps to impose a new fire protection assessment against any property benefited by the fire protection assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this article and in case such second fire protection assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city council may obtain and impose other fire protection assessments until a valid fire protection assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-171. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any fire protection assessment under the provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any fire protection assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such fire protection assessment was duly levied, that the fire protection assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such fire protection assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this article; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-172. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, city manager, city council, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a fire protection assessment imposed by the city council under the provision of this article. 
(b)  When it shall appear that any fire protection assessment should have been imposed under this article against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of fire protection services, facilities, or programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll; or such property was erroneously assessed; or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual parcel of property as of the effective date of the assessment roll approved by the annual rate resolution for any upcoming fiscal year, the city council may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the owner of the omitted or erroneously assessed parcel in the manner and form provided in section 19-165, imposed the applicable fire protection assessment for the fiscal year in which such error or omission is discovered, in addition to the applicable fire protection assessment due for the prior two (2) fiscal years. Such fire protection assessment shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the real property involved, shall be collected as provided in division 3 of the Code of Ordinances, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments. 
(c)  Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to a fire protection assessment, to reclassify property based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the fire protection assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the fire protection assessment imposed under the provisions of this article. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the city manager and not the property appraiser or tax collector. 
(d)  After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-173. - Interim assessments. 
(a)  An interim fire protection assessment may be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after the adoption of the annual rate resolution. The amount of the interim fire protection assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual rate resolution for the fiscal year for which the interim fire protection assessment is being imposed. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim fire protection assessment may also include an estimate of the subsequent fiscal year's fire protection assessment. 
(b)  Issuance of the certificate of occupancy without the payment in full of the interim fire protection assessment shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. Any interim fire protection assessment not collected prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act as provided in section 19-181 of this article, under the alternative collection method provided in section 19-182 or by any other method authorized by law. 
(c)  Any interim fire protection assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-174. - Authorization for exemptions and hardship assistance. 
(a)  The city council, in its sole discretion, shall determine on an annual basis whether to provide exemptions from payment of the fire protection assessment for government property or institutional property whose use is wholly or partially exempt from ad valorem taxation under Florida law. 
(b)  The city council, in its sole discretion, shall determine on an annual basis whether to provide a program of hardship assistance to city residents who are living below or close to the property level and are at risk of losing title to their homes as a result of the imposition of the fire protection assessments. 
(c)  On an annual basis, the city council shall designate the funds available to provide any exemptions or hardship assistance. The provision of an exemption or hardship assistance in any one (1) year shall in no way establish a right or entitlement to such exemption or assistance in any subsequent year and the provision of funds in any year may be limited to the extent funds are available and appropriated by the city council. Any funds designated for exemptions or hardship assistance shall be paid by the city from funds other than those generated by the fire protection assessment. 
(d)  Any shortfall in the expected fire protection assessment proceeds due to any hardship assistance or exemption from payment of the fire protection assessments required by law or authorized by the city council shall be supplemented by any legally available funds, or combination of such funds, and shall not be paid for by proceeds or funds derived from the fire protection assessments. In the event a court of competent jurisdiction determines any exemption or reduction by the city council is improper or otherwise adversely affects the validity of the fire protection assessment imposed for any fiscal year, the sole and exclusive remedy shall be the imposition of a fire protection assessment upon each affected tax parcel in the amount of the fire protection assessment that would have been otherwise imposed save for such reduction or exemption afforded to such tax parcel by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Secs. 19-175—19-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION AND USE OF FIRE PROTECTION ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 19-181. - Method of collection. 
(a)  Unless otherwise directed by the city council, the fire protection assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this article may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or other provision of law. 
(b)  The amount of a fire protection assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefited property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program provided: 
(1)  The collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; 
(2)  Notice is provided to the owner as required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and 
(3)  Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such fire protection assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to the tax collector by the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-182. - Alternative method of collection. 
In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city council may elect to collect the fire protection assessments by any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this section: 
(a)  The city council shall provide fire protection assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property that is subject to the fire protection assessment. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the fire protection assessment; 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire protection assessment; 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
(4)  The total amount of the fire protection assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period; 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted; 
(6)  The date on which the fire protection assessment is due; and 
(7)  A statement that the fire protection assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(b)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the fire protection assessments shall be recorded in the official records of the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(c)  The city council shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent fire protection assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A fire protection assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date payment was due, as identified in accordance with paragraph (a)(6) of this section. The city council or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her fire protection assessment within sixty (60) days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city council or its agent will either: 
(1)  Initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent fire protection assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property; or 
(2)  Cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent fire protection assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as any person. The city council or its agent may join in one (1) foreclosure action the collection of fire protection assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city council and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire protection assessments and any other costs incurred by the city council as a result of such delinquent fire protection assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent fire protection assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that: 
(1)  Notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this article; and 
(2)  Any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent fire protection assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the city council's use of an alternative method of collection, the city manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to him or other city officials in section 19-172 hereof. 
(g)  Any city council action required in the collection of fire protection assessments may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-183. - Government property. 
(a)  In the event fire protection assessments are imposed against government property, the city council shall provide fire protection assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the fire protection assessment; 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the fire protection assessment; 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's fire protection assessment for the appropriate period; 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted; and 
(6)  The date on which the fire protection assessment is due. 
(b)  Fire protection assessments imposed against government property shall be due on the same date as all other fire protection assessments and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(c)  A fire protection assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date payment was due, as identified in paragraph (a)(6) of this section. The city council shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its fire protection assessment within sixty (60) days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the city council will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent fire protection assessments and any other costs incurred by the city council as a result of such delinquent fire protection assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  As an alternative to the foregoing, a fire protection assessment imposed against government property may be collected as a surcharge on a utility bill provided to such government property in periodic installments with a remedy of a mandamus action in the event of nonpayment. The city council may contract for such billing services with any utility, whether or not such utility is owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Secs. 19-184—19-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
 
Sec. 19-191. - Applicability. 
This article and the city council's authority to impose assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-192. - Alternative method. 
(a)  This article shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This article, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from directing and authorizing, by resolution, the combination with each other of: 
(1)  Any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary, or convenient by the city; 
(2)  Any notice required by this article; or 
(3)  Any notice required by law, including the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-193. - Repeal of prior inconsistent ordinances and resolutions. 
All prior inconsistent ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council, or parts of prior ordinances and resolutions in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 19-194. - Incorporation into code. 
This article shall be incorporated into the Titusville City Code and any section or paragraph, number or letter, and any heading may be changed or modified as necessary to effectuate the foregoing. Grammatical, typographical, and like errors may be corrected and additions, alterations, and omissions, not affecting the construction or meaning of this article and the city code may be freely made. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-13-08)  
Secs. 19-195—19-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HISTORIC PROPERTY AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 19-200. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Titusville Historic Property Ad Valorem Tax Exemptions." 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-201. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to create a program that allows tax exemptions for properties listed on the City of Titusville Register of Historic Places to stimulate preservation and revitalization of those properties; to ease the burden on owners of preserving and maintaining these properties; as an incentive to increase the value and appearance of qualified historic properties; to stabilize and improve property values and to enhance the tax base within the City of Titusville. The purpose and intent of this article furthers the city's historic preservation ordinance found in the city's land development regulations (LDR), chapter 29, article VI, historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-202. - Definitions. 
Preconstruction application means a form obtained from the City of Titusville Community Development Department containing all of the information required by the Florida Department of State, Division of Historic Resources promulgated in accordance with Rule 1A-38, Florida Administrative Code, and shall include additional information regarding the documentation of cost of qualifying improvements to be submitted by an applicant to the City of Titusville to apply for a historic property ad valorem tax exemption. 
Qualifying improvement means any change in the condition of an eligible property brought about by the expenditure of labor and purchase of materials that result in restoration, renovation or rehabilitation of said property in keeping with the design criteria established for the purposes of this exemption. This shall include, specifically, existing structure interior or exterior work as provided for in the historic preservation ordinance, chapter 29, article VI, historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-203. - Historic property ad valorem property tax exemption. 
(a)  Exemptions from City of Titusville Ad Valorem Taxes are hereby established: 
(1)  Pursuant to F.S. § 196.1997, the city council of the City of Titusville by ordinance may authorize the exemption from City of Titusville ad valorem taxation of up to one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of all qualifying improvements to historic properties, which result from the restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation of such properties. The exemption applies only to qualifying improvements to real property. In order for the property to qualify for the exemption, any such improvements must be made on or after the day the ordinance authorizing ad valorem tax exemption for historic properties is adopted; and 
(2)  Properties that seek an ad valorem tax exemption must qualify under this paragraph and must be approved by the city council by resolution after a recommendation by the historic preservation board. No improvements made prior to the adoption of this section may qualify for the tax exemption. Improvements must be authorized by issuance of a building permit. The exemptions do not apply to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or to taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to Section 9(b) or Section 12, Article VII of the Florida Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-204. - Historic property ad valorem property tax exemption criteria. 
(a)  The property shall be listed on the Titusville Register of Historic Places. 
(b)  To qualify for an exemption, the property owner must enter into a covenant or agreement with the city council for the term for which the exemption is granted pursuant to F.S. § 196.1997(7). 
(c)  In order for an improvement to qualify a property for an exemption, the improvement shall: 
(1)  Be approved for restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation under this section prior to any tax exemption approval; 
(2)  Be consistent with the United States Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. The standards and guidelines are the criteria by which all exemptions are judged. All interior, exterior, and site work must follow these criteria to qualify for a tax exemption; and 
(3)  Be determined by the historic preservation board and city council to meet criteria established in rules adopted by the Florida Department of State, Chapter 1A-38. F.A.C.; and 
(4)  Be completed within three (3) years from the date the application for preconstruction is approved by city council. A preconstruction application approval shall automatically be revoked if the property owner has not submitted a request for review of completed work within three (3) years following the date of approval of a preconstruction application. The city council may grant a single extension to this provision for up to six (6) additional months if such request is made in writing within three (3) years of the date of approval; and 
(5)  Contain a minimum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) worth of improvements to the exterior of the property, unless it has been documented in the preconstruction application that no improvements to the exterior of the property are needed; and 
(6)  Meet the certificate of appropriateness requirements for a qualifying restoration, renovation, or rehabilitation including exterior work by separate application per chapter 29, article VI, historic preservation of the land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-205. - Exemption period. 
(a)  Any tax exemption granted pursuant to this section shall remain in effect for the period set forth in the resolution approving the application for exemption not to exceed ten (10) years, so long as: 
(1)  The covenant required of the property owner by this section is maintained. 
(2)  The improvements which qualified the property for an exemption are maintained over the period for which the exemption is granted; and 
(3)  The exemption is not otherwise disqualified and duly revoked pursuant to section 19-212, revocation proceedings of this ordinance [article]. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-206. - Exemption amount. 
The dollar amount of the tax exemption will be the percentage, (up to one hundred (100) percent) as established by the city council at the time of preconstruction application approval for exemption, of the assessed value of the qualified improvements, which assessed value is determined by the county property appraiser's office. This dollar amount will be fixed for the duration of the tax exemption based on the property improvement's assessed value in the year the property improvement is completed as defined in the adopted resolution. An exemption on the assessed value of the improvement for up to one hundred (100) percent of that portion of the city's ad valorem tax may be granted, however the city will not generally allow the exemption on the assessed value of an improvement exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for single-family residential properties and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for other properties. However, the city council can waive this restriction if the property meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The property is of great significance to the city and the assessed value of the improvement exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed built value of the property; 
(2)  The additional exemption is necessary to save the property from destruction and to ensure its renovation; or 
(3)  The additional exemption is necessary to meet governmental building codes to ensure the rehabilitation of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-207. - Application. 
(a)  The applicant must obtain approval by the city council after recommendation by the historic preservation board of any proposed scope of work before commencing construction. The historic ad valorem exemption ordinance applicant must also obtain a certificate of appropriateness as required by this section. Failure to obtain prior approval shall result in denial of the tax exemption. Application for ad valorem historic tax exemption shall be made on appropriate forms from the City of Titusville. The application shall be made by the owner of record or a duly authorized agent of the owner. The application forms shall contain all of the information required by the Florida Department of State. Division of historic resources and shall include additional information regarding documentation of the estimated cost of qualifying improvements. The application shall consist of the following parts: 
(1)  Preconstruction application. 
a.  Content of the preconstruction application. The preconstruction application must contain the following information: 
1.  Name of the property owner and the location of the historic property; 
2.  Proof that the property has been previously designated or is in the process of being designated on the Titusville Register of Historic Places; 
3.  Proof that the improvements to the property will be consistent with the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and will be made in accordance with guidelines developed by the Department of State, Chapter 1A-38. F.A.C.; 
4.  Photographs documenting existing conditions of the property; 
5.  Information outlining construction estimates for the proposed project and the anticipated beginning date for the construction of the improvements; and 
6.  A copy of the latest tax bill issued by the Brevard County Tax Collector's Office. 
7.  If necessary, a completed application for a certificate of appropriateness for the qualifying restoration, renovation or rehabilitation. The certificate of appropriateness must be approved prior to any completion of construction. 
b.  Review of preconstruction application. 
1.  The preconstruction application shall be reviewed by the City of Titusville Historic Preservation Board at any regular or special meeting of such board. If applicable, review of the preconstruction application can be combined with the review and consideration of a local designation application and a certificate of appropriateness by the board. The historic preservation board shall make a recommendation to city council determining the following: 
i.  Whether or not the proposed project will be a qualifying improvement as defined by this article; and 
ii.  Whether or not the work, as proposed, complies with applicable review standards. 
2.  If the board finds, by majority vote, that the proposed project is a qualifying improvement and that the work proposed complies with applicable review standards, the historic preservation board shall recommend approval of the preconstruction application to the city council. An exemption on the assessed value of the improvement for up to a period of up to ten (10) years and up to one hundred (100) percent of that portion of the city's ad valorem tax may be granted, however the city will not generally allow the exemption on the assessed value of an improvement exceeding one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) for single-family residential properties and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for other properties. However, the city council can waive this restriction if the property meets the following criteria: 
i.  The property is of great significance to the city and the assessed value of the improvement exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed built value of the property; 
ii.  The additional exemption is necessary to save the property from destruction and to ensure its renovation; or 
iii.  The additional exemption is necessary to meet governmental building codes to ensure the rehabilitation of the property. 
3.  If the historic preservation board finds by majority vote, that the proposed project is either not a qualifying improvement, or is not in compliance with the applicable review standards, the historic preservation board may advise the applicant as to the changes necessary to make it a qualifying improvement. The historic preservation board can historic ad valorem exemption ordinance also provide recommendations to bring the project in compliance with applicable review standards. The applicant may resubmit the preconstruction application for further review at a future regular or special meeting of the historic preservation board. 
c.  Work requiring a certificate of appropriateness. If all or part of the proposed work involves exterior work requiring a certificate of appropriateness under chapter 29, overlays and special districts, article VI, historic preservation section 29-119, certificate of appropriateness procedures and review criteria, of the land development regulations, the exterior portion of the work shall be reviewed in accordance with that code and any design guidelines associated with that code. The preconstruction application process may be initiated and reviewed simultaneously with the procedure for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, but no preconstruction application shall be approved by the board until the process for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness has been completed. 
(2)  Application for review of completed work. 
a.  Content of the application. The application form shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Information shall be provided sufficient to determine if the completed work is consistent with the work as proposed in the preconstruction application, including photographs. 
2.  Information documenting the total actual cost of the project. 
b.  Review of application for completed work. Application for review of completed work shall be made by the applicant upon completion of all work items summarized in the preconstruction application. This form shall be submitted to the historic preservation board for review at a regular or special meeting of said board. At this meeting, the board shall determine if the work, as completed, is consistent with the work that was proposed in the preconstruction application. 
(3)  If the board finds, by majority vote, that the completed work is consistent with the preconstruction application, then the application for review of completed work shall be approved by the board and forwarded to the city council with its recommendation that the city council grant the exemption. 
(4)  If the board finds, by majority vote, that the completed project is not consistent with the work proposed in the preconstruction application, the board shall advise the applicant as to the changes necessary to make it consistent. The applicant shall have sixty (60) days to bring said work into compliance. After this sixty-day period, the board shall review the information provided by the applicant to demonstrate compliance. If. to the satisfaction of a majority of the board, the completed work is consistent with the preconstruction application, then the application for review of completed work shall be approved by the board and the board shall forward its recommendation to the city council that the exemption be granted. If the board decides by majority vote that the work is not consistent, then the board shall not approve the application and shall recommend to the city council that it deny the request for tax exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-208. - Historic property exemption covenant. 
(a)  No final application shall be approved by the city council unless it is accompanied by a signed preservation exemption covenant. 
(1)  The covenant shall provide that the property owner, successors or assigns, shall maintain and repair the property to preserve the historic qualities and integrity of the property during the period for which the tax exemption was approved. If the exemption is granted, the city clerk shall record the covenant with the deed for the property in the official records of the county prior to the effective date of the tax exemption. A certified copy of the recorded covenant shall be provided to the city manager within thirty (30) days of the approval of the tax exemption or the approval shall be void and of no effect. 
(2)  Violation of the covenant shall subject the property owner to the payment of the differences between the total amount of taxes which would have been due in March in each of the previous years in which the covenant was in effect had the property not received the exemption, and the total amount of taxes actually paid in those years, plus interest on the difference calculated as provided in F.S. § 212.12(3). 
(3)  The requirements of the covenant must be transferred to the new owner if the property changes ownership during the tax exemption period. The new property owner may sign a waiver to discontinue the tax exemption, with no penalty to the new property owner. The tax exemption shall not be reinstated after the waiver has been delivered to the city manager. A copy of the waiver shall be delivered by the city clerk to the county property appraiser's office. The waiver will discontinue the tax exemption in the tax year in which the waiver was received, if the waiver is received by the property appraiser's office by July 1. A waiver received by the property appraiser's office after July 1 shall cause the discontinuance to be effective the following tax year. 
(4)  With respect to nonresidential properties, the covenant may require that the primary business use of the property and of any structures, facilities or land that are associated with such business use at the time the exemption is granted shall be continuously conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-209. - Appeals. 
The applicant may appeal any decision of the historic preservation board under this ordinance to the city council. The appeal shall be filed on a form prepared by the community development director of the City of Titusville. The city council shall review the applications and supporting documentation filed by the applicant using applicable review standards. A public hearing shall be held and notice provided the applicant. The applicant may appeal any decision of the city council under this article to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-210. - Notice to applicant. 
Written notice shall be made to the applicant in reference to each application after a recommendation or final decision has been made. Each written notice shall include reasons for the decision and recommendations for changes to the proposed improvement project that will make it a qualifying improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-211. - Notice to property appraiser. 
Within ten (10) working days following adoption of a resolution by the city council granting the historic preservation property tax exemption, the city manager or his/her designee shall transmit a copy of the resolution, the preservation exemption covenant, and the final application to the Brevard County Property Appraiser, with instructions that the property appraiser provide the historic preservation property tax exemption to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 19-212. - Revocation proceedings. 
(a)  The city manager may initiate proceedings to revoke the historic preservation property tax exemption in the event that the applicant, or any subsequent owner or successor in interest to the property, fails to maintain the property according to the terms, conditions and standards of the historic property improvement exemption covenant. Proceedings under this section may also be initiated following a finding by the code enforcement board that a code violation has occurred on the property. City staff shall provide notice to the current owner of record after review and recommendation by the historic preservation board to the city council. The city council shall review the recommendation of the historic preservation board and make a determination as to whether or not the exemption should be revoked. 
(b)  Upon a determination by the city council that the historic preservation property tax exemption shall be revoked, the city manager or his/her designee shall provide written notice of the decision to the property owner of record as well as to the Brevard County Property Appraiser. The notice to the owner of record shall be accompanied by reasons and recommendations for change to the property that may result in reinstatement of the exemption. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a notice of revocation, the Brevard County Property Appraiser shall discontinue the historic preservation property tax exemption on the property as of January 1 of the year following receipt of the notice of revocation. 
(d)  Reinstatement. A property may be reinstated for the historic preservation property tax exemption upon satisfactory submission of evidence that the recommendations for change to the property previously made by the city council have been completed. The process for reinstatement shall be the same as the process for review of an application for review of completed work. Upon completion of the reinstatement process, the city manager or his/her designee shall notify the Brevard Property Appraiser per section 19-211(b) above. The historic preservation property tax exemption shall only be reinstated for the remaining unexpired term of the initial exemption period. 
(Ord. No. 1-2018, § 1, 1-9-18)  
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes established, § 9-8; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 13-56 et seq.; taxicabs, § 22-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 20-26. - Powers and duties of city manager relative to traffic. 
The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city council shall have power and he is hereby authorized: 
(1)  In general. To regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the city by the erection or placing of proper signs and markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, restricted speed areas, one-way streets, through or arterial streets, stop streets, U-turns, play streets, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones and other signs or markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking vehicles within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Safety zones, etc. To designate crosswalks, safety zones, bus stops and taxicab stands and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses and taxicabs in such stands. 
(3)  Truck routes. To designate truck routes and to regulate the parking of vehicles of various sizes and weights. 
(4)  Signs and markers. To cause all such necessary signs or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street when he deems such action necessary. 
(5)  Traffic-control devices. To determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices. 
(6)  Closing streets. When he deems it in the interest of public safety or convenience temporarily to close any street, alley or portion of the same to vehicular or foot traffic, or to divert such traffic therefrom. 
(7)  Violations. Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated or any sign or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this section when so placed or erected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1963, § 26-2)  
Sec. 20-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 19-2012, adopted May 22, 2012, renumbered § 20-27 as § 11-515.  
Sec. 20-28. - When police officers authorized to impound vehicles. 
Police officers of the city are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from any public street, park, lawn or parkway or from any private alley, drive, driveway or other privately owned property and to cause the same to be impounded in the nearest garage or other place of safety, or in a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle shall be parked or abandoned on any public park, lawn, parkway or in front of or so as to block entrances or driveways into public or private property from streets, avenues, highways or boulevards. 
(2)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any private alley, drive, driveway or on other privately owned property without the permission or consent of the owner of such private alley, drive, driveway or property. 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended and parked upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(4)  When any vehicle is left unattended and parked for an excessive period of time and in violation of any ordinance of the city or regulation of the city manager limiting the time for parking of vehicles on designated streets or parts of streets within the city. 
(5)  When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to persons or property and the persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury or condition incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(Code 1963, § 26-9)  
Sec. 20-29. - Notice to owner when known; notice to proprietor of public garage of ownership of vehicle. 
Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street or public or private place as authorized in this article and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefore and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(Code 1963, § 26-10; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 1-23-07) 
State Law reference— Notice to state department of highway safety and motor vehicles required, F.S. § 715.07.  
Sec. 20-30. - Procedure when owner of vehicle is unknown. 
Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street or public or private places as authorized under this article and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in section 20-29 and if the vehicle is not claimed by the owner within a period of five (5) days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal and impoundment to the state motor vehicle commissioner and to the director of the department of public safety of the state and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1963, § 26-11; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 1-23-07) 
State Law reference— Notice to state department of highway safety and motor vehicles required, F.S. § 715.07.  
Sec. 20-31. - Owner responsible for storage charges. 
The owner or operator of any vehicle shall be responsible and liable for the storage charges against such vehicle when the same shall be removed and impounded under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 26-12)  
Sec. 20-32. - Driving on runways or taxi strips at Arthur Dunn Airport. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be operated on the runway or the taxi strip of the Arthur Dunn Airport without the written authorization of the airport manager or the county commissioner from district number 1 of the county. 
(Code 1963, § 26-14)  
Secs. 20-33—20-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Restrictions on parking recreational vehicles and other vehicles on public lands at certain times, § 12-13; parking, § 39-31 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
State Law reference— Parking restrictions, F.S. § 316.1945. 
 
Sec. 20-51. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context otherwise requires: 
Clerk shall mean the clerk of the circuit and county courts of the county. 
Crosswalk shall mean: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Designated parking space shall mean any parking space posted with a sign bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption "PARKING BY DISABLED PERMIT ONLY." 
Handicapped person shall mean any person with permanent mobility problems who has been issued an exemption entitlement parking permit pursuant to F.S. § 320.0844. 
Intersection shall mean: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles; or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is self-propelled by any means whatsoever. 
Official signs shall mean any sign which is placed or erected by the authority of a public body having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating traffic or parking. 
Official traffic-control devices shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purposes of regulating, warning and guiding traffic. 
Owner shall mean a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or, in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee, or lessee, or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner, for the purpose of this article. 
Park or parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers as may be permitted under this article. 
Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot. 
Private road or driveway shall mean any privately owned way or place used for vehicular travel by the owner of such way or place and those having express or implied permission from the owner of such way or place, but not by other persons. 
Public parking space shall mean any parking space on city property and any parking space on private property which the owner, lessee or person in control of such property provides for use by members of the public other than employees of such owner, lessee or person, including, but not limited to, parking spaces at shopping centers, stores, offices, motels, malls, restaurants and marinas. 
Safety zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or so marked by adequate signs or authorized pavement markings as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral line, of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Stand or standing shall mean the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers, as may be permitted by this chapter. 
Stop or stopping shall mean when prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a law enforcement officer or official traffic-control device. 
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, bicycles, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street or highway for purposes of travel. 
(Code 1963, § 26-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 20-52. - Authority of city manager to designate parking zones. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered in his discretion to plainly designate by white lines or other suitable markers on any and all streets in the city parking places for the parking of motor or other vehicles, and where the city manager has designated or outlined parking spaces as provided herein on a street adjacent to any block, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor or other vehicle on such street, within such block area except in parking spaces so designated or outlined as herein provided. All vehicles leaving such parking spaces where diagonal parking is required shall back out of the same and then move forward in the same direction in which such vehicle was proceeding when entering such parking space. All vehicles leaving either diagonal or parallel parking spaces shall give passing cars the right-of-way and proceed in that direction before turning into a cross street when reached. 
(b)  The city manager shall designate and appropriately mark spaces at the curb wherever necessary in the business district as zones for loading and unloading goods and merchandise. Such loading zones shall not be used for parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  It is hereby made the duty of the city manager to place or cause to be placed and maintained a white line, plainly visible, parallel to the curbs on streets where diagonal parking is allowed. No vehicle or trailer, nor any attachment or part thereof, nor anything held or transported by such vehicle or trailer, shall extend beyond such line toward the center of such streets. 
(Code 1963, § 26-5)  
Sec. 20-53. - Same—Prohibited in certain areas or spaces. 
(a)  Within the incorporated areas of the city, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law, or the directions of a city police officer, parking enforcement specialist, other law enforcement officer, or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand, or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
b.  On a sidewalk, bike path or bike lane. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city or the state department of transportation indicates a different length by official traffic-control devices. 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
h.  On any railroad tracks. 
i.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
j.  In such manner as to block traffic lanes or to interfere with the orderly flow of traffic so as to constitute a hazard to the passage of emergency vehicles. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
d.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop signal or official traffic-control device located at the side of a roadway. 
e.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance. 
f.  And any place where an official traffic-control device prohibits standing. 
g.  Within thirty (30) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing unless the city or the state department of transportation establishes a different distance due to unusual circumstances. 
h.  At any place where an official traffic-control device prohibits or restricts parking, or in excess of time periods authorized by such device. 
i.  Along or adjacent to any curb painted red or yellow, or across the delineated boundaries of a public parking place. 
j.  Any place designated as a "Fire Lane". 
(b)  Within the incorporated areas of the city: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way street or highway shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right hand curb or edge of the street or highway. 
(2)  Except when otherwise provided by this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way street or highway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left hand curb or edge of the street or highway. 
(Code 1963, § 26-18; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 1-23-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 316.1945.  
Sec. 20-54. - Public parking spaces for certain handicapped persons. 
No person shall park any vehicle or bicycle in any public parking space designated for handicapped parking located on city owned or leased property or private property within the city, unless such person is a handicapped person or unless such person is momentarily parking in such parking place for the purpose of unloading or loading a handicapped person as provided in F.S. § 316.1955. 
(Code 1963, § 26-19; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 1-23-07) 
State Law reference— Parking spaces for disabled persons, F.S. §§ 316.1955—316.1964.  
Sec. 20-55. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person cited for a violation of section 20-53 or 20-54 shall be deemed to be charged with a non-criminal violation, F.S. § 316.1945, and shall be assessed a civil penalty according to the following schedule: 
Violation 	Within 10 Days 	After 10 Days 	After 20 Days 
Parked in handicapped space 	$250.00 	$250.00 	$250.00 
Parked in fire lane 	100.00 	125.00 	150.00 
Parked within 15 feet of fire hydrant 	100.00 	125.00 	150.00 
Parked on sidewalk, bike path, or lane 	60.00 	70.00 	80.00 
Parked obstructing traffic 	60.00 	70.00 	80.00 
Parked on railroad track or bridge 	40.00 	50.00 	60.00 
Parked in intersection 	40.00 	50.00 	60.00 
Parked where official signs prohibit 	100.00 	125.00 	150.00 
Parked on crosswalk 	40.00 	50.00 	60.00 
Other: 
Warning Only 	40.00 	50.00 	60.00 
 
(b)  Each day any violation occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. For parking in excess of the time authorized in a public parking space, each succeeding equal time period beyond that authorized as the maximum time period for such parking space shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The amount of any penalty specified in this section shall be doubled if payment is not received by the clerk prior to notice being mailed to the registered owner by certified mail pursuant to sections 106-48 and section 106-49, Code of Brevard County, Florida. 
(d)  Surcharge on parking fines. 
(1)  A surcharge in the amount of $10.00 is imposed on all parking fines for parking violations occurring within the city, for the sole purpose of funding school crossing guard programs. 
(2)  The proceeds of this surcharge shall be placed in a trust fund called the school crossing guard trust fund and funds collected from this surcharge shall be distributed quarterly to fund school crossing guard programs. However, the city may set aside funds from this surcharge to pay for start-up costs and recurring administrative costs related to printing new tickets or other means of implementing the school crossing guard program. 
(Code 1963, §§ 26-13.1, 26-20; Ord. No. 17-1995, § 1, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 18-2008, § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 9-13-16)  
Sec. 20-56. - Citation forms. 
The issuance and completion of prenumbered parking citations by municipal police officers and parking enforcement specialists shall be on forms and in such format as required and approved by the clerk and contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, time and location of violation. 
(2)  Vehicle tag number, decal number, model and color. 
(3)  Name and address of registered owner or owners. 
(4)  Owner's date of birth. 
(5)  Name and signature of issuing officer or parking enforcement specialist. 
(6)  Descriptions of violations and amounts of penalties. 
(7)  Directions as to payment of penalty or request for hearing. 
(8)  Statement as to effect of election to request hearing and failure to comply with citation pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967 and § 318.325. 
(9)  Blanks for name and mailing address of persons receiving citation. 
(Code 1963, § 26-21; Ord. No. 17-1995, § 1, 6-13-95)  
Sec. 20-57. - Procedures governing payment of civil penalties or hearing and proceedings to enforce parking violation. 
All requests for hearings in response to municipal parking citations shall be made in person and processed by the city. Hearing request received will be completed and forwarded to the Brevard County Clerk's Office, Traffic Division. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, to the extent authorized by F.S. § 318.325, the city hereby authorizes traffic hearing officers to hear and determine whether a parking violation has been committed and the city hereby expressly authorizes parking violations to be heard by a traffic hearing officer. 
(a)  Any person issued a city parking citation shall answer the citation, by either remittance of fine to the city, pursuant to the directions on such citation within ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the citation; or 
(b)  A hearing may be requested by the person receiving such citation or the cited vehicle's registered owner for the purpose of presenting evidence concerning a parking violation. To request a hearing within the ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation, the person receiving the citation should take the citation to the City of Titusville or City of Titusville Police Department, and a hearing will be scheduled for the person at which time a determination shall be made whether a parking violation has been committed. Any person who requests a hearing and does not appear in accordance with said statement shall be subject to contempt proceedings or other such penalties as the court may, in its discretion, impose to require compliance with this article. 
(c)  Pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 316.1967, an election to request a hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to pay the civil penalty indicated on the parking citation, and the official, after the hearing, may impose a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs for each parking violation. If payment of the civil penalty is not received or a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period after notice described in subsection (a) and (b) of this section, the original citation and an affidavit verifying noncompliance with such citation shall be submitted to the clerk's office for processing in accordance with Florida law. The City of Titusville shall supply the Florida Department of Safety and Motor Vehicles, or any successor department performing substantially the same duties, a list of persons who have three (3) or more outstanding parking violations, or one (1) or more outstanding parking violations, or one (1) or more outstanding parking violation(s) of Florida Statutes, or any city ordinances which regulate parking in spaces for persons with disabilities. The information may be supplied to the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles in any communication format approved by it or state statute. 
(Code 1963, § 26-22; Ord. No. 17-1995, § 1, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 12-2016, § 2, 9-13-16)  
Sec. 20-57.1. - Failure to pay civil penalty. 
If a person fails to pay any parking citation fine imposed herein within thirty (30) days of the issuance of said fine, then notification of the failure to pay the parking citation will be sent to the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles' office which may refuse to renew the vehicles' registration until the parking citation is paid in full. Furthermore, the delinquent parking citation account may be forwarded to a collections agency for collection. 
(Ord. No. 12-2016, § 2, 9-13-16)  
Sec. 20-58. - Miscellaneous parking regulation. 
(a)  There shall be no off-street parking in the front yards, rear yards, and side yards, street side, of single-family dwellings, except as normally exists in driveways or designated parking spaces or areas, unless otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  No owner of property within the corporate limits of the city shall permit the parking, maintaining or keeping upon his property and no person shall park, maintain or keep any travel trailer, camper trailer, cargo trailer or boat trailer for more than twelve (12) hours, except as provided by this section, and further excepting from operation of this section, trailer sales of new and used unoccupied trailers, house cars or camp cars by an individual, firm or corporation, properly licensed according to the ordinance of the city, at a location that is zoned for trailer sales use. 
(c)  Camp sites in mobile home parks. A separate camp site for travel trailers or camper trailers shall be permitted in any mobile home park provided that said camp area comprises less than ten (10) percent of the total area of said mobile home park; that a twenty-five-foot buffer strip exists between said camp site and any mobile home site; and that toilet, water and garbage disposal facilities are available and easily accessible to users of said camp site. No travel trailer or camper trailer shall be permitted to remain in said camp site for more than thirty (30) days. 
(d)  Use as living unit prohibited. The use of a trailer or mobile home as a dwelling or living unit on any lot, other than a licensed and approved trailer park shall not be permitted within the city. 
(e)  Parking of trailers. Travel trailers, camper trailers and boat trailers of any length, and cargo trailers not in excess of fourteen (14) feet in length shall be permitted to park on private property in any residential district provided they are: 
(1)  Located behind the front building line and its most forward projection is not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the front lot line; or 
(2)  Located in carport or garage; or 
(3)  Located in the driveway area permitted for the parking of passenger cars as long as there remains sufficient area in the driveway area for the off-street parking of two (2) passenger cars, without blocking the sidewalk area. 
(f)  Self-propelled mobile homes. Self-propelled mobile homes of any length shall be permitted to park in any residential district in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e) above. Self-propelled mobile homes shall not be used as a living unit when parked in a residential district. 
(g)  Parking on public property prohibited. No trailer or mobile home shall be parked upon any public or private street, park or other public property within the corporate limits of the city more than two (2) hours, and a trailer or mobile home shall not be used for sleeping, housekeeping or living quarters while so parked, unless located in an area publicly designated for such use. 
(h)  Construction trailers. Trailers used for construction offices on a construction site or in a subdivision shall be permitted during the period of construction only after a building permit for the construction job has been issued; such trailer or trailers must be removed from the site or subdivision before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the new construction. Such permitted trailers shall not be used for sales, habitation or promotional purposes, and shall be permitted only after receiving a permit from the building official for each such trailer. 
(Ord. No. 21-1997, § 1, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 3, 10-13-09) 
Editor's note— Section 27-9 had been saved from repeal. Refer to Adopting Ordinance No. 31-1992.  
Sec. 20-59. - Prohibition, parking of semi-trucks upon the public right-of-way. 
(a)  Prohibition. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, owner or operator, to park a tractor trailer, cargo trailer, car carrier, semi-trailer, pole trailer, road tractor, trailer, moving and storage van, or other similar vehicle collectively referred to as "tractor trailer" upon the public streets, roads and rights-of-way within the city limits of the City of Titusville except as provided herein. 
(b)  Exception. 
(1)  The temporary loading and unloading of cargo from the tractor trailer (i.e. loading and unloading a moving van; loading and unloading an automobile; loading and unloading merchandise, etc.). The exception shall only apply during the loading and unloading and shall not extend beyond a twelve-hour duration and the vehicle must be attended during the loading and unloading operation. 
(2)  The temporary parking of a tractor trailer in compliance with applicable traffic regulations or at the direction of a law enforcement officer, shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
(c)  Penalty. 
(1)  A violation of this section shall be deemed to be a noncriminal traffic infraction, in accordance with F.S. (1997), ch. 318, and the amount of the civil penalty shall be in accordance with F.S. (1997), § 318.18, and classified as a nonmoving traffic violation. Disposition of said noncriminal violations shall be in accordance with F.S. (1997), § 318.325, regulating jurisdiction and procedure for parking infractions and shall be processed in accordance with sections 20-56 and 20-57 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, and in accordance with F.S. (1997), ch. 318. 
(2)  That in addition, as an alternate method for enforcement of the violation of section 20-59(a) of the Code, shall be through the Titusville Code Enforcement Board and the process and procedure as applicable to the code enforcement board and fines and penalties as authorized by F.S. (1997), ch. 162 and Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 20-1998, § 1, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 20-60. - On-street parking regulations. 
(a)  Districts in which parking is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as agent, owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or otherwise, to park, store, deposit or allow, cause or permit to be parked, stored or deposited on any public or private property in any residential zoning districts in the city, any road tractor, semi-trailer, truck tractor or any combination thereof or any other truck or special mobile equipment or other heavy equipment of whatever type, size or nature. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  Private property whereon construction is underway, for which a current and valid building permit has been issued by the city, as to those vehicles actively engaged in such construction. 
(3)  Those persons performing lawful and authorized work upon the premises where the vehicle is parked, including immediate pickup or delivery service. 
(4)  Standards pickup and paneled trucks having a carrying capacity of not more than one (1) ton gross weight. 
(5)  Any vehicle that is parked entirely inside a garage, or is parked in a carport where no part of the vehicle extends outside the roof line of such carport. 
(6)  The emergency parking of a disabled vehicle. However, any such vehicle shall be removed from the residential district within twenty-four (24) hours by wrecker towing or other available means, regardless of the nature of the emergency. 
(7)  Trucks meeting the specifications of the city tow (wrecker) truck, provided such trucks are being used to provide emergency services on an "on-call" basis for a governmental law enforcement agency. 
(c)  Penalty and enforcement. 
(1)  A violation of this section shall be deemed to be a noncriminal traffic infraction, in accordance with F.S. (1997), ch. 318, and the amount of the civil penalty shall be accordance with F.S. (1997), § 318,18, and classified as a nonmoving traffic violation. Disposition of said noncriminal violations shall be in accordance with F.S. (1997), § 318.325, regulating jurisdiction and procedure for parking infractions and shall be processed in accordance with sections 20-56 and 20-57 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, and in accordance with F.S. (1997), ch. 318. 
(2)  That in addition, as an alternate method for enforcement of the violation of section 20-59(a) of the Code, shall be through the Titusville Code Enforcement Board and the process and procedure as applicable to the code enforcement board and fines and penalties as authorized by F.S. (1997), ch. 162 and Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 3-2017, § 1, 1-10-17)  
Secs. 20-61—20-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 4-2007, adopted Jan. 23, 2007, repealed art. IV, which consisted of §§ 20-70—20-79, pertained to combat automobile theft program, and derived from Ord. No. 46-1993, adopted Nov. 9, 1993. 
 
Secs. 20-70—20-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-2010, adopted Sept. 14, 2010, repealed Ord. No. 22-2009, adopted May 12, 2009, from which art. V, §§ 20-80—20-93, pertaining to the traffic light enforcement program, derived. 
 
Secs. 20-80—20-93. - Reserved.  
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing standards, § 6-141 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 16; public service utilities tax, § 19-26 et seq.; utilities, § 53.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-2012, adopted Aug. 16, 2012, amended art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. I pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 36-1997, adopted Oct. 28, 1997; Ord. No. 45-1998, adopted Nov. 24, 1998; Ord. No. 24-2001, adopted July 24, 2001; Ord. No. 54-2003, adopted Sept. 25, 2003; Ord. No. 59-2004, adopted Sept. 28, 2004; Ord. No. 66-2005, adopted Sept. 22, 2005; Ord. No. 47-2006, adopted Sept. 12, 2006; Ord. No. 59-2007, adopted Sept. 25, 2007; and Ord. No. 32-2009, adopted Sept. 8, 2009. 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Lots served by governmentally owned water/sewer/reclaimed water lines. 
(a)  No out-of-city service. The city declares that its policy is not to provide water, sanitary sewer or reclaimed water service to out-of-city users and to provide water, sanitary sewer or reclaimed water service to inside-city-limits users. The city in its discretion pursuant to this policy may elect to provide water, sanitary sewer service, or reclaimed water service to out-of-city users. In the event the city does provide service to an out-of-city user, the city in no way intends to assume the duty or obligation to provide service to other out-of-city users since the city has a limited water supply and limited sewer capacity and limited reclaimed water supply and the needs of its citizens are paramount. In the event a request for service is granted, water and sanitary sewer service shall both be provided if service is available. 
Every out-of-city property owner who desires to be considered for water, sanitary sewer service or reclaimed water service shall apply for annexation as a condition precedent to being considered for the service. If by reason of annexation laws, the property can be annexed and the city in its discretion desires to annex the property, the property owner shall submit an application for annexation and pay the required advertising and recording fees and the annexation will be processed in accordance with applicable regulations. 
If, by reason of annexation, laws the property cannot be currently annexed, however, the property is contiguous to a parcel or parcels that is currently receiving city services or has a water service agreement, the city in its discretion may elect to enter into an agreement to provide the service conditioned upon the owner annexing the property at the time the property becomes contiguous and paying the required fees and complying with the conditions of a service agreement. In the event the property owner requests service under this provision, the owner shall pay a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for processing and approving the request. 
All applications for annexation and service agreements provided for above, will be processed by the city manager or designee and the city manager shall have the authority to review and approve the above applications to the extent authorized by applicable regulations. In the event the city manager elects to deny an application, the property owner may within thirty (30) days after said denial appeal the city manager's decision to the city council for its review. The review of the city council will be limited to determining whether the city manager properly exercised discretion as authorized above. 
(b)  Other noncontiguous properties. If by reason of annexation laws, the property cannot be currently annexed and the parcel is not contiguous with a parcel or parcels that is currently receiving city services or has a water service agreement, then in that event, the city council may, in its discretion, authorize a request for out-of-city service provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The property is located on the east side of the Florida East Coast Railroad right-of-way south of the city limits and north of Orlando Utilities (between the railroad and the Indian River). In recognition of the provisions of Chapter 96-262, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1990 (Indian River Lagoon Legislation), the city recognizes that improper septic tank use poses a threat to the water quality of the Indian River Lagoon system, and therefore, provides for the above provision for availability of service; or 
(2)  That there are economic development reasons that service should be extended to the property and that the residents of the city will receive significant benefit from the development of the property by way of jobs, increase retail sales and the provision of services to the new business or industry or increase in residents; or 
(3)  The property owner has demonstrated to the city that the natural groundwater on the property is not treatable to drinking water standards. The property owner will provide to the city a copy of an analysis of the natural groundwater on the property from a certified independent HRS approved lab. The lab certificate shall include the following analysis: pH, suspend solids, TDS, total hardness, calcium hardness, chlorides, iron, copper, lead, nitrites, nitrates, bacteria (coliforms) i.e. E-coli. The cost of testing will be borne by the property owner. 
In addition, the property owner must demonstrate that the current water supply (i.e. well) cannot be treated to acceptable standards (SWDA) via a conventional, readily available treatment system designed specifically for household use. In the event that the owner's demand requirements exceed one (1) ERU, the owner is deemed to have met this requirement. If said natural groundwater is deemed untreatable, then in that event, the city may, in its discretion, permit connection to the water system and the property owner shall comply with all other applicable provisions; and 
(4)  The request for sewer and/or water service shall not overload or impair the existing system or interfere with the ability of the city to meet the needs of city residents. 
For purposes of this section, economic development reasons shall mean nonresidential land uses. In order to qualify as a nonresidential land use that has a significant benefit to the city, the development must meet the definition of development which would qualify for an ad valorem tax exemption under F.S. § 196.1995, (1995), and have or obtain an occupational license with the city. 
In the event the city grants the request for water or sewer service, the applicant shall pay an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and sign an agreement to annex when the property becomes contiguous and comply with applicable codes and pay any applicable advertising and recording fees. 
All applications for water or sewer service shall include both services, if available to the property. Availability shall be determined in accordance with section 39-131 of the Code. 
The city may impose additional requirements as a condition of granting the service. 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(d)  Permit. No consumer, user or property owner shall be permitted to connect into or extend the existing water, sanitary sewer or reclaimed water service system without first obtaining a permit. 
(e)  Cost of extension. The cost of extending a water, sanitary sewer or reclaimed water line shall be as established in the Land Development Regulations, Volume II. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 12-2013, § 1, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 28-2014, § 1, 7-8-14; Ord. No. 61-2014, § 1, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 16-2016, § 1, 9-13-16)  
Secs. 21-2—21-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-2012, adopted Aug. 16, 2012, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II consisted of §§ 21-26, 21-27, 21-41—21-50, 21-60—21-66, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 16-2005, adopted Mar. 22, 2005; Ord. No. 42-2008, adopted Nov. 11, 2008; and Ord. No. 21-2009, adopted May 12, 2009. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-26. - Unauthorized use of city water; injuring waterworks properties and facilities. 
Whoever shall take or use water from any of the hydrants, faucets or stopcocks of the waterworks system without having a right to do so by reason of a contract with the superintendent or without having received permission to do so from one having the right to give such permission, or who shall without such permission, open any fireplug, hydrant, stopcock or valve or other fixtures appertaining to said works; or who shall shut off or let in water into or from any pipe, or who shall injure, deface or impair any part of appurtenances of such waterworks; or who shall throw or cast anything into the reservoir of such works, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12) 
Cross reference— Connection to sewage disposal and water supply facilities required, § 39-131, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II.  
Sec. 21-27. - Requirements of the cross-connection control program. 
(a)  Cross-connection control and backflow prevention. The city does hereby find that it is necessary for the protection and the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the people served by the City of Titusville's potable water supply system to adopt cross-connection control standards through this section and a written cross-connection control (CCC) manual incorporated herein which establish minimum requirements for the design, construction, installation, testing and maintenance of connections to the city's potable water supply system. 
The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. Section 300f to 300j-26), requires the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) to adopt such rules as are necessary to carry out its functions under the Act, which include protecting public health by regulating the nation's public drinking water supply. 
These rules, as stated in the Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C. 62-555.360), as amended, require that all community water systems establish and implement a written cross-connection control program to detect and prevent cross-connections that may create an imminent and substantial danger to the public health and that such programs be developed using accepted practices of the American Water Works Association in its Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Manual of Water Supply Practices (Manual M14), as amended. 
(b)  Cross-connection control manual. The city hereby adopts a cross-connection control manual for the City of Titusville, and in connection therewith, there is hereby adopted "City of Titusville Water Resources Department Cross-Connection Control Program Manual". The city reserves the right to determine the applicability of the items referenced therein. The city council hereby delegates to the city manager or his designee the right to modify, amend or replace the policies, procedures and standards at any time in the future without the need to amend this section. 
This manual shows who is required to install a backflow prevention device and what type of device is required to protect the potable water system. It lists the responsibilities of the water purveyor, that is, the City of Titusville's Water Resources Department and those of each property owner; the type of backflow prevention assembly required; how the assembly is to be installed; and the forms necessary to fulfill the requirements of FDEP. 
(c)  Schedule of fees. There is hereby established a uniform schedule of fees for the City of Titusville Water Resources Department Cross-Connection Control Program, as adopted by resolution of the Titusville City Council. The fee resolution is available at the Water Resources Department or the City of Titusville website. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 2, 7-8-14; Ord. No. 23-2016, § 4, 9-27-16)  
Secs. 21-28—21-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM EMERGENCIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 28-2014, adopted July 8, 2014, amended div. 2 to read as herein set out. Former div. 2 consisted of §§ 2-41—2-49, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 24-2012, adopted Aug. 16, 2012. 
 
Secs. 21-41, 21-42. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-43. - Critical water supply system emergency proclamation—Proclamation. 
The mayor, or in his absence, the vice-mayor, shall have the power and authority to declare that a critical water supply system emergency exists and by proclamation prohibit or limit water use by the city's water supply customers until such critical water supply system emergency has ended. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 3, 7-8-14)  
Secs. 21-44, 21-45. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-46. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water as prohibited by emergency proclamation as noted in section 21-43. Any person or business violating any provision of the emergency proclamation shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the City Code. In addition, such person or business shall pay all costs and expenses involved in this case, including attorney's fees. Each day any violation of any provision of this division shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 3, 7-8-14)  
Secs. 21-47—21-49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-50. - Water supply capacity allocation. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to establish a fair and equitable method of establishing the order of priority that connections are made to City of Titusville potable water supply and treatment facilities. The city council of the City of Titusville, in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, hereby establishes these regulations. 
(b)  Permit. There is hereby established a City of Titusville water supply allocation permit for any person desiring to receive a commitment to reserve water supply capacity for future development from the city. Any applicant desiring to reserve any of the limited water capacity of the city may make application to reserve a prescribed amount of capacity. 
Upon issuance of the permit, all fees paid pursuant hereto shall be nonrefundable except as hereinafter provided and the permit for which all fees are paid shall run with the land. 
(c)  Allocation of water supply capacity among applicants for each type water permit. In order to provide equitable treatment for all potential users of the water treatment facilities, Titusville adopts a policy of "first come—first served" to the greatest extent possible, giving due consideration to the extent to which those who may have acted in reliance on water supply capacity being available as a result of FDEP permits having been issued or contracts having been entered into with the city. The city has been and shall continue to process, subject to available capacity, complete applications for FDEP permits on a "first come—first served" basis, pursuant to the provisions of this section. The City of Titusville water resources director shall determine the amount of available water supply capacity and update the capacity as it may change from time to time. After the capacity has been determined, said capacity shall be allocated as follows: 
(1)  Each Titusville water supply allocation permit shall be applied for in conjunction with application for an FDEP water permit. Connections not requiring an FDEP permit with capacity in excess of five hundred (500) gallons per day shall apply for a water capacity allocation permit in conjunction with application for a utility construction permit. Applications will be made to the City of Titusville water resources department. 
(2)  No building permit shall be issued by the city unless the applicant has a water supply allocation permit. 
(3)  No extension or addition of the city water distribution system shall be authorized unless the applicant has a water supply allocation permit and has paid the fees specified herein. 
(4)  All holders of current FDEP permits shall have vested rights to complete the water improvements authorized by the FDEP permit within one (1) year. If a current holder of a FDEP permit shall not have completed the water improvement authorized by the FDEP permit within one (1) year, then said applicant shall be required to obtain a water supply allocation permit under this section. Any renewal or extension of a FDEP permit shall require a water supply allocation permit under this section. 
(5)  No one (1) application for a water supply allocation permit shall exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day, except the city council may authorize applications in excess of said limitations when it appears as if the project cannot be phased or other good cause is shown to the city that said project justifies a larger allocation. 
No property owner who previously has received prior site plan approval, plat approval, or another type of approval shall have a vested right to water supply allocation unless the property owner has complied with the terms and provisions of this section. 
(d)  Term of water supply permit; permit fee. 
(1)  Each Titusville water supply allocation permit shall be for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance and may be extended for two (2) additional successive periods of twelve (12) months upon payment of additional water supply permit fees as set forth herein. These extensions shall be automatic providing construction on the project for which the permits are issued has not been discontinued for six (6) months continuously. Extensions beyond thirty-six (36) months are prohibited and any FDEP permits outstanding are to be considered as withdrawn by the permit holder. Each applicant who has made application for and received a Titusville water supply allocation permit shall have one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit issued by the City of Titusville to commence work on installation and extension of the water system. If work has not started within one hundred eighty (180) days, the water supply allocation permit shall be null and void. 
(2)  The water supply allocation permit fee shall be thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per one hundred (100) gallons per day or portion thereof of capacity, which is based on the cost to Titusville of maintaining unused water supply capacity at the water production facilities for the amount of water supply set forth in said water supply allocation permit. For each renewal or extension of the permit, an additional thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per one hundred (100) gallons per day or portion thereof of capacity shall be paid. 
If the city determines that a hardship to permittee exists and the city and the permittee mutually agree that, for good reason the permit should be cancelled and some fees be refunded, such fees will be refunded according to the following schedule: 
Three (3) months: Seventy-five (75) percent refund 
Six (6) months: Fifty (50) percent refund 
Nine (9) months: Twenty-five (25) percent refund 
Twelve (12) months: No refund 
Permit extension 1: No refund 
Permit extension 2: No refund 
No renewal fee shall be required to be paid if the applicant has a current building permit for the units which are the subject of the water supply allocation permit and is diligently constructing said project. If the project is not completed and a certificate of occupancy obtained within eighteen (18) months of issuance of the original water supply allocation permit, an additional water supply allocation permit fee shall be paid. 
(3)  Transfer of water supply capacity. No assignment, sale, or conveyance of a permittee's water supply capacity to any other party for use on any other property not identified or described in the water supply permit shall be valid. The water supply capacity permitted shall inure to the benefit of only the current and future owners of the property described in said water supply permit, and the permittee may not transfer water supply capacity to any other property not identified in the water supply permit. Any permittee may assign or transfer water supply capacity authorized by a water supply permit to purchasers of land for which the permit was issued to service, and upon application therefor, the city will reissue water supply permits for any portion of the water supply capacity transferred or assigned in connection with such transfer of ownership of land. Any assignment or transfer of any water supply permit shall not be effective and valid unless the city receives written notification of said assignment or transfer of such water supply permit, as well as written notice of the transfer or assignment of all or any portion of the land described or said water supply permit. 
(e)  Application and permit provision. The application for a water supply allocation permit and the water supply allocation permit thereupon issued shall contain substantially the following provision: The application for or the subsequent issuance of a water supply allocation permit by the City of Titusville shall not create any vested right in permittee, nor be construed as a guarantee of water supply capacity to the applicant or permittee for conditions beyond the control of the city. The city may permit connections to its water system only if it may lawfully do so and would not thereby violate any permit, license, restriction, injunction, moratorium, or denial of permission to connect imposed or issued by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any applicable agency of the United States, the State of Florida, or the city. The city makes no other representation or agreement as to the availability or capacity of its water system in connection with the development of the property described in the application for a water supply allocation permit. The applicant or permittee expressly agrees that it shall have no claim or cause of action against the city for its observance of these rules or any such permit, license, restriction, injunction, moratorium or denial of permission to connect its water lines into the city's water system and the applicant or permittee hereby waives and relinquishes any right, claim, cause of action, or other remedy whatsoever against the city arising from or as a result of the city's refusal to permit the applicant or permittee to connect to the city's water system for its observance of these rules or the reason that the connection would violate such permit, license, restriction, injunction, moratorium, or denial of permission to connect. 
(f)  Use of revenues. All revenues derived from the water supply allocation permit fees imposed by this section shall be deposited in a utility construction fund account and shall be used only for the construction, acquisition, addition, extension and over-sizing of the water system of the city. Interest earned on these funds shall accrue to this fund. 
Amendments. In developing these rules, the city has made every effort possible to provide for just, reasonable, and equitable treatment for all potential water system customers. Should inequities develop during the implementation of these rules, the city may, from time to time, amend these rules in order to alleviate the inequity. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 3, 7-8-14)  
Secs. 21-51—21-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION 
 
Sec. 21-60. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. 
(a)  Address means the house number of a physical location of a specific property. This includes "rural route" numbers but excludes post office box numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by the U.S. Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the property's address. An "even-numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or the letters A—M. An "odd- numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or the letters N—Z. 
(b)  District means the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
(c)  Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(d)  Landscape irrigation means the outside watering of plants in a landscape such as shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, groundcovers, plants, vines, gardens and other such flora that are situated in such diverse locations as residential areas, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public medians and rights-of-way. "Landscape irrigation" does not include agricultural crops, nursery plants, cemeteries, golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs, and vegetation associated with recreational areas such as playgrounds, football, baseball, and soccer fields. 
(e)  Residential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape associated with any housing unit having sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one (1) or more residents, including multiple housing units and mobile homes. 
(f)  Nonresidential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape not included within the definition of "residential landscape irrigation," such as that associated with public, commercial and industrial property, including commercial or transient housing units, hotel and motel units, and public medians and rights-of-way. 
(g)  Water supply system emergency means a situation that occurs when the city experiences a sudden and catastrophic loss of its water supply or ability to provide treated water to regulated standards. 
(h)  Water supply means the water supply wells, treatment plants, storage tanks, pumps and pipes comprising the water delivery system. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-61. - Landscape irrigation schedules. 
(1)  When Daylight Savings Time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with the following irrigation schedule: 
(a)  Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on Wednesday and Saturday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(b)  Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Thursday and Sunday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(c)  Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesday and Friday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(d)  No more than three-fourths (¾) inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one (1) hour per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(2)  When Eastern Standard Time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with the following irrigation schedule: 
(a)  Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on Saturday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(b)  Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Sunday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(c)  Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(d)  No more than three-fourths (¾) inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one (1) hour per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(3)  All landscape irrigation shall be limited in amount to only that necessary to meet landscape needs. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-62. - Exceptions to the landscape irrigation schedules. 
Landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule exceptions: 
(1)  Irrigation using a micro-spray, micro-jet, drip or bubbler irrigation system is allowed anytime. 
(2)  Irrigation of new landscape is allowed at any time of day on any day for the initial thirty (30) days and every other day for the next thirty (30) days for a total of one (1) sixty-day period, provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum amount necessary for such landscape establishment. 
(3)  Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and herbicides, when required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices, is allowed at any time of day on any day within twenty-four (24) hours of application. Watering in of chemicals shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) inch of water per application except as otherwise required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices. 
(4)  Irrigation systems may be operated at any time of day on any day for maintenance and repair purposes not to exceed twenty (20) minutes per hour per zone. 
(5)  Irrigation using a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle is allowed at any time of day on any day. 
(6)  Discharge of water from a water-to-air air-conditioning unit or other water-dependent cooling system is not limited. 
(7)  The use of recycled water from wet detention treatment ponds for irrigation is allowed anytime provided the ponds are not augmented from any ground or off-site surface water, or public supply sources. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-63. - Reclaimed water. 
Those reclaimed water customers of the city, who use water for landscape irrigation may do so only in accordance with the landscape irrigation schedules and the exceptions thereto. 
For the purpose of this section, a reclaimed water system includes systems in which the primary source is reclaimed water, which may or may not be supplemented from another source during peak demand periods. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-64. - Additional requirement. 
Any person who irrigates landscape with an automatic lawn sprinkler system installed after May 1, 1991, shall install, maintain and operate a rain sensor device or switch that overrides the irrigation system when adequate rainfall has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-65. - Variance from specific day of the week limitations. 
A variance from the specific landscape irrigation days or day set forth in section 21-61 may be granted by the water resources director or his/her designee if strict application of the scheduled days or day would lead to unreasonable or unfair results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that compliance with the scheduled days or day will result in a substantial economic, health or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or those served by the applicant. Where a contiguous property is divided into different zones, a variance may be granted hereunder so that each zone may be irrigated on different days or day than other zones of the property. However, in no event shall a variance allow a single zone to be irrigated more than two (2) days per week during Daylight Savings Time or more than one (1) day per week during Eastern Standard Time. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-66. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Law enforcement and code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of sections 21-61 through 21-64 of this division. In addition, the water resources director may authorize such employees, as the director deems appropriate, to issue written warnings as hereinafter identified to enforce the provisions of sections 21-61 through 21-64. 
Violation of any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
First violation: Written warning 
Second violation (within a six-month period of previous violation) (as authorized by section 47-224 of the Land Development Regulations): $100.00 
Third violation (within a six-month period of previous violation) (as authorized by section 47-224 of the Land Development Regulations): $250.00 
Subsequent violations (within a six-month period of previous violation) (as authorized by section 47-224 of the Land Development Regulations): $500.00 
In addition to the enforcement and penalties hereinabove provided, the water resources director or his/her designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of sections 21-41 through 21-46 by the discontinuance of water (including reclaimed water) service in the event of violation hereof. It is expressly understood that law enforcement and code enforcement officers are authorized, pursuant to sections 47-221 through 47-227, to issue citations and take such other action as authorized by said sections to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014, § 4, 7-8-14)  
Secs. 21-67—21-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-2012, adopted Aug. 16, 2012, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 21-76—21-84, 21-101—21-114, 21-131—21-145, 21-161—21-174, 21-191, 21-192, 21-211—21-219, 21-239, 21-240, and derived from Ord. No. 36-1998, adopted Oct. 13, 1998; and Ord. No. 9-2006, adopted Feb. 28, 2006. 
Cross reference— Sanitary sewer, § 53-60, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-76. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings designated in this subsection: 
Act or the Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
Approval authority shall mean the regional water management division director of the FDEP. 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the industrial user: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, "authorized representative" shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions of the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city prior to or together with the report being submitted. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expression in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
Best management practices (BMPs) shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Bypass shall mean the intentional diversion of wastewater streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Building sewer shall mean a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the WWF. 
Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the carbonaceous biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expression in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, parts 405—471, incorporated herein by reference. 
Categorical Industrial User shall mean an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
City shall mean the city manager or his/her representative. 
Color shall mean the optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred (100) percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
Composite sample shall mean the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on either an increment of flow or time. 
Consistent removal means the average of the lowest fifty (50) percent of the removal measured in accordance with Rule 62-625.420(2), F.A.C. 
Control authority shall mean the City of Titusville. 
Cooling water shall mean the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Daily maximum shall mean the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
Director shall mean the City of Titusville Water Resources Director. 
Discharge shall mean the introduction of pollutant[s] into a WWF from any nondomestic source. 
Environmental Protection Agency or USEPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
Enforcement response plan shall mean the document and written plan and procedures by which the City of Titusville implements an enforcement strategy applicable to the pretreatment program established herein. The plan applies to pretreatment program, as well as the fats, oils and grease program (section 21-240), violations and matters of program noncompliance. Stipulated penalties for specific and programmatic infractions are addressed in the plan. 
Existing source shall mean any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
Fats, oils and greases shall mean semisolid, viscous liquid, organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended. 
Food service establishments shall mean a commercial facility primarily engaged in preparing /serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs by the public, such as, but not limited to: restaurants, commercial kitchens, cafeterias, nightclubs, delicatessens, meat cutting-preparations, bakeries, bagel shops, grocery stores, caterers, hotels, schools, church kitchens, convenience stores, park/fraternal organization kitchens and hospitals. 
Grab sample shall mean a sample, which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and taken over a time period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Grease shall mean a material composed primarily of fats, oils, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil and grease shall be deemed as grease by definition. Grease may also include petroleum-based products. 
Grease interceptor shall mean an outside, underground, multi-compartment tank used for separating waterborne greases and grease complexes from wastewater and retaining such greases and grease complexes, therefore reducing the amount of fats, oil and grease in the wastewater prior to discharging into the wastewater treatment system. 
Grease trap shall mean a small (typically one hundred (100) gallons or less) indoor device designed to separate, trap or hold oil and grease substances to prevent their entry into the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps must be PDI (Plumbing and Drainage Institute) certified. 
Hauler shall mean one who transfers waste from the site of a user to an approved site for disposal or treatment. The hauler is responsible for assuring that all federal, state and local regulations are followed regarding waste transport. 
Holding tank waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
Industrial user shall mean a source of discharge. 
Industrial wastewater shall mean a nondomestic wastewater originating from a nonresidential source. 
Instantaneous limit shall mean the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference shall mean a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(a)  Inhibits or disrupts the WWF, its treatment process or operations, or its domestic wastewater residuals processes, use of disposal; and 
(b)  Is cause of a violation of any requirement of the WWF's permit (including any increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents use or disposal of domestic wastewater residuals in compliance with local regulations or rules of the department and F.S. ch. 403. 
Liquid waste hauler shall mean any person, firm, corporation or other entity that collects, pumps, transports and/or disposes of liquid wastes. 
Local limit shall mean specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City of Titusville upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
Measurement refers to the ability of the analytical method or protocol to qualify, as well as identify, the presence of the substance in question. 
Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
Municipal wastewater system or system shall mean a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyance which conveys wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the system. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342) by the federal government for a point source discharge of treated wastewater. 
New source shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the CWA which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located, 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or 
c.  The production of wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, shall be considered; 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(3)  Construction of a new source, as defined in Rule 62-625 F.A.C., has commenced if the owner or operator has begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including cleaning, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which are necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nondomestic pollutants shall mean any substances other than human excrement and household gray water (shower, dishwashing operations, etc.). Nondomestic pollutants include the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, CBOD, COD, toxicity, odor). 
Pass-through shall mean a discharge which exits the treatment plant effluent into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with an indirect discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the city's WWF's permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Permit shall mean a permit, including a no discharge (ND) permit, issued to a WWF in accordance with Chapter 62-620, F.A.C. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
pH shall mean a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units; neutral wastewaters are numerically equal to seven (7) and the number increases to show increasing alkalinity and decreases to show increasing acidity. 
Pollutants shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat-wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and agricultural wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, CBOD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment or treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a WWF. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by Rule 62-625.410(5), F.A.C. Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities for protection against surges or slug discharges that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the WWF. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with Rule 62-625.410, F.A.C. 
Pretreatment requirement shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection under F.S. ch. 403, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established in Rule 62-625.400, F.A.C. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain defined types of industrial wastewater; these prohibitions appear in section 21-101. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) shall mean a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Receiving stream or waters of the state shall mean all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Removal shall mean a reduction in the amount of pollutant in the WWF's effluent or alteration of the nature of a pollutant during treatment at the WWF. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological means and may be the result of specifically designed WWF capabilities or may be incidental to the operation of the treatment system. Removal as used in this chapter shall not mean dilution of a pollutant in the WWF. 
Residential type users shall mean users only contributing sewage wastewater to the municipal wastewater system. 
Sand/oil interceptor shall mean a device so constructed as to separate, trap and hold oils, grease, sand and grit substances from the wastewater discharged by a facility to prevent these substances from entering the sewer system. 
Septic tank waste shall mean the accumulation of wastewater solids and/or liquid in a septic tank. 
Sewage shall mean the used water and added waste of a community that is carried away by drains and sewers. 
Sewer property damage shall mean any degradation to the integrity of a private or municipal sewer collection or treatment system. 
Significant industrial user (SIU) shall mean, except as provided in (c) below, the following: 
(a)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under Rule 62-625.410, F.A.C. and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405—471, which has been adopted by reference in Chapter 62-660 F.A.C., and 
(b)  Industrial user that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the WWF (excluding domestic wastewater, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWF's operation or for violating pretreatment standards or requirements in accordance with Rule 62-625.500(2)(e), F.A.C. 
(c)  Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in (b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWF's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with Rule 62-625.500(2)(e), F.A.C. determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance or SNC shall mean a SIU shall be in significant noncompliance when any one (1) or more of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits are those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1); 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  When the SIU fails to accurately report noncompliance; 
(4)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city manager or his/her designee has determined caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of WWF personnel or the general public); 
(5)  When any discharge occurs which causes imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or results in the WWF's use of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(6)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(7)  When periodic compliance reports, baseline monitoring reports or other required reports are not received by the city manager or his/her designee within forty-five (45) days after the due date; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices which, in the opinion of the city manager or his/her designee may reasonably be expected to have a significant adverse impact on the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program, the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's reclaimed water quality or air emissions generated by the system, or has the potential to endanger the WWF employees. 
Slug discharge shall mean any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature released at a flow rate or concentration that causes a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in section 21-101. 
Slug load shall mean any pollutant (including BOD) released in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration that causes a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in section 21-101. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) shall mean a system used to identify various types of industries; now known as NAICS. 
Stormwater shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant shall mean one (1) of one hundred twenty-six (126) pollutants or a combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of section 307 (33 USC 1317) of the Act or 40 CFR 401.15 or other laws. 
Treatment plant shall mean that portion of the municipal wastewater system designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. 
Treatment plant effluent shall mean any discharge of pollutants from the municipal wastewater system into waters of the state. 
Upset shall mean an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temperate noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. 
User shall mean any person who contributes or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, including persons who contribute such waste from mobile sources. 
Wastewater shall mean the liquid- and water-carried industrial waste or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, mobile sources, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the municipal wastewater system. 
Wastewater facility or WWF shall mean any or all of the following: the collection/transmission system, the treatment plant, and the reuse or disposal system. 
Water resources director shall mean the person designated by the city manager to administer this article or his/her designee. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BMPs - Best management practices 
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand 
CBOD - Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
CIU - Categorical industrial user 
COD - Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency 
ERP - Enforcement response plan 
F.A.C. - Florida Administrative Code 
IWDP - Industrial waste discharge permit 
GPD - Gallons per day 
LC50 - Lethal concentration of fifty (50) percent of the test organisms 
L - Liter 
Mg - Milligrams 
Mg/l - Milligrams per liter 
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
O&M - Operation and maintenance 
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA - Resources Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC - Standard industrial classification 
SIU - Significant industrial user 
SNC - Significant noncompliance 
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.) 
TSS - Total suspended solids 
USC - United States Code 
WWF - Wastewater facility 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 28-2014, § 5, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-77. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect discharges of pollutants from nondomestic sources into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulation (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the WWF, which will interfere with the operation of the system. 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system, which will pass through the system inadequately treated, into receiving water or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
(3)  Ensure that the qualities of the wastewater treatment plant biosolids are maintained at a level that allows its marketability. 
(4)  Protect municipal personnel, who may come into contact with sewage, biosolids and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public. 
(5)  Prevent a hydraulic overload of the municipal wastewater system. 
(6)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system. 
(7)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system. 
(8)  Ensure the city complies with its permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements and other federal or state laws, which the municipal wastewater system is subject to. 
(b)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect discharge to the municipal wastewater collection system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(c)  This article shall apply within the city and to persons outside of the city who, by contract with the city, are included as users of the municipal wastewater system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located beyond the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this article, as well as any permits or orders issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-78. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager or his/her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager or his/her designee may be delegated to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-79. - Obstructions and enforcement penalties. 
(a)  No person shall do any act or thing which may impair or obstruct the flow of any public sewer or clog up any appurtenance thereof or place therein any substances, solid or liquid, other than the waste products for which the sewers are provided. 
(b)  Any owner or agent of improved property who shall fail or refuse to connect with the city sanitary sewer system as required by section 39-92, Land Development Regulations, Volume II, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-15. 
(c)  Any person violating any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-15. 
(d)  In addition to the remedies provided above, the city, at its option, shall have the authority to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring a building or structure to be connected to the city sanitary sewer system, and the city shall be entitled to collect attorney's fees and costs for obtaining such an order. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-80. - Repairs done by the city, charges to plumber. 
(a)  All repairs, except obstructions, to laterals in the streets will be affected by the city and when caused by the negligence of the plumber the cost of the repair shall be charged to him. 
(b)  The cost of removing all subsequent obstructions will be charged to the plumber ordering the work done. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-81. - Permit for excavation or interfering with system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any cut or trench in any highway, street reservation or public space in the city or to disturb or to remove any public works or materials therein, or to turn, lift or remove, raise or tamper with any cover of any manhole, basin, inlet or other appurtenance of any public sewer without a permit from the city manager, or his/her designee. Such permit must be kept on the work to be exhibited to persons authorized to examine the permit. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-82. - New sewers and connections. 
All new sewers and connections to the sewer system must be properly designed and constructed according to the standards established by the city, FDEP and EPA. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-83. - Wastewater system users. 
It shall be a violation of this article to discharge to the city's WWF any wastewater except as authorized by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-84. - Exemption from sewer service charges. 
No sewer service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person whatsoever, and the city, county and the state and every agency, department and instrumentality thereof which uses any sewer service from such sewer system shall be charged and pay therefore at the rates fixed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Secs. 21-85—21-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-101. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which, acting alone or in conjunction with other substances present in the WWF, shall cause interference with the operation or performance of the WWF or otherwise pass through the WWF. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system, whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards of any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no user may contribute the following substances to the system as defined in Chapter 62-625.400 F.A.C. 
(1)  Any liquid, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the municipal wastewater system. Included in this prohibition are waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius). At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides and any other substances which constitute a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause interference with the flow in a sewer but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
(3)  Any fat or greases, including, but not limited to, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in any amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. 
(4)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.0 or otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to the system, city personnel or equipment. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the municipal wastewater system, any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gases or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Any substance which may cause the treatment plant effluent, or any other residues, residuals or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the system cause the city to be in noncompliance with biosolids use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or other state requirements applicable to the biosolids use and disposal practices being used by the city. 
(8)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the city's permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten (10) percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius) or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius). 
(10)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the city manager or his/her designee in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(11)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause workers health and safety problems. 
(12)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with section 21-112. 
(13)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface discharge, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(14)  Any industrial wastes containing floatable fats, waxes, grease or oils or which become floatable at the wastewater temperature at the introduction in the treatment plant during the winter season; but in no case, industrial wastewater containing more than one hundred (100) mg/l of emulsified oil or grease. 
(15)  Nonbiodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oils, which form a persistent water emulsion, and nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds. 
(16)  Any residuals, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(17)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(18)  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents that will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
(19)  Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR 261, except as may be specifically authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(20)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to show a lethal concentration of fifty (50) percent (LC50) as determined by a toxicity test of ninety-six (96) hours or less, using a percentage of the discharge and aquatic test species chosen by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(21)  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
(22)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
(b)  Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these waters could be discharged to the municipal wastewater systems. All floor drains located in process or material storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
(c)  Where the industrial user can demonstrate, by the methods outlined below, that no discharges from floor drains contain high levels of pollutants that may exceed permit discharge limits at the point of connection to the municipal wastewater system, the connection of all floor drains to the pretreatment system will not be required. To demonstrate that floor drain discharges will not enter the connection to the municipal sewer system, the industrial user must purchase, install and maintain a permanent monitoring and diversionary flow system to be located no less than two hundred fifty (250) feet, or a lesser distance approved by the city manager or his/her designee, upstream from the point of connection to the municipal sewer system. Such a monitoring station and diversionary flow structure must include automatic sampling and detection equipment for all parameters with discharge limits, and a diversionary piping system that recycles or reroutes sewage flow that may contain high slugs or concentrations of pollutants that are detected by the continuous monitors. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-102. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
Any user shall be required to comply with the more restrictive standard of federal, state or local limits as may be changed from time to time. Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR 405-471 and incorporated herein and shall not discharge wastewater exceeding the categorical pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-103. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-104. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
Pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater with any parameter levels in excess of the allowable instantaneous limits. Maximum allowable limits for each parameter are identified in the City of Titusville Pretreatment Program Reference Manual. 
Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal. At his/her direction, the water resources director may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above. Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a single grab sample. 
The City of Titusville may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or zero discharge permits to implement local limits and the requirements of section 21-101. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-105. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater permits, specific toxic pollutants and more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the municipal wastewater system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 21-77 or the general and specific prohibitions in sections 21-101 through 21-104. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-106. - Special agreements. 
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which the industrial user may discharge to the system. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with Chapter 62-625.820, F.A.C. Industrial users may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from FDEP. Such a request will be approved only if the user proves that factors relating to the discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by FDEP when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with procedural and substantive provisions in Chapter 62-625.820 [F.A.C.]. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-107. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless an expressly specific limitation is developed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-108. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 21-101 within the time limitations specified by the water resources director. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-109. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city manager or his/her designee may require industrial users to restrict the industrial user's discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the municipal wastewater system and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Each person discharging, into the municipal wastewater system, greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day or greater than four (4) percent of the average daily flow in the system, whichever is lesser, shall install and maintain, on his property, at his expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty-four-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least fifty (50) percent of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the city manager or his/her designee. A wastewater permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager or his/her designee, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances, sand, or other harmful substances, except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city manager or his/her designee and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense. 
(d)  Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-110. - Spill prevention plans. 
(a)  Industrial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials that may interfere with the municipal wastewater system by developing spill prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's expense. Spill prevention plans, including the facilities and the operating procedures, shall be approved by the city before implementation of the plan. 
(b)  Industrial users who store hazardous substances shall not contribute to the municipal wastewater system after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless a spill prevention plan has been approved by the city. Approval of such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous substances. 
(c)  All SIUs who store chemicals or whose wastewater includes or could include pollutants in amounts sufficient to cause interference at a WWF treatment plant shall be required to establish a spill prevention plan which shall be approved by the director and reevaluated at least once every two (2) years. A copy of this plan shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee as part of the IWDP requirements. SIUs who have a history of serious leaks, spills or other accidental slug discharges of waste regulated by this division shall be subject on a case-by-case basis to a special IWDP condition or requirement for the construction of facilities or establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for such accidental discharge. Plans, specifications and operating procedures for such special IWDP conditions including description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges, description of stored chemicals and WWF notification procedures shall be developed by the user at the user's expense and submitted to the city manager or his/her designee for review. 
(d)  In the case of an accidental discharge or slug discharge by a user, it is the responsibility of that user to immediately inform the WWF of the incident by telephone. The caller shall specify the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume and corrective action taken. All users holding an IWDP shall be given accidental or slug discharge emergency instructions within their IWDP. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental or slug discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may be present when such accidental or slug discharges may occur are advised of the emergency procedures. 
(e)  Within five (5) calendar days following an accidental or slug discharge, the user shall submit to the city manager or his/her designee a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWF, fish kills, or other such damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(f)  Industrial users must notify the city manager or his/her designee immediately of changes that occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. The IU facility will reevaluate the need for a slug control plan, update the existing plan or other actions to prevent such discharges. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-111. - Tenant responsibility. 
Any person who shall occupy the industrial user's premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article in the same manner as the owner. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-112. - Hauled wastewater. 
Septic tank waste (septage) will not be accepted into the municipal wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-113. - Vandalism. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment or other part of the municipal wastewater system. Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to the sanctions set out in section 21-217. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-114. - Discharge prohibitions and temporary industrial waste discharge permits. 
No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved building sewer or other approved connection, unless he shall have been issued a temporary IWDP by the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager or his/her designee shall incorporate into the temporary IWDP conditions that are deemed reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division and the user shall be required to pay applicable charges and fees therefor. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Secs. 21-115—21-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER PERMIT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Permits, § 53-61, Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
 
Sec. 21-131. - Wastewater survey. 
When required by the city manager or his/her designee all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-132. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater into the city's sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a wastewater permit from the city manager or his/her designee. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the industrial user to the sanctions set out in section 21-217. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee of the obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state or local law. IWDP fees shall be as set forth in section 21-192. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee may require other nondomestic users to obtain wastewater permits as necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-133. - Existing connections. 
Any significant industrial user who discharges industrial waste into the municipal wastewater system prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within ninety (90) days after such date, apply to the city for a wastewater permit in accordance with section 21-136 and shall not cause or allow discharges to the system to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-134. - New connectors. 
Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the municipal wastewater system must obtain a wastewater permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharges. An application for this permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start-up date. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-135. - Extrajurisdictional industrial users. 
Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the city limits shall submit a permit application, in accordance with section 21-136, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. New significant industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such applications to the city manager or his/her designee ninety (90) days prior to any proposed discharge into the municipal system. Upon review of such application, the city manager or his/her designee may enter into a contract with the industrial user which requires the industrial user to subject himself to and abide by this article, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions herein. Alternately, the city manager or his/her designee may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against the user. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-136. - Application contents. 
(a)  In order to be considered for a wastewater permit, all industrial users required to have a permit must submit the following information on an application form approved by the city manager or his/her designee: 
(1)  Name, mailing address, and location (if different from the mailing address). 
(2)  Environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Standard industrial classification (SIC) code for pretreatment (the industrial user as a whole and any processes for which categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated). 
(4)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility, which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the municipal system. 
(5)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operations, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system. 
(6)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production. 
(7)  Type and amount of raw materials process (average and maximum per day). 
(8)  The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge. 
(9)  Time and duration of the discharge. 
(10)  Measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day by user, resulting in interference or pass-though, and such violation is likely to reoccur, develop and enforce specific effluent limits to the municipal system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined wastewater formula in Chapter 62-625.410(6)(a)1, 2 and 3 F.A.C. 
(11)  Daily maximum, daily average and monthly average wastewater flow rates including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any. 
(12)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state or local standards; pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; and nature and concentration of regulated process; and nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in each regulated process. Sampling and analysis will be undertaken in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
(13)  A statement reviewed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the user and certified to be a qualified professional, indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional pretreatment is necessary. 
(14)  If additional pretreatment or operations and maintenance will be required to meet the standards, then the industrial user shall indicate the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional treatment or operations and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply only to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such event includes hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, beginning operation and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to in the above shall exceed nine (9) months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed eighteen (18) months. 
b.  No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city manager or his/her designee, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(15)  In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the city manager or his/her designee or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
(16)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city manager or his/her designee to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(b)  An incomplete or inaccurate application will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-137. - Application signatories and certification. 
All permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-138. - Decisions. 
The city manager or his/her designee will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed permit application the city manager or his/her designee will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. Issuance of a permit shall not relieve the user from complying with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-139. - Contents. 
(a)  Wastewater permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the municipal wastewater system. 
(b)  Wastewater permits must contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A statement that indicates permit duration, which shall not exceed three (3) years. 
(2)  A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit. 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law. 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law. 
(5)  Statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and compliance schedules. 
(6)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be necessary. 
(c)  Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(2)  Limits on the instantaneous, maximum concentration of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
(3)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
(4)  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine discharge. 
(5)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
(6)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharge to the system. 
(7)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
(8)  Specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules. 
(9)  Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where self-monitoring indicates a violation. 
(10)  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(11)  Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports. 
(12)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified in section 21-171 and according to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(13)  Requirements for prior notification and approval by the city manager or his/her designee of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system. 
(14)  Requirement for the prior notification and approval by the city manager or his/her designee of any change in the manufacturing or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
(15)  Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges or any discharge that could cause any problems to the system. 
(16)  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit. 
(d)  Zero discharge permit. Nonresidential user shall be issued zero discharge permits, if deemed necessary, by the city manager or his/her designee, when the nonresidential user meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Could be subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.5 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, if processed wastewater were discharged to the city's sewer system; 
(2)  Generates processed wastewater that could result in a violation of City of Titusville Code section 21-101 and section 21-102 if it were to be discharged to the sewer system; 
(3)  Maintains, uses, stores, or transfers quantities of materials which, due to the quantity and/or characteristics of that material, pose a significant potential threat to the city's sewer system, human health, or the environment; or 
(4)  Has a significant history of violating federal, state or municipal environmental, health, or safety regulations or permit requirements. 
(e)  Industrial wastewater zero discharge permit holders: 
(1)  Shall have a spill control plan as outlined in section 21-110 of this chapter; 
(2)  Shall immediately notify the IPS by telephone in case of an accidental discharge, slug loads or spills of prohibited substances, as stated in section 21-101 and section 21-102, that may have entered the city sewer system; 
(3)  Shall submit compliance certification statements for each semiannual reporting period, signed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the industrial user stating that no discharge of process wastewater into the city sewer system has occurred; 
(4)  Shall be required to submit copies of hauling manifest (hazardous and nonhazardous) with each semiannual compliance certification report; 
(5)  May be subject to both announced and unannounced on-site compliance inspections by the City of Titusville industrial pretreatment personnel; 
(6)  May be subject to on-site and off-site compliance monitoring of the facility's wastewater discharge and will be billed by the city for the associated analytical costs; 
(7)  May be subject to discharge permit modification, suspension, or revocation and termination of sewer service in the event of any unauthorized discharge to the city's sanitary sewer system; 
(8)  Shall comply with the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and state hazardous waste and air regulations regarding the proper disposal of hazardous waste. Alternative waste disposal of process wastewater must not adversely impact any other environmental media such as air, any water bodies and/or soil. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-140. - Duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three (3) years. Each permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-141. - Applicants and public right to object. 
Upon receipt of the IWDP by the applicant, the applicant or public shall have twenty (20) days to file in writing, objections to any term or condition of the IWDP and: 
(1)  If the applicant or public files no objections within this time, the IWDP is deemed accepted. 
(2)  If the applicant or public files a timely objection and agreement cannot be reached, the city manager or his/her designee may submit to the city council the proposed IWDP conditions and the applicant's or public's written objections thereto at a meeting of the council. The city council shall schedule a public hearing within sixty (60) days following the submission by the city manager or his/her designee of the proposed IWDP and written objections, unless such time be extended for just cause shown to resolve any disputed matters relevant to such IWDP. The city manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant and other interested parties of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing scheduled before the city council. The council shall establish such special permit conditions, as it deems advisable to ensure the applicant's compliance with this division or applicable law or regulation and direct the water resources director to issue an IWDP to the applicant accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-142. - Modification. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee may modify the permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance. 
(3)  A change in the municipal wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's municipal wastewater system, city personnel, or the receiving waters. 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater permit. 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting. 
(7)  To correct typographical or other errors in their permit. 
(8)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(b)  The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification does not stay any permit conditions. The procedure for modifying a permit will be processed as provided in sections 21-136, 21-137 and 21-138. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-143. - Transferability. 
(a)  Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner or operator with prior approval of the city manager or his/her designee if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the city manager or his/her designee. The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which: 
(1)  States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operation and processes. 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater permit void on the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-144. - Revocation. 
(a)  Wastewater permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(2)  Falsifying the self-monitoring report. 
(3)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(4)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(5)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(6)  Failure to pay fines. 
(7)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(8)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(9)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey. 
(10)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(11)  Violation of any pretreatment standards or requirement or any terms of the permit or this article. 
(b)  Permits shall be void upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater permit. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-145. - Reissuance. 
A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with section 21-136 a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Secs. 21-146—21-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MONITORING, RECORDKEEPING 
 
Sec. 21-161. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
Users that become subject to new or revised categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with the following reporting requirements: 
(a)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of categorical pretreatment standard, or eighty (80) days after final administrative decision on a category determination under Rule 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the municipal system shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing users, which have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit to the city a report that contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
(b)  The information required by this section includes: 
(1)  Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated process. 
(4)  Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastewater formula set out in Chapter 62-625.410(6), F.A.C. 
(5)  Measurements of pollutants. 
a.  The industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
c.  Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations shall be reported. 
d.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Chapter 62-625.600(1)(e), F.A.C. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the IPS or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
e.  A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. All other pollutants will be measured by twenty-four-hour composite samples obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques. If flow proportional composite sampling is unfeasible, samples may be obtained through time proportional sampling or techniques or through four (4) grab samples if the user proves such a sample will be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling was approved and documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. 
f.  Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as appropriate. 
(6)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the industrial user as defined in section 21-76 and certified to, by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
(7)  Compliance schedule. 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
b.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
c.  The user shall submit a progress report to the city manager or his/her designee no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment or progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
d.  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-162. - Compliance deadline reports. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in subsection 21-161(b)(5) and (6). For industrial users subject to equivalent concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 62-625.410(4), F.A.C., this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sample period. 
(b)  All compliance reports must be certified in accordance with section 21-137 and signed by an authorized or duly authorized representative as defined in section 21-76. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-163. - Periodic compliance reports. 
All significant industrial users subject to pretreatment standards shall, at a frequency determined by the city manager or his/her designee but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. 
(a)  In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
(b)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-137. 
(c)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(d)  If an industrial user's monitoring results indicate a violation has occurred the industrial user must immediately notify the city manager or his/her designee and resample its discharge. The industrial user must report the results of the repeated sampling within thirty (30) days of discovering the first violation. 
(e)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulate d pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the city manager or his/her designee, using the procedures prescribed in subsection 21-161(b)(5) and (6) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 28-2014, § 6, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 21-164. - Report of changed conditions. 
(a)  Each industrial user is required to notify the city manager or his/her designee of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations of pretreatment systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater. The certified letter must be received by the city thirty (30) days prior to the proposed change date. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater permit application under section 21-136 if necessary. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee may issue a wastewater permit under section 21-138 or modify an existing wastewater permit under section 21-142. 
(d)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition until or unless the city manager or his/her designee has responded to the industrial user's notice. 
(e)  For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten (10) percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant shall be deemed significant. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-165. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of prohibited material or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent the discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  No industrial user who commences contribution to the system after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. 
(c)  In the case of an accidental or other discharge that may cause potential problems for the municipal wastewater system, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume if known, and corrective action taken by the user. 
(d)  Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability that may be imposed by this article. 
(e)  Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(f)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (c) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-166. - Reports from noncategorical users. 
All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city manager or his/her designee may require. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-167. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, and based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(b)  Wastewater samples collected for purposes of determining industrial user compliance with federal categorical pretreatment standards and requirements must be obtained using, where feasible, flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is unfeasible, the use of time proportional sampling will be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. The approval for alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. 
(c)  Sampling protocols must be followed in accordance with subsection 21-161(b)(5) of this article. 
(d)  Industrial users shall be required to monitor their discharge at a frequency determined by the city manager or his/her designee, but no less than twice a year, to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with applicable standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-168. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the IPS or other parties approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-169. - Monitoring charges. 
The city manager or his/her designee may recover the city's expenses incurred in collecting and analyzing samples of the industrial user's discharge by adding the costs to the industrial user's sewer charges. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-170. - Timing. 
Written reports are deemed transmitted at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-171. - Recordkeeping. 
Industrial users shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records and information required to be retained under Chapter 62-625.600(14), F.A.C. including documentation associated with best management practices. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. 
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this article or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-172. - Compliance monitoring; inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to carry out all inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by the industrial user, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users. Representatives of the WWF shall be authorized to enter any premises of any industrial user in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are required to be kept under Chapter 62-625.600(14)(a), (b), F.A.C., to ensure compliance with pretreatment standards. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, FDEP and USEPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The city, FDEP and USEPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of, on the industrial user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, and metering of the user's operations. 
(d)  The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user's expense. All devices used to measure shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the pretreatment specialist and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(g)  Where the industrial user is a Department of Defense (DOD) contractor and is required to follow the guidelines of the Industrial Security Manual (DOD 5220.22-M), the city recognizes that access onto the premises will be granted based on the provisions set forth in the DOD manual. The city also recognizes that, in certain circumstances, access to parts of these facilities can be denied and understands that such denial is strictly for protection of federally classified material. In such circumstance, the industrial user shall provide, to the best of his ability, any information regarding facility operations in these restricted areas that would assist personnel from the city to perform their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-173. - Search warrants. 
If the city manager or his/her designee has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof and if the city manager or his/her designee has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then, upon application by the city attorney, the county court judge or circuit court judge shall issue a search and seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the city manager or his/her designee in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety or if the industrial user consents, inspection shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-174. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Authority. In accordance with F.S. ch. 119, all information and documents submitted to the city are considered to be public information, and as such are available to the public for reading and copying. However, in accordance with F.S. § 403.111, any information submitted to the department (city) in accordance with this chapter may be claimed as confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be asserted at the time of submissions, by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at the time of submission, the city shall make the information available to the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information will be treated in accordance with the procedures in F.S. § 403.111. 
(b)  Effluent data. Effluent information and data provided to the control authority in accordance with this chapter shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Secs. 21-175—21-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CHARGES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 21-191. - Surcharge costs. 
Any discharge containing suspended solids, carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD), oil and grease, nitrogen or phosphorus in strength in excess of normal domestic waste are subject to a surcharge in accordance with the City of Titusville Pretreatment Program Reference Manual. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-192. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
(a)  Generally. The fees provided for in this section are separate and distinct from all other fees chargeable by the city. All fees shall become immediately due and owing to the city upon receipt of an invoice for rendition of services or expenditure by the city and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within forty-five (45) days after receipt. All such delinquent sums shall be subject to a late charge of fifteen (15) percent. Unpaid monthly service charges shall remain and constitute liens against the real property involved. Liens may be enforced by the city manager by any lawful means. 
(b)  Monthly pretreatment service charge. In addition to the monthly basic sewer charge, flow charge and strong waste surcharges provided for in section 21-191, each permitted user of the city's WWF shall be charged a monthly pretreatment service charge to provide for the partial cost recovery of the industrial pretreatment program established herein. The monthly billing for the pretreatment service charge shall either be by separate billing or included on the user's regular monthly utility bill. 
(1)  For the purposes of calculating this charge, users have been divided into three (3) groups as follows: 
a.  Group A. Industrial users processing groundwater or producing wastewater which contains primarily conventional pollutants or having industrial processes which do not involve the production of toxic metals (except for silver) or toxic organic-bearing wastewaters. This group includes users such as groundwater remediation sites, hospitals, colleges, laundries, seafood processors, etc., which require minimal amounts of city monitoring. 
b.  Group B. Industrial users producing wastewater that may bear toxic metals other than silver or toxic organics and who are not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards (i.e., noncategorical industries) and require an intermediate amount of city monitoring. 
c.  Group C. Industrial users producing process wastewater who are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards (i.e., categorical industries) and require a maximum amount of city monitoring. 
(2)  Where discharge to the POTW is directly related to the volume of potable water consumed and no significant quantities of wastewater are obtained from other sources, this charge will be based on the monthly average of the total number of gallons of potable service charged in the previous twelve (12) months and will be calculated at a rate of: 
a.  Group A users: $0.07 per thousand gallons of potable consumption. 
b.  Group B users: $0.245 per thousand gallons of potable consumption. 
c.  Group C users: $0.315 per thousand gallons of potable consumption. 
(3)  Where an industrial user is willing to purchase, install and properly operate and maintain a continuous sewer flow meter at the final point of discharge into the municipal sewer system, pretreatment charges will be assessed on the actual discharges as recorded by the sewer flow meter. Charges will be calculated at the same rates listed in subsection (b)(2) above. 
(c)  Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees. Each IWDP application filed pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for an initial application or a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a reissuance application. 
(d)  Temporary industrial wastewater discharge permit application fee. An application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged to permit temporary industrial wastewater discharges to cover review costs for items such as toxicity, potential for impact, designing of temporary IWDP and establishing of self-monitoring requirements. 
(e)  Reporting requirement late fee. A late fee for failure to fulfill periodic compliance reporting requirements within forty-five (45) days following the month in which they are required shall be at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per incident in addition to the cost of any demand activities initiated under section 21-172. Payment of the fee will not relieve the user from the necessity of fulfilling the reporting requirements; that is, the user will be required to pay the fee, conduct the necessary work effort required in his IWDP, and submit the completed report to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(f)  Fees for compliance monitoring, inspections, and surveillance. Costs incurred by the city for demand monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures necessary as a result of a violation and as defined in section 21-172 shall be chargeable and billed to the user whose conduct has necessitated such activity. 
(1)  The charge for sampling an industrial waste stream, grab or composite samples, shall be based on the current city burden labor rates of the involved team member(s) plus the cost of analysis for each parameter. 
(2)  The cost of analysis conducted by the city laboratory is provided in the City of Titusville Pretreatment Program Reference Manual. 
(g)  Administrative fees. Fees for administrative efforts such as, but not limited to, conciliation and show cause meetings not otherwise specifically covered in this section and the result of an administrative effort brought about as a result of a violation shall be chargeable at current City of Titusville burden labor rates. 
(h)  Assessment of damages caused by user. Any user causing damage to the city's WWF shall be liable to the city for such damage. Such damage shall include, but not be limited to, obstruction damage, or any other impairment to the sewer lines or sewer facility, killing of WWF's bio-organisms or contamination of reclaimed water or sludge. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Secs. 21-193—21-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 21-211. - Publication of significant noncompliant industrial users. 
The city shall annually publish, in the daily newspaper circulated in the area where the municipal wastewater system is located, a list of the industrial users, which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits are those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1). 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here are those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  When the SIU fails to accurately report noncompliance. 
(4)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city manager or his/her designee has determined caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of WWF personnel or the general public). 
(5)  When any discharge occurs which causes imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or results in the WWF's use of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(6)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(7)  When periodic compliance reports, baseline monitoring reports or other required reports are not received by the city manager or his or her designee within forty-five (45) days after the due date. 
(8)  When any violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, occur which, in the judgment of the city manager or his/her designee, may reasonably be expected to have a significant adverse impact on the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program, the wastewater treatment system, the quality of biosolids, the system's reclaimed water quality or air emissions generated by the system, or has the potential to endanger the WWF employees. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-212. - Administrative enforcement and abatement. 
(a)  Enforcement procedure. Whenever the city manager or his/her designee determines or has reasonable cause to believe that a discharge of wastewater has occurred in violation of the provisions of this article, the user's IWDP or any other applicable law or regulation, he shall evaluate the violation as prescribed below: 
(1)  If the city manager or his/her designee determines the violation does not constitute SNC, he/she shall issue the SIU a letter of violation stating the nature of the violation and requesting information or requiring corrective action within a specified time period. In response to this letter: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to respond within ten (10) working days of the date of the letter shall constitute SNC and the city manager or his/her designee may issue a notice of SNC as prescribed in subsection (a)(3) below. 
b.  If the SIU responds with an acceptable written explanation for the violation or corrects the violation within the prescribed time, the city manager or his/her designee may cease all further enforcement action. 
c.  If the SIU requests additional time to correct the violation, it shall submit a compliance schedule outlining what steps will be taken to gain compliance and prevent recurrence of the violation. The city manager or his/her designee shall evaluate this request, modify it as he/she deems necessary and may issue a short-term compliance schedule requiring the corrective actions to be made within a specified period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days as prescribed in subsection (a)(2) below. 
d.  If the SIU responds that pretreatment is required to correct the discharge problem, the city manager or his/her designee may issue a notice of SNC as prescribed in subsection (a)(3) below. 
(2)  Once a SIU has received a short-term compliance schedule: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to implement the short-term compliance schedule within ten (10) working days of receiving the schedule may cause the director to declare the SIU to be in SNC, issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (e) below. 
b.  If the SIU complies with the short-term compliance schedule within the specified time period, the director may cease further enforcement action. 
c.  If the city manager or his or her designee determines that compliance has not been achieved after the time specified in the short-term compliance schedule or no response has been received from the SIU, he/she may declare the SIU to be in SNC, issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (e) below. 
(3)  If the city manager or his/her designee determines the violation is SNC, the city may issue the SIU a notice of SNC stating the nature of the violation and requiring corrective action within a specified time period. The director may also include the SIU in the EPA's required annual listing of SIUs in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards in the local newspaper with the largest circulation. In response to the notice of SNC: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to respond within ten (10) working days of the date of the notice may cause the director to issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (e) below. 
b.  If the SIU requests additional time to correct the violation, it shall submit a compliance schedule outlining what steps will be taken to gain compliance and prevent reoccurrence of the violation. The city manager or his/her designee shall evaluate this request, modify it as he/she deems necessary and may issue a first compliance schedule requiring the corrective actions to be made within a specified period of time as prescribed in subsection (a)(4) below. 
(4)  Once a SIU has received a first compliance schedule: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to implement the first compliance schedule within ten (10) working days of receiving the schedule may cause the city manager or his/her designee to issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (e) below. 
b.  If the SIU complies with the final compliance schedule within the specified time period, the city manager or his/her designee may cease further enforcement action. 
c.  If the city manager or his/her designee determines that compliance has not been achieved after the time specified in the final compliance schedule or no response has been received from the SIU, he/she may revoke the IWDP, terminate the SIU's sewer service and seek to fine the SIU in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. 
(b)  Cessation of enforcement action. The cessation of any enforcement action by the city manager or his/her designee shall not relieve the SIU concerned of any costs of demand monitoring or other activities carried out by the city during the enforcement period. 
(c)  Conciliation meetings. At any point before or during the enforcement action, the city manager or his/her designee may, but shall not be required to, invite representatives of the SIU to a conciliation meeting to discuss the violation and methods of correcting the cause of the violation. Such additional meetings as the city manager or his/her designee deems advisable may be held to resolve the problem. If the SIU and the city manager or his/her designee can agree to appropriate remedial and preventive measures, they shall commit such agreement to writing with provisions or a reasonable compliance schedule and the agreement shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the user's IWDP. If an agreement is not reached through the conciliation process, the city manager or his/her designee may continue with the enforcement policy as outlined in subsection (a) above and take such other actions as he/she deems advisable to ensure the SIU's compliance with this division or other law or regulation. 
(d)  Violation notice issuance. Failure of the city manager or his/her designee to issue any letters of violation or notices of SNC referred to in subsection (a) above shall not in any way relieve the SIU from any consequences of a wrongful or illegal discharge. All notices of violation shall be issued to SIUs by certified mail, return receipt requested. Failure or refusal to accept any issued notices shall subject the SIU to immediate termination of its IWDP. 
(e)  Compliance schedules. All compliance schedules referred to in subsection (a) above shall contain specific actions to be taken by SIUs to correct the noncompliance within the time period also specified by the schedule. Schedules may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including, but not limited to, the installation and proper operation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices. 
(f)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. If the control authority performed the initial sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority will perform the repeat sampling and analysis within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the exceedance. The only exception to this requirement is if the control authority notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis within thirty (30) days. Repeat sampling by the industrial user is not required if: 
(1)  The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month; or 
(2)  The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user between the time when the industrial user performs its initial sampling and the time when the industrial user receives the results of the sampling. 
(g)  [Prohibited discharge.] The City of Titusville hereby expressly prohibits the discharge of hazardous waste into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-213. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the city manager or his/her designee finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article, permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city manager or his/her designee may issue an order to the industrial user directing him to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements. 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations or terminating the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-214. - Fines. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, permits and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be fined an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation/per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each business day during the period of violation. 
(1)  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the city manager or his/her designee shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of twenty (20) percent of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven (7) percent per month. Furthermore, these unpaid charges, fines and penalties, together with interest therefrom, shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. 
(3)  Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city manager or his/her designee to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where the city manager or his/her designee believes a request has merit, he/she shall convene a hearing on the matter within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request from the industrial user. If the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders to the fine. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-215. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee may suspend the wastewater permit of an industrial user for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, interferes with the operation of the municipal wastewater system, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any industrial user notified of a suspension of the wastewater permit is to immediately stop or eliminate his contribution. In the event of an industrial user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager or his/her designee shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager or his/her designee shall allow the industrial user to recommence the discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 21-216 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  An industrial user who is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the city manager or his/her designee prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 21-216. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. 
(b)  Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 21-216 why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-216. - Show cause hearing. 
The city manager or his/her designee may order any industrial user who causes or contributes to a violation of this article, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement to appear before the city manager or his/her designee and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user. Whether or not the industrial user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-217. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city manager or his/her designee, through the city's attorney, may petition the appropriate court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. The court shall grant an injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an adequate remedy at law. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Any industrial user who has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. In case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each business day during the period of the violation. 
(1)  The city manager or his/her designee may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(2)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, and any other factors as justice requires. 
(3)  Where appropriate, the city manager or his/her designee may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to the city and the industrial user's expense in undertaking the project is at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the civil penalty. 
(c)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Any user or industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any orders or permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty in an amount not to exceed the maximum amount permissible by law or at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both, for each offense. Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense and upon conviction of a specified violation, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations, and IWDPs issued hereunder. 
(2)  Any user or industrial user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater permits or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-218. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The city manager or his/her designee may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any orders, or a previous permit issued hereunder unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The city manager or his/her designee may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any orders, or a previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that he has obtained financial assurance sufficient to restore or repair damage to the municipal wastewater system caused by his discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, orders, or permits issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated his ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Sec. 21-219. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. An upset does not constitute noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(1)  Effect of an upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements in subsection (2) below are met. 
(2)  Conditions necessary for demonstrating of upset. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of an upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The industrial user's facility was, at the time of the upset, being properly operated; and 
c.  The industrial user has orally submitted the following information to the city manager or his/her designee within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, with a written submission to be provided within five (5) days: 
1.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance, 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue, and 
3.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence or the noncompliance. 
(3)  Industrial user responsibility in case of an upset. The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method or treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 21-101 of this article or the specific prohibitions in section 21-104 to this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during the pass-through or interference, or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City of Titusville was regularly in compliance with its NPDES and FDEP permits, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
The reference in this subsection 21-219(b) refers only to specific prohibitions actually listed in the ordinance. Pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(2) does not apply to pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the WWF, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a close-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celcius) using the test methods specified in CFR 40 261.21. 
(c)  Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of an individual user's treatment facility shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against the industrial user if the user can demonstrate that such a bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or sewer property damages. In order to be eligible for the affirmative defense, the industrial user must demonstrate that there was no feasible alternative to the bypass and submit notice of the bypass as required by Chapter 62-625.860, F.A.C. 
(d)  The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city manager or his/her designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violation will generally be in accordance with the City of Titusville enforcement response plan. However, the city manager or his/her designee may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city manager or his/her designee is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
Secs. 21-220—21-238. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PRIVATE LIFT STATION 
 
Sec. 21-239. - Requirements. 
(a)  All private lift stations that discharge into the city's collection system shall be required to pay an annual permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  A privately owned lift station application shall be filled out in its entirety for each permit issued. 
(c)  All private lift stations that discharge into the city's collection system are required to be inspected annually by the City of Titusville. The city will provide the owner of the privately owned lift station a written report that will include recommendations for repair and/or preventative maintenance. Any and all repairs that are required to maintain the lift station functions are the responsibility of the lift station owner. 
(d)  As a satellite or tributary collection system, privately owned lift stations are required to operate under the requirements of the city's NPDES and FDEP permits. As such, privately owned lift stations are required to be properly operated, maintained and managed to prevent all unauthorized discharges or sanitary sewage that may affect the quality and use of the waters of the United States, as defined in the Clean Water Act (USEPA). 
(e)  Privately owned lift stations are required to be secure. It is the responsibility of the private lift station owner to prohibit unauthorized access to all private lift station components and private sewer lines. 
(f)  Any unauthorized discharges from privately owned lift stations must be reported to the City of Titusville, Florida (the control authority) and health and environmental authorities within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence. 
(g)  Violations of this section are subject to fines as outlined in sections 21-191, 21-192 and 21-214 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
DIVISION 8. - GREASE INTERCEPTORS 
 
Sec. 21-240. - Requirements. 
(a)  [User's discharge permit.] All facilities that commercially prepare food for distribution shall be required to obtain a user's discharge permit from the city manager or his/her designee for the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. All preexisting facilities that change ownership are required to reapply for a user's discharge permit. 
(1)  All newly constructed facilities, excluding single-family homes, will be required to install an approved, external grease trap with a minimum size of 750-gallon capacity. All grease trap designs will require review and approval by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(2)  Existing facilities without an external grease trap are required to install an external grease trap to meet WWF discharge compliance. Other permits issued for internal grease traps will be issued on a case-by-case basis. The only factor that makes the use of an internal interceptor(s) acceptable would be an inadequacy of space, along with the size of the facility, for the installation of an external grease trap as specified. All other preexisting facilities that change ownership will be required to install external grease traps. 
(3)  If these remaining facilities fail to meet discharge requirements they will be subject to discharge fines based on the effluent parameters. Failure to submit payment for such discharge violations or required compliance measures set forth by the pretreatment coordinator, within the stipulated timeframe, will result in termination of water supply to the facility by the city manager or his/her designee, resulting in facility closure by the department of health. 
(b)  Alternative treatment. The use of any enzymes, chemicals, or other products designed to emulsify, liquefy or further render grease soluble for the purpose of cleaning drainlines or circumventing the intended design of the grease trap, is prohibited. All potential vendors with products claiming biological activity will need to submit product-marketing literature, material safety data sheets and a sample of the product to the WWF for review and approval. Product evaluation under actual field-testing may be required by the WWF. The vendor or manufacturer of the biological product will reimburse all expenses for WWF field training [testing]. Final product approval will be given in writing by the WWF. 
(c)  Garbage disposal installation. The installation of garbage disposals into any food facility is prohibited. 
(1)  Grease trap design. Grease traps are required to comply with current city design and installation specifications. The specifications are available from the City of Titusville Water Resources Department. Any new or existing facility that is required to install a grease trap is required to submit the grease trap design to the city for review. The grease trap design must be approved by the city prior to construction and/or installation. 
(2)  Interceptor maintenance report. It will be the responsibility of the facility to contract with a local licensed septic pumping contractor and maintain a record of each grease trap pump-out. It is required that each grease trap be inspected and certified on an annual basis by both the licensed septic pumping contractor and the designee of the city manager. A grease trap pump-out will be required on a monthly basis or as required by past grease production. All grease trap pump-out records and annual grease trap inspection receipt will need to be displayed along with health department inspection certification. Failure to do so will result in required grease trap pump-out, and if not complete within ten (10) days, a fine of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) or a fine up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) if not completed within thirty (30) days. If upon inspection, the grease trap is found to have over eleven (11) inches of solids in the bottom of the grease trap or a grease cap of over three (3) inches or the facility exceeds discharge compliance levels, based upon grease trap effluent sampling, the pretreatment representative can require a grease trap pumped out, cleaned and transported to a designated disposal site. Each facility is responsible for their wastewater discharge quality and the proper disposal of their grease trap contents. Failure to comply with either effluent discharge levels or proper legal disposal of grease trap contents may result in possible fines not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(3)  Program monitoring. It is the responsibility of each facility to maintain their effluent discharge quality. Failure to do so may result in monthly effluent sampling by the pretreatment department. Surcharge and fines shall be assessed on the parameters listed in the City of Titusville Pretreatment Program Reference Manual. Each violation will be based on the total water consumption and the impact on the wastewater collection and treatment system by the facility. All surcharges and/or fines will be added to the facility's monthly water bill for payment. 
(Ord. No. 24-2012, § 1, 8-16-12)  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on collection of certain utility bills, F.S. § 180.135. 
 
Sec. 21-241. - Schedule of water and sewer charges. 
(1)  No free service. No water or sewer service shall be furnished free of charge to any person whatsoever, and the city and each and every agency, department or instrumentality which uses the water system shall pay therefor at the rates as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
Therefore hereby established is a uniform schedule of rates and charges for the use or availability for use of sewer and water service as follows. 
(2)  Service availability charge. All owners and/or tenants, agents, lessors, lessees, operators of residential units, multidwelling units and commercial units, occupied or unoccupied, operating and nonoperating, shall subscribe to and pay for the availability of water and sewer service in the form of a fixed monthly charge. 
(3)  Rates. Water and sewer users will be charged based upon their consumption per thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof at the applicable rates listed below plus a service availability charge. The schedule of fees may be obtained from the Water Resources Department or the City of Titusville website. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Nonresidential sewer-only customers with a one-inch or greater service line. The bill for nonresidential sewer-only customers whose estimated consumption would have required a water service line of one (1) inch or greater shall be determined by the water resources director. This determination shall be based upon the estimated consumption at the applicable commercial/industrial usage rate, taking into consideration the nature of the business, the volume of the effluent and such other factors to determine the volume of sanitary sewage discharged into the city's wastewater treatment system. Any nonresidential customer dissatisfied with the volume estimated by the water resources director shall have the right to appeal the decision to the board of adjustments and appeals as provided for in section 31-51 of the Land Development Regulations, Volume II. In addition, the nonresidential bill will include the wastewater service availability charge applicable to the specific size service connection. 
(d)  Failure to connect. Owners or agents of property who have failed to connect to the city sanitary sewer system after a period of one (1) year from the time service is made available shall pay charges based as follows: The sanitary sewer service charge for customers that are connected to the city water system shall be computed according to the rate schedule in subsection (b) above. Those customers not connected to the city water system but where after a period of one (1) year from the time sanitary sewer service is made available shall pay the amount specified in subsection (b)(4). 
(e)  Over-strength surcharge. 
1.  Sewer system users whose wastewater has a greater strength than normal domestic sewage shall have a surcharge added to such user's monthly sewer service charge. The surcharge for operation and maintenance, including replacement, is: 
$0.211 per pound BOD; 
$0.126 per pound SS. 
Any user who discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent of the sludge from the sewer plant or any user who discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the city water resources director, based on the excess costs incurred by the city in treating the over-strength wastewater. 
2.  All users contributing more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month and whose waste strength is greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg BOD/l or two hundred fifty (250) mg SS/l shall be subject to monitoring and inspection and sampling requirements as provided in section 21-76 et seq. of this Code, and each user may be required to prepare and file a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the wastewater characteristics including the methods of sampling and measurement to obtain these data, and these data shall be used to calculate the user charge for that user. The water resources director shall have the right to gain access to the waste stream and take samples. Should the water resources director do so, and should the results be substantially different as determined by the water resources director from the data submitted by the user, the user charge for that user shall be revised for the next billing cycle/period. 
3.  Any user who feels his user charge is unjust and inequitable may make written application to the water resources director requesting a review of his user charge. The written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and/or strength of his wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. Review of the request shall be made by the city manager and if substantiated, the user charges for that user shall be recomputed based on the revised flow and/or strength data, and the new charges shall be applicable to the next billing cycle/period. 
The city shall annually review the over-strength surcharge in order to ensure that the rate reflects the excess cost incurred by the city in treating the over-strength waste. 
(f)  Separate water meters. Separate water meters shall only be allowed for irrigation and water-cooled air conditioning, as follows: 
1.  Where the city provides sewer services, all customers with water-cooled air conditioning shall equip the air conditioning water supply with a single, separate city water meter, including all associated costs and fees. The city meter site shall be subject to city approval and the customer shall make the meter site fully accessible to the city for all field activities, even if the site is located on private property. 
2.  Where the city provides sewer service, the rate charged for the separate air conditioning water meter shall be the applicable water rate plus twenty (20) percent of the sewer rate. If there is no separate city water meter, the rate charged for water used by air conditioning shall be the applicable water rate plus the full sewer rate. 
3.  For all other conditions, the rate charged for separate water meters shall be the irrigation rate. 
(g)  Adjustments to bills. In order to receive an adjustment, the customer must apply within sixty (60) days after receipt of the bill for which the customer is asking the adjustment. 
1.  When a customer's water bill is unusually high due to water used by the city, or some fault of the city, the customer's water and sewer bill should be adjusted to a normal bill based on the past six (6) months average usage. 
Where a meter is found to be faulty, or an error in meter reading is discovered, an adjustment shall be given to the customer based on the above-stated procedure. The customer may request a water meter to be pulled and tested, for a fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00) or actual cost for a meter two (2) inches or greater in size paid by the customer. If the testing demonstrates that the meter is not accurate, the fee will be refunded. 
Where there is a leak or water loss on the customer's side of the meter, substantiated by a plumbing repair bill, then the sewer-only portion of the bill will be adjusted to the customer's average usage for the for the last six (6) months prior to the leak, providing that the water did not enter the sanitary sewer system. Only one (1) such adjustment shall be given within a twelve-month period. There shall be no adjustment when water loss enters the sanitary sewer system (example: running toilets, faucets, etc.). 
2.  During the period of review the city shall not terminate the water and sewer service. After final decision by the city or the board of adjustments and appeals, the bill shall be paid in full within thirty (30) days. If a customer is not satisfied with the decision of the city, the customer may appeal the decision to the board of adjustments and appeals within thirty (30) days of receipt of the city decision. The appeal will be processed as provided for in the Land Development Regulations, Volume II. 
3.  The city is authorized to adjust the sewer portion of the utility bill for the filling of a swimming pool in the following instances: 
a.  Before the initial filling of the pool, the owner shall, in writing, notify the utility billing division of his intent to request a sewer adjustment and the design capacity of the pool and an intended date of filling the pool. The owner shall request that his meter be read, and the city shall read the meter before and after the filling of the swimming pool. The city shall receive a service charge of ten dollars ($10.00) for reading the meter. After the pool has been filled and the conditions above have been complied with, the utility billing manager may adjust the sewer portion of the bill. 
b.  After the initial filling of the swimming pool, the owner shall, in writing, notify the utility billing division of his intent to request an adjustment to the sewer portion of a utility bill. A request for adjustment for refilling of a swimming pool may only be made once every twelve (12) months and for one (1) refilling within the twelve-month period. The request in writing shall state the quantity or capacity of the pool. If the above conditions are complied with, the utility billing manager may authorize a sewer adjustment. 
c.  If a customer is not satisfied with the decision of the utility billing manager, the customer may appeal the decision to the board of adjustments and appeals within thirty (30) days of receipt of the utility billing manager's decision. The appeal will be processed as provided for in Land Development Regulations, Volume II. 
(Ord. No. 20-1990, § 3(33.40), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 33-1990, § 1, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 32-1991, § 1, 9-10-91; Ord. No. 31-1993, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 21-1994, § 1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 29-1995, § 1, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 26-1996, § 1, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 33-1998, § 1, 9-29-98; Ord. No. 33-2001, § 1, 9-20-01; Ord. No. 41-2001, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 19-2002, § 1, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 56-2003, § 1, 9-25-03; Ord. No. 60-2004, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 45-2006, § 1, 9-21-06; Ord. No. 47-2007, § 1, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 38-2008, § 1, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 34-2009, § 1, 9-24-09; Ord. No. 19-2010, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 24-2011, § 1, 9-14-11; Ord. No. 32-2012, § 1, 9-18-12; Ord. No. 29-2013, § 1, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 46-2014, § 1, 9-17-14; Ord. No. 33-2015, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 20-2016, § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 23-2016, § 5, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 30-2018, § 1, 7-24-18)  
Sec. 21-242. - Hydrant fees. 
There is hereby established a monthly hydrant fee of one dollar ($1.00) per water customer for outside-the-city users of the city water system. All revenues derived from the hydrant fee shall be recorded in a separate account of the city. Out of the revenue the city may pay the cost of installing new hydrants, to the extent funds are available, which shall represent eighty cents ($0.80) of the one-dollar charge and pay the cost of maintenance and repair outside-the-city fire hydrants and pay the cost of water used or consumed in fighting fires from the hydrants for outside-the-city residents, which represents twenty cents ($0.20) of the one-dollar charge. 
(Ord. No. 20-1990, § 3(33.50), 6-19-90; Ord. No. 21-1994, § 1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 33-2001, § 1, 9-20-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 33-2001, § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2001, states that the provisions of § 21-242 shall take effect with the first billing cycle of Oct. 2001.  
Sec. 21-243. - Water meter charges. 
The city shall charge and receive from all consumers to whom service is furnished the charges and meter deposits as set forth herein for connecting to the water main, carrying the water line to meter and installation of the key curb cock with service box. All expenses involved in connecting from the property or building to the meter shall be borne by the consumer. Consumers who are requesting new service must submit an "application for service" and agree to pay a deposit based on previous credit history, if applicable, with the City of Titusville's utility department. Each applicant will be assessed a rating of either "high risk", "moderate risk", or "low risk" and the amount of the meter deposit will be based upon the assigned rating. In the event that the applicant does not have sufficient credit history to determine their utility credit risk, the "moderate risk" deposit will be required for service. The schedule of fees may be obtained from the Water Resources Department of the City of Titusville website. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Deposits. The deposits set forth by resolution of the city council are the deposits required for "moderate risk" applicants. "Low risk" applicants shall pay fifty (50) percent of the stated rate and "high risk" applicants shall pay one hundred fifty (150) percent of the stated rate. 
(1)  Utility deposits for single-family residents, duplexes, triplexes, and other residential complexes with no master meter will be retained by the city for a period of thirty-six (36) months, at which time it may be returned providing that the customer's payment record justifies such return and the utility service at that location or any location serviced for the customer has not been terminated because of nonpayment during the preceding thirty-six-month period. Once a deposit has been refunded, the individual customer shall be considered to have established credit. If service is terminated after the deposit is refunded, a new deposit will not be required for a termination for nonpayment if the customer has not been terminated during the previous three (3) years; otherwise a new deposit will be required and the account classified as "low risk." If service is terminated within six (6) months from the time the account is classified as "low risk", the customer will be required to pay the required deposit for the "moderate risk" category, and the account will then be classified as such. If the customer is cut-off more than once in a six-month period, the customer will be required to have the "high risk" deposit on file and the account classified as such. Upon the closing of an account, the deposit shall be applied to the final bill. 
(2)  Utility deposits for commercial, industrial, multiple units master metered customers will be retained by the city until final settlement of the customer's account, at which time such deposit shall be applied to the final bill. 
(3)  A deposit may be transferred from one (1) service location to another providing the services remain in the name of the person or entity that made the initial deposit. If a person or entity has more than one (1) utility deposit with the city for service at two (2) or more locations, such deposits may be applied against any delinquent existing account in the same depositor's name. The city shall not allow another utility account to be opened by the customer at another location until all amounts owed have been paid in full. 
(c)  Temporary service. Contractors or any other consumer desiring water on a temporary basis will be allowed to use water from a fire hydrant only after approval is received from the supervisor of the water/sewer field operations division and after making application and paying a fifteen-dollar administrative charge plus a one thousand-dollar deposit with the utility billing division. All water dispensed will be metered through a city-owned water meter. The deposit shall be held by the city until the meter is returned and all water charges satisfied, at which time the deposit will be returned. 
Contractors will be required to return the meter to the water/sewer field operations division every thirty-day period, until the meter is returned permanently, in order for the meter to be read, appropriate charges determined and bill prepared. In an instance where the meter is lost or misplaced by the contractor, the deposit will automatically be forfeited. Charges will be estimated and the contractor billed and notified that failure to observe responsibilities could be cause for denying service in the future. 
(d)  Administrative charge. Each new customer, transfer or reconnection shall pay an administrative charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per customer for the turn-on plus applicable meter deposit based on the tiered rates as set forth in subsection 21-243(b). 
(e)  Change of occupancy. When a change of occupancy takes place on any premises supplied by the city with water and wastewater service, written notice thereof shall be given at the office of the city not less than three (3) days prior to the date of change by the outgoing customer. The outgoing customer shall be held responsible for all water and wastewater service rendered on such premises until such written notice is so received by the city and the city has had reasonable time to discontinue the water and wastewater service. However, if such written notice has not been received, the application of such a succeeding occupant for water and wastewater service will automatically terminate the prior account. The customer's deposit may be transferred from one (1) service location to another, if both locations are supplied water and wastewater service by the city. The customer's deposit may be transferred from one (1) name to another as long as the customer makes a written request. 
(f)  Rental unit bills. Bills for service to rental units shall be payable by the owner of the rental units, unless the tenant or prospective tenant contracts directly with the city for service. In the event the tenant or prospective tenant of a rental unit contracts directly with the city for service, then upon termination of either the tenancy or termination of active water service, bills for service shall again be payable by the owner of the rental unit until such time as new tenant contracts directly with the city for service. The owner of rental units shall be obligated to promptly notify the city of the commencement and termination of any tenancy of its rental units. 
(g)  Access to premises. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing, maintaining, inspecting, or removing the city's property or the performance under or termination of the city's agreement with the customer and under such performance shall not be liable for trespass. 
(h)  Change of customer's installation. No changes or increases in the customer's installation, which will materially affect the proper operation of the pipes, mains, or stations of the city, shall be made without written consent of the city. The customer shall be liable for any change resulting from a violation of this rule. 
(i)  Utility tampering prohibited. Whenever there is evidence of meter tampering, meter bypassing, self-restored services, or unauthorized use of fire hydrants, the customer shall pay a utility tampering fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the cost of consumption and repairs. Where the estimated usage is undefined, due to consumption without a water meter present, estimated usage shall bill at a rate of five thousand (5,000) gallons per month. 
(Ord. No. 20-190, § 3(33.60(b)); Ord. No. 21-1994, § 1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 11-1996, § 1, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 33-1998, § 1, 1-9-98; Ord. No. 33-2001, § 1, 9-20-01; Ord. No. 60-2004, § 2, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 15-2006, § 1, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 1-2011, § 1, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 39-2015, § 1, 11-10-15; Ord. No. 23-2016, § 6, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 39-2017, § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 21-244. - Utility bills; date payable; delinquent accounts. 
(a)  Delinquent bills. Bills are due when rendered and become delinquent if not paid within fifteen (15) days after the bill has been mailed or presented to the customer for payment. Water and wastewater service may not be discontinued until ten (10) working days after a written notice of the delinquent payment has been mailed or presented to the customer. A charge of five dollars ($5.00) or one and five-tenths (1.5) percent per month or eighteen (18) percent per annum of the delinquent amount, whichever is greater, will be levied to the customers' account for this notice. If the bill is not paid by the thirtieth day after billing, the water service shall thereupon be terminated without further notice. Service shall be restored only after the city has received payment for all past-due bills, current bills and a reconnect charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) has been collected from the customer. There shall be no liability of any kind against the city for the discontinuance of water and wastewater service to a customer for that customer's failure to pay the bills on time. Partial payment of a bill for water and wastewater service rendered will not be accepted by the city, except by the city's agreement thereof. 
(b)  Liens. Any unpaid utility bill shall constitute a lien against the property, which lien shall be prior to all other liens on such property except the liens of state, county and municipal taxes and shall be on a parity with the lien of such state, county and municipal taxes. Such lien, when delinquent for more than thirty (30) days, may be foreclosed by the city in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Florida for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. The attorney's fees and costs of foreclosure shall be taxable. 
(c)  Schedule of miscellaneous service charges. In addition to the charges described previously, the city shall implement the following service charges for the purpose of recovering the estimated cost to the city for providing such service. 
(1)  The city shall charge and receive from all consumers requesting connection to the city wastewater system a tap installation fee. The fee shall be structured such that the city is reimbursed for the labor, materials and overhead associated with performing a sewer tap installation requested by such consumer. The fee charged will be the actual cost, as determined by the city to the consumer, incurred by the city. 
(2)  If a customer requests that a meter be re-read for any reason, the city shall re-read the meter free of charge once within a twelve-month period. If the customer requests this service more than once in a twelve-month period a service charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be applied to the customer's account. If the reading is found to be incorrect the service charge will be waived. 
(3)  For an un-metered connection to the city's water system for the purpose of providing fire protection service on a stand-by basis, there shall be a charge. The schedule of fees may be obtained from the Water Resources Department or the City of Titusville website. 
(Code 1963, §§ 19-11, 28-5; Ord. No. 21-1994, § 1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 33-1998, § 1, 1-9-98; Ord. No. 12-2000, § 1, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 33-2001, § 1, 9-20-01; Ord. No. 10-2003, § 1, 2-4-03; Ord. No. 23-2016, § 7, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 21-245. - Emergency conservation rate. 
Upon issuance of a water shortage order or water shortage emergency order by the St. Johns River Water Management District or water supply system emergency, the mayor, or the vice mayor in the absence of the mayor, shall have the authority to invoke by proclamation, an increase in the monthly water usage charge rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons for all customer classes. The emergency conservation rate shall not exceed a thirty-percent increase in the water usage charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons at any usage tier rate. 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, § 4, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 21-246—21-265. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, § 17-31 et seq.; stormwater management, § 42.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II; flood damage prevention, § 44.00 et seq., Land Development Regulations, Vol. II. 
 
Sec. 21-266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beneficiaries of stormwater management utility services shall mean all developed land in the city which benefit by the acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater systems and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto, or which will ultimately benefit by the city's stormwater management program. Such benefits may include, but are not limited to, the provision of adequate systems and programs to ensure the proper collection, control, conveyance, detention, retention, treatment, and release of stormwater runoff, reduction of hazards to property and persons, and improvement of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
Condominium unit shall mean an individually owned apartment with one (1) or more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, or a property identified as condominium by the Brevard County Property Appraiser. 
Developed land shall mean all property altered from a natural state by grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures, impervious surfaces or drainage works so that stormwater runoff from the property is changed in quantity, quality, or point of discharge from that which would occur in the natural condition. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall serve as a reference from which an equitable distribution of the cost of services and facilities can be made among all properties in the city through a stormwater management service charge rate methodology. The equivalent residential unit in the city for the purpose of service charge ratemaking has been determined through engineering analysis to be a gross area of eleven thousand (11,000) square feet and a coefficient of runoff of .30. Because the hydrologic response of all detached single-family residential properties is substantially similar to this equivalent unit definitions, they shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit. 
Hydrologic response of a property shall mean the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the size, shape, topography, vegetation, superficial geologic conditions, antecedent moisture conditions, groundwater conditions, and presence of impervious or semi-impervious surfaces on the property. 
Impervious surfaces shall mean those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration or stormwater runoff patterns which existed prior to development. 
Intensity of development factor shall mean a decimal factor employed in a stormwater utility service charge rate methodology which generally reflects the degree to which conditions on a property affect the volume and timing of stormwater runoff. The intensity of development factor is similar to the coefficient of runoff used in hydrologic engineering analysis to estimate the peak rate of runoff. 
Nonresidential unit shall mean any developed property not fitting the definition of single-family residential unit contained in this section shall be deemed and treated as a nonresidential unit for the purposes of stormwater management service charges. Nonresidential units shall include, but not be limited to, apartments, boarding houses, hotels and motels, houses used primarily for commercial purposes, commercial properties which include dwelling units, storage areas, railroad rights-of-way, parking lots, park and recreation properties, public and private schools, hospitals and convalescent centers, office buildings, lands in agricultural use which alters the natural hydrologic response, water reservoirs and wastewater treatment plants. 
Single-family residential unit shall be located on one (1) or more legal lots as defined by the city zoning code, and shall include houses, manufactured housing and motor homes located on individual lots, and property identified as a single-family residence by the Brevard County Property Appraiser. 
Townhouse shall mean single-family dwelling units on independent lots constructed in a series or group involving two (2) or more units with common party walls, and property identified as townhouse by the Brevard County Property Appraiser. 
Undeveloped land shall mean land in an unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic condition comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different that than which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-4), 11-13-90; Ord. No. 9-1992, § 1, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 20-2017, § 1, 8-22-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 21-267. - Findings. 
The city council hereby makes the following findings: 
(1)  The professional engineering and management analysis submitted to the city properly defines the stormwater management needs of the city. 
(2)  Given these needs, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the conservation, management, maintenance, protection, control, use, and enhancement of stormwater in the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(3)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits of the city is consistent with the present and future stormwater management needs of the community. The stormwater management needs generally include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management services and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all property owners within the city in a variety of ways. 
(4)  The city presently owns and operates a stormwater management system which has been developed over a number of years. The future usefulness of that system and of additions and improvements thereto rests on the ability of the city to effectively conserve, manage, protect, control, use and enhance stormwater and water resources generally in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program. 
(5)  Formation of a stormwater management utility; establishment of a separate enterprise fund for accounting of stormwater management program revenues, expenditures, assets and liabilities, earnings and obligations; and adoption of various stormwater management rates, fees, charges, rentals, fines and penalties are necessary to meet the needs identified in the professional engineering and management analysis. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-1), 11-13-90)  
Sec. 21-268. - Creation. 
Pursuant to the home rule power of article VIII, 2(b) Florida Constitution, F.S. ch. 166, and F.S. § 403.0893, the city does hereby establish a stormwater management utility. The utility shall be responsible for the city's stormwater management program and system and for all activities and facilities necessary to provide control of stormwater quantity and quality in the city. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-2), 11-13-90)  
Sec. 21-269. - Enterprise fund account. 
There is hereby established a stormwater management utility enterprise fund which shall be used solely for the independent and separate accounting of all revenues, expenditures, assets and liabilities, earnings, and obligations of the stormwater management utility. Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the city council through an ordinance, the revenues and other assets of the stormwater management utility shall be used only for the conservation, management, protection, control, use and enhancement of stormwater in the city and the acquisition, administration, construction, acquisition of equipment, management, maintenance, extension and improvement of the public stormwater systems and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-3), 11-13-90)  
Sec. 21-270. - Service area, scope of responsibility and service level objective. 
The stormwater management utility shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the conservation, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater systems to collect, control, convey, store, detain, retain, recharge, and treat stormwater and through regulation of stormwater management systems on private property. It shall be the long-term objective of the city to provide a comparable and consistent level of stormwater service to similarly situated properties through the service area. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-5), 11-13-90)  
Sec. 21-271. - General financing and service charge rate policy. 
It shall be the policy of the city that funding for stormwater management be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands imposed on the city's stormwater systems and programs, the level of service provided, and benefits realized as a result of the provision of adequate stormwater management services and facilities. Service charges for stormwater management shall be fair and reasonable, and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. The cost of stormwater services and facilities may include operating, capital improvement and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management requirements. Similarly-situated properties shall pay similar charges. Service charge rates shall be designed to be consistent and coordinated with the city's use of other stormwater management funding mechanisms, including but not limited to plan review and inspection, fees, special fees for services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges, and special assessments so as to accomplish the city's overall objective of equitable funding. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-6), 11-13-90)  
Sec. 21-272. - Service charges. 
The city council hereby establishes stormwater management utility service charges which shall be billed to all properties in the city, except as specific exemptions allowed in this article or in future ordinances or amendments to this article shall apply. The stormwater management utility service charges may include a service rate charge applied to each property related generally to the amount and quality of runoff discharged to the public stormwater systems and stormwater receiving waters, a base rate charge for certain costs of service common to all stormwater management utility accounts, and special service charges to persons, entities or properties which require services and/or facilities not commonly needed by all persons, entities, or properties. 
(1)  The service rate charge shall be reflective of the cost of providing services and facilities to properly control stormwater runoff quantity and quality. The two (2) most important factors in the city's present cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities to individual properties are: 
a.  The size of each property. 
b.  Its intensity of development. 
(2)  Special service charges shall be structured to recover the cost of providing to certain persons, entities and properties stormwater management services that are not commonly required by all stormwater service charge ratepayers. Such services may include, but are not limited to, private development plan review and inspection, site inspections to verify the operational condition of on-site stormwater management systems such as private detention/retention and conveyance facilities, monitoring and mitigative activities related to conditions on individual properties which impact water quality, and actions to abate conditions on private properties which do not comply with adopted city standards and/or which interfere with proper stormwater management and have been designated by the city manager or a duly authorized representative of the city manager to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-7), 11-13-90; Ord. No. 29-2000, § 1, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 20-2017, § 2, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 21-273. - Service rate charges. 
(a)  The city finds and determined that a typical single-family residential property in the city is approximately eleven thousand (11,000) square feet in area, and that the hydrologic response due to the typical intensity of development of such properties would be represented by a coefficient runoff of approximately thirty one-hundredths (.30) in the commonly accepted rational formula for calculating peak stormwater runoff (Q=CIA): The city council hereby accepts these values as representative of the conditions on a typical single-family residential property in the city, and adopts these values as the equivalent residential unit (ERU) from which stormwater management utility service rate charges will be calculated for nonresidential properties. 
(b)  As identified by the Brevard County Property Appraiser: each detached single-family residential property shall be billed service rate charges for one (1) equivalent residential unit; each condominium and townhouse unit shall be billed service rate charges for one-half (½) equivalent residential unit; each duplex shall be billed service rate charges for one (1) equivalent residential unit; each triplex shall be billed service rate charges for one and one-half (1.5) equivalent residential units; each quadruplex shall be billed service rate charges for two (2) equivalent residential units. 
(c)  Nonresidential properties shall be billed on the basis of the number of equivalent residential units calculated to exist. Each equivalent residential unit or fraction thereof shall be charged the rate/ERU as defined below. The method of calculating the number of equivalent residential units on properties other than single-family residential, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, triplexes, and quadruplexes for the purpose of determining the service rate charge shall be as follows: 
SRC = (ASF/ERUSF) * (IDF/ERUIDF) * RATE/ERU 
in which 
*SRC = service rate charge per year. 
*ASF = the total area (in square feet) of the subject property. 
*ERUSF = the equivalent residential unit square footage of the defined ERU (11,000 square feet). 
*IDF = the intensity of development factor for the subject property. 
*ERUIDF = the intensity of development factor for the defined ERU (.30). 
*RATE/ERU = the annual service charge rate per ERU, as established by the city council in this article, in a subsequent ordinance, or by amendment to this article. 
(d)  The stormwater utility fee shall constitute a non-ad-valorem assessment, pursuant to F.S. § 403.0893. 
(e)  On or before September 15 of each year, the city council shall hold a public hearing to adopt a rate resolution. The rate resolution shall stay in effect until such time as a change in the stormwater utility fee or assessment is proposed. On or before September 15 in the year of a proposed rate change, the board shall hold a public hearing to adopt the modified rate resolution for the purposes of imposing the stormwater utility fee or assessment upon the owners of all real property located within the designated stormwater management system benefit areas. The city council may approve an increase in the annual stormwater assessment above the prior year amount by no more than a percentage equal to the Consumer Price Index (CPI), not to exceed three (3) percent annually, within requiring notice and public hearing in order to meet the cost of living or inflationary increases in the cost of providing services. Such rate resolution shall incorporate a schedule of rates and classifications of all affected real property in the designated stormwater management system benefit areas. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-8), 11-13-90; Ord. No. 9-1992, § 1, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 32-1998, § 1, 9-29-98; Ord. No. 29-2000, § 2, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 20-2017, § 3, 8-22-17; Ord. No. 36-2018, § 1, 8-14-18)  
Sec. 21-274. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 40-2009, adopted Oct. 27, 2009, deleted § 21-274, which pertained to basic rate charges and discount, and derived from Ord. No. 46-1990, adopted Nov. 13, 1990; Ord. No. 9-1992, adopted May 12, 1992; Ord. No. 14-1992, adopted Aug. 25, 1992; Ord. No. 1-1994, adopted Jan. 11, 1994; Ord. No. 32-1998, adopted Sept. 29, 1998; Ord. No. 33-1999, adopted Oct. 26, 1999; and Ord. No. 29-2000, adopted July 11, 2000.  
Sec. 21-275. - Fee collection. 
Preparation and certification of annual stormwater utility assessment roll to tax collection. 
(a)  On or before September 15 of each year, the director shall cause to be prepared an annual stormwater utility assessment roll based on information provided by the property appraiser. Such roll shall contain a summary description of each parcel of real property within the designated stormwater management system benefit areas; the name and address of the owner of each such parcel; the rate classification applicable to each parcel of real property as specified in the rate resolution; and the amount of the annual stormwater utility fee or assessment applicable to each parcel of real property. The summary description of each parcel of real property shall be in such detail as to permit ready identification of each parcel on the real property assessment roll. 
(b)  Teh city council shall, at any regular or special meeting held on or before September 15 of each year, review the annual stormwater utility assessment roll prepared by the director for its conformity with the rate resolution provided for in section 21-273. The council shall make such changes or additions as necessary to conform such roll with the rate resolution, it shall ratify and confirm such roll and certify the roll to the tax collector for appropriate action. 
(c)  In the event that any classification of real property designated in the rate resolution requires an individual calculation of the annual stormwater utility assessment, the director shall calculate and determine such annual stormwater utility assessment. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-11), 11-13-90; Ord. No. 1-1994, § 1, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 32-1998, § 3, 9-29-98; Ord. No. 33-1999, § 2, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 29-2000, § 4, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 40-2009, § 2, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 43-2012, § 1, 12-13-12; Ord. No. 20-2017, § 4, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 21-276. - Exemptions or credits applicable to service charges. 
The exemption of property from taxation under state law will not relieve the owner of any such real property located within a designated stormwater management system benefit area from the provisions of this article, or from the imposition by the city council of the annual stormwater utility assessment applicable to such real property, as specified in the rate resolution adopted under the provisions of section 21-273. 
Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater management utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exemption or reduction in the stormwater service charge shall be granted based on the age, tax or economic status, race or religion of the property owner, or other condition unrelated to the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The following exemptions and credits shall be allowed: 
(1)  Undeveloped lands shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(2)  Developed, publicly owned roadways and airport runways which are available for use in common by the general public for transportation shall be exempted from stormwater service charges. These properties may include public road rights-of-way and airport runways owned by the city, county, state or federal government. This exemption shall not include public lands used for offices, airports excluding runways, maintenance yards, water and wastewater treatment plants, water reservoirs and storage facilities, parking lots, park and recreation facilities, libraries, schools, colleges, universities, social service centers, public housing, public hospitals or convalescent centers, and similar public properties, nor shall the exemption apply to internal site roadways within such public facilities, all of which shall be charged in a manner consistent with that applied to comparable nonpublicly owned properties. This exemption shall not apply to private roads or drives, or to internal roads, drives and parking areas in privately owned, properties regardless of the degree of access to those sites, roads and drives allowed to the general public. 
(3)  Retention areas. 
(4)  Waterbodies, such as lakes, ponds and rivers without impervious bottoms. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above existing school facilities owned and operated by the Brevard County School Board shall be exempt from stormwater management utility service charges. This exemption shall not apply to charter schools. 
(Ord. No. 46-1990, § 1(21A-13), 11-13-90; Ord. No. 10-2008, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 20-2017, § 5, 8-22-17)  
Secs. 21-277—21-279. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RECLAIMED WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-280. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future, words of the future tense shall include the present, words in the plural shall include the singular, words in the singular shall include the plural, words of the male gender shall include the female gender, and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive. 
Administrator shall mean the city manager of the City of Titusville or his designee. 
Billing shall mean the charge made for reclaimed water service. The charge may be made on a separate invoice or may be include on the monthly utility bill. 
City shall mean the City of Titusville, Florida, and its utility service district. 
Customer shall mean the actual user of the reclaimed water. 
Cross connection shall mean any physical connection or arrangement which could allow the transfer of waters between the city's portable water supply and distribution system, or any other non-potable water source. 
Development shall mean any proposed change in land use which alters the demands for water and/or wastewater services. 
Director shall mean the city manager or his designee of the City of Titusville. 
Discontinuation of service shall mean cessation of a service by physical separation from the system's service lines to ensure that no service can be received. 
Distribution main shall mean a conduit used to supply reclaimed water from transmission mains to service lines. 
Effluent shall mean treated wastewater flowing out of any treatment facility. 
F.D.E.P. shall mean the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or its successor in function. 
Public eating, drinking or bathing facility shall mean water fountains, picnic tables, swimming pools, spas, and food service facilities, such as tables and beverage counters, that are open to, and provide service for, the public. 
Reclaimed water shall mean effluent from city owned and operated wastewater treatment plant, which effluent has been treated to advanced secondary treatment standards in compliance with the requirements of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. Includes the term "treated effluent." 
Reclaimed water reuse system shall mean those reclaimed water mains, lines, fittings, valves and appurtenances, installed in public right-of-way or utility easements which are owned by the City of Titusville. 
Reuse service area (reuse service area) shall be defined as the area permitted in the city's current F.D.E.P. domestic wastewater facility permit(s) as the reuse service area. 
Reuse service district shall be geographically defined as the area of critical concern (see section 63-105), as designated by resolution of the city council, where the installation of a reclaimed water system shall be required as provided in this article. 
Transmission mains shall mean those mains together with the storage and pumping facilities, transmit the reclaimed water to the distribution systems and other points of use of the reclaimed water. This transmission (delivery) system has been provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 1, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 7-1997, § 2, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 36-2003, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 21-281. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a reclaimed water use program. The establishment of a reclaimed water system is a vital ingredient in a program for conserving potable water. As the general welfare, health, safety and convenience of the Titusville community are directly affected by the use of reclaimed water, it is in the interest of the public that the reclaimed water system be designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 1, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-282. - Promulgation and enforcement of reclaimed water service procedures regulations. 
(a)  This article hereby establishes that the city's existing water resources division is expanded to include reclaimed water with services and responsibilities for reclaimed water facilities owned and operated by the City of Titusville. 
(b)  The administrator or his designee shall have the power to promulgate procedures and regulations with respect to the following matters. 
(1)  Application procedures, forms, and requirements and allowable uses other than irrigation. All uses must be in accordance with applicable F.D.E.P. regulations. 
(2)  Installation requirements including specification of acceptable materials, devices and regulations to prevent backflow or cross-connections with other systems. 
(3)  Procedures for enforcement of the ordinances and regulations pertaining to reclaimed water including procedures for inspection of the customer's system. 
(4)  Procedures for the orderly expansion of the reclaimed water system. 
(5)  Procedures and regulations for the efficient operation of the reclaimed water system. 
(6)  Procedures to ensure that all wells located on the property receiving reclaimed water will be completely disconnected from irrigation systems on the property. Wells may be maintained and used for other purposes providing there is no potential physical connection to the water reclamation system. 
(7)  The rendering of bills for service and the collection of charges for all services rendered. 
(8)  Collection of all fees and charges and recording in the public records and liens agreed to by customers of the system. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the water resources director may, when necessary for the efficient operation of the reclaimed water system or for the health or safety of the general public or the customer, establish regulations regarding the following matters, which regulations shall become effective at the time of promulgation without the need for city council approval: 
(1)  The maximum number and type of users of the reclaimed water. 
(2)  Cross-connection, noncomplying devices prohibited. 
For reclaimed water customers of the city, the use of water from a reclaimed water system for other than landscape irrigation is prohibited between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. daily and is allowed only in accordance with the contractual agreements in place between the customer and the city or as determined by the water resources director in accordance with system limitations. 
(d)  No person shall construct, operate, maintain or allow to remain present on property owned or controlled by him, any device or system which is connected to or which controls a device or system connected to the city's reclaimed water system and which is not in compliance with all provisions of F.D.E.P. Regulations and this Code related to reclaimed water and with all procedures and regulations promulgated pursuant to this section. Reclaimed water shall not be directed, conveyed, or piped into any residence or building used as a dwelling unit. The person who owns or controls the property upon which such a noncomplying device or system is found shall be liable to the city for the amount by which the costs associated with the securing and/or removal of the noncomplying device or system exceeds the cost of a normal discontinuance of service. These excess costs shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the noncomplying device or system is located. 
(e)  Any customer whose reclaimed water system is in violation of any city ordinance, regulation or procedure shall be subject to immediate discontinuance of reclaimed water service. Such discontinuance of service shall not relieve any person of liability for civil actions or for criminal or municipal ordinance violation prosecution. 
(f)  System responsibility. The administrator will be responsible for the training of city personnel in cross-connection control and inspection to see that the adopted rules are followed. 
(g)  Home owner/change of ownership. Where reclaimed water is in use or available on the premises, notification of any change of ownership or control of the property shall be given to the city administrator and to the wastewater treatment facility or designee(s) as to the change. Failure to do so will result in discontinuance of service. 
(h)  In-ground irrigation and prohibited attachments. All irrigation systems shall be permanently installed and consist of low trajectory water droplet spray heads of in-ground irrigation design. Hose bibbs or hose connections are not allowed except as provided herein. Hose bibbs shall be located in locked vaults, service boxes, or compartments which shall be clearly labeled as being of nonpotable quality. Hose bibbs which can be only operated by special tools, may be placed in non-lockable vaults, service boxes, or compartments clearly labeled as nonpotable water. Vaults, service boxes and compartments meeting the requirements of this rule may be located above or below grade. 
(i)  Owners reuse control. A hand control valve must be installed and accessible on the user's side of the city curbstop service line. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 39-1997, § 1, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 5, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 21-283. - Areas embraced. 
All territory within the City of Titusville and the city reuse service district served by the City of Titusville reclaimed water system shall be governed by this division to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-284. - Public easement requirements. 
Reclaimed water service mains and lines shall be provided for properties located within the designated reuse service district at the same time that water or sewer service lines and mains are installed. All development constructed within the reuse service district shall have a reclaimed water distribution system designed and installed for irrigation. The administrator may exempt parcels requiring no irrigation. Reclaimed water service shall comply with all provisions of such service as set forth in this article: 
(1)  No facilities will be installed under the provisions outlined herein and accepted by the city for maintenance unless it is in dedicated public right-of-way or dedicated public easement. Any new easement shall be adequately sized as approved by the city to accommodate construction and maintenance of any reclaimed system component. No obstruction of whatever kind shall be planned, built, or otherwise created within the limits of the easement or right-of-way without written permission of the city. 
(2)  Reclaimed water system extensions and improvements shall be accepted by the city only upon receipt of the proper dedication documentation and the acceptance of ownership by the administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 36-2003, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 21-285. - Ownership. 
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances within dedicated public easements, when constructed or accepted by the city, shall become and remain the property of the city. No person shall by payment of any charges provided herein or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the city, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having their property connected thereto for the reclaimed water service in accordance with this article and any amendments thereof. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Secs. 21-286—21-289. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 21-290. - Connection required. 
(a)  Where available, the owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city reuse service district developed for public, commercial, office, industrial, warehousing and/or multi-family use(s) shall connect or cause to be connected, with the reclaimed water distribution system. 
(b)  New single family subdivision developments within the reuse service district constructed after January 1, 1995, shall include reclaimed water distribution mains, and shall connect to the system when reclaimed water service becomes available. 
(c)  Connection to the system is voluntary for all existing single family homes and new homes not within the new single family subdivision developments as referenced in section 21-290(b). 
(d)  All connections shall be made in accordance with policies and regulations adopted by the council. This provision shall not be construed to entitle any person to cross the property of another to make such connection. 
(e)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "available" or "availability" shall mean a reuse line exists in a public easement or right of way which abuts the property or where a reuse line is within one hundred (100) feet of the property as accessed via public easements or rights of way. 
(f)  At such time as reclaimed water service becomes available, required connection shall be made within ninety (90) days of notification by the city. 
(g)  Existing subdivisions may petition the city for installation of reclaimed water within a subdivision. Upon the receipt of a petition signed by at least fifty-one (51) percent of the subdivision property owners, the city may initiate a program to install reclaimed water service within a subdivision. Upon completion of the installation, the city will determine the capital cost and will pro-rate the cost over the lots that could be served in the subdivision and require repayment to the city of the capital cost over a thirty-six-month period until repaid to the city. 
(h)  The city council may determine at its discretion that the extension of a reuse transmission main shall be for the common good of protecting and benefiting the city's water supply source and that the extension of the transmission main will increase reclaimed water application to the reuse service district by providing various areas or lands abutting the main with reclaimed water service. The costs of the extension of the reuse transmission main may be shared by the city and those properties receiving benefits of the main by the establishment of a connection fee as determined and established by city council. Upon finding that an area would be benefited by installing a reuse transmission main, a connection fee may be established based upon the following procedures: 
(1)  City council may initiate a connection fee for a subdistrict and shall adopt a resolution declaring the necessity for the proposed improvement, describing the nature and extent of the work, the general description of the materials to be used, the estimated costs of the improvements, the estimated connection fee and the location of the area in which such improvements are to be installed. The resolution shall establish a date when the city council shall meet, which shall not be less than twelve (12) days after the adoption of the resolution, for the purposes of hearing any objections or comments concerning the proposed improvements. A notice of the time of hearing the objections shall be published once per week for two (2) consecutive weeks (the first publication not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for the hearing). A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the property owners of record reflected on the Brevard County Property Appraisers Assessment rolls for lands within the subdistrict, which will be benefited by the improvement. 
(2)  The city council will meet and hear objections and comments concerning the proposed improvement. After consideration of the objections or comments, the city council in its discretion, shall determine whether or not to proceed with the improvements and the estimated costs of the improvements together with the proposed connection fee. At the hearing, the city council shall adopt a resolution disclosing the description of the subdistrict, the proposed total costs and expenses of improvements, and the portion to be paid as a connection fee for connection to the reclaimed water system. 
(3)  After the improvements have been installed and cost of the improvements finally determined, the city council may, by resolution impose a connection fee within the subdistrict for all connections to the reuse transmission main. After the completion of said list of property owners benefited by the improvement is delivered to the city clerk of the City of Titusville he shall thereupon give notice by publication in two (2) issues at least seven (7) days apart, in some newspaper published in said municipality that the list has been delivered to him and is open for inspection at his office, and that at a time and place therein mentioned, not less than ten (10) days from the first publication the city council will meet and hear any objection or defenses to the proposed connection fee and, if approved by the city council, a copy of the proposed connection fee established within the subdistrict shall be incorporated in a resolution adopted by the city council. 
(4)  As provided for in section 21-290(a), (b), all new single-family subdivision developments shall at the time reclaimed water service is connected and approved for use, pay the connection fee established within the subdistrict. In addition, all public, commercial offices, industrial warehouses and/or multi-family uses shall connect to the reuse line when available and pay the required connection fee. The city shall provide each owner of public, commercial, etc. properties at least one hundred twenty (120) days' notice to connect and pay the fee. Any existing single family homes within the subdistrict who voluntarily connects to the reuse transmission main shall pay the required connection fee at the time of connection to the system or repay the amount as allowed in paragraph (g) above. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 36-2003, § 1, 10-14-03)  
Sec. 21-291. - Reclaimed water user classification. 
There is hereby established a uniform classification of water users as follows: 
(1)  Class A. Detached single-family residential units. Meters not required. 
(2)  Class AM. Multifamily residential facilities. Master meter required. 
(3)  Class B. Office, commercial, industrial and warehousing facilities. Meter required. 
(4)  Class C. Public bodies, parks, rights-of-way. 
(5)  Class CM. Community irrigation systems, reclaimed connections serving more than one (1) property. Meter required. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 1-2001, § 1, 1-23-01)  
Sec. 21-292. - Reclaimed water rates and charges. 
There is hereby established a uniform schedule of rates and charges by classes for the use or availability of the city's reclaimed water system and a maintenance and replacement fee for inside and outside the city, including bulk water sales to other private utilities, as follows: 
(1)  Class A, AM, B, C and CM users: 
a.  No stand-by charge or user charge will be paid by Class A, AM, B, C or CM users who are on the sanitary sewer system. Class A, AM, B and CM shall pay a maintenance and replacement fee of eight dollars ($8.00) per month per ERC to be billed monthly on the utility bill. The ERC shall be determined based upon the service/meter size as follows: 
1-inch meter/service 	Equals 	1 ERC 
1½-inch meter/service 	Equals 	5 ERC 
2-inch meter/service 	Equals 	8 ERC 
3-inch meter/service 	Equals 	15 ERC 
4-inch meter/service 	Equals 	25 ERC 
6-inch meter/service 	Equals 	50 ERC 
8-inch meter/service 	Equals 	80 ERC 
 
The maintenance and replacement fee shall take effect with the first billing cycle in October, 2010. 
Class A, AM, B, and CM who are not connected to the City of Titusville's sanitary sewer system shall pay nine dollars ($9.00) per month per ERC for stand-by or user charge in addition to the maintenance fee for a total of seventeen dollars ($17.00) per month. 
Any class user that discharged reclaimed water back into the sanitary sewer, shall be billed at the rate for sanitary sewer contained within this chapter and shall pay maintenance fee and reuse charges eight dollars ($8.00) and nine dollars ($9.00) respectively. Class C users shall not be required to pay the maintenance and replacement fee. All funds generated by the maintenance and replacement fee shall be utilized only for the maintenance and replacement or expansion of the reclaimed water system. 
b.  Class A, AM, B, C, or CM users shall pay all costs associated with the reclaimed water service connection, including but not limited to, tapping into the distribution main, the connection pipe, the city's shut-off valve, the meter and the backflow prevention device. 
c.  The city may enter into such agreements as it deems appropriate for public utilization of reclaimed water. 
(2)  Each quarterly billing for reclaimed water installation charges shall include a customer service charge of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per bill. 
(3)  A customer whose service has been discontinued may resume reclaimed water service by payment of installation charges and a reconnection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Provided, however, that where service has been discontinued for violation of the policies and relating to the use of reclaimed water system, service will not be reconnected until the city receives, in its opinion, reasonable and sufficient guarantee that the violation will not occur. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 33A-1998, § 1, 9-29-98; Ord. No. 1-2001, § 1, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 56-2003, § 2, 9-25-03; Ord. No. 60-2004, § 4, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 19-2010, § 2, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 21-293. - Payment required. 
(a)  Bills for the installation charge shall be submitted by the city and shall be paid by the users quarterly. A customer's quarterly account shall be considered delinquent if any portion remains unpaid thirty (30) days after the date of the bill for such service. 
(b)  All other charges, including connection and reconnection charges, if not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the billing date, shall be considered delinquent. Any customers' accounted which is disconnected shall pay a twenty dollar ($20.00) reconnect fee prior to reconnection. 
(c)  The utility service to a customer shall be discontinued, unless otherwise provided by law, when the reclaimed water charges becomes delinquent, and shall not be reconnected until all past due charges, penalty charges, and reconnection charges shall have been fully paid. 
(d)  In the event the customer's account is more than ninety (90) days past due, the city may record a lien against the benefitted property and all costs the city incurs for collection, including legal fees and other costs shall be paid by the customer and/or property owner and shall be superior to all other liens except for taxes. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-294. - Right to refuse service. 
(a)  No connection shall be made to the reclaimed water system unless specifically approved by the administrator or his designee. 
(b)  No payment of any costs, submittal of any petition or any other act to receive reclaimed water reuse service shall guarantee such service. The city shall have the right, at all times, to refuse to extend services on the basis that a use is detrimental to the system; or there is an inadequate supply of reclaimed water; or lack of payment of required service charges; or for any other reason which, in the judgment of the administrator will cause the extension not to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-295. - Service interruption. 
The city reserves the right to temporarily discontinue service to any portion of, or the entire, reclaimed water system as deemed necessary by the administrator. 
The administrator shall have the authority to establish schedules to control the use of the water reuse system in order to reduce maximum pressure demands on the system and to regulate usage of reused water to balance with supply and storage availability. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Secs. 21-296—21-299. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION AND USE OF THE RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 21-300. - Policies and regulations adopted; compliance required. 
The city adopts by reference the "Policies and Regulations Governing the Installation and Use of the Reclaimed Water System" dated ________. Compliance with the policies and regulations is hereby required. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-301. - Use of reclaimed water. 
(a)  Reclaimed water may be used for the irrigation of crops not intended for human consumption; residential lawns, golf courses, cemeteries; parks; landscaped areas; highway medians and rights-of-way; or for any other purpose specifically approved by the administrator. 
(b)  Reclaimed water may be used for fire protection; toilet flushing in nonresidential buildings; and for irrigation of edible, commercially marketed crops requiring vegetables that are peeled, cooked, thermally processed before human consumption, only with the written permission of the administrator. 
(c)  Reclaimed water may not be used inside of any residential dwelling, or to fill swimming pools, hot tubs, spas or wading pools. 
(d)  The use of reclaimed water shall be restricted so that no wetted surfaces are located within one hundred (100) feet of any public eating, drinking or bathing facility. 
(e)  Reclaimed water shall not be applied to impervious surfaces that allow drainage to surface waters. Reclaimed water shall not be applied to properties containing subsurface drainage tiles or plates. 
(f)  All uses of reclaimed water shall require a reuse permit, issued by the administrator, following procedures established by the administrator. 
(g)  All areas using reclaimed water shall be clearly marked as required by applicable D.E.P., St. Johns or other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-302. - Maintenance by the customer. 
The property owners and customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all facilities, including irrigation lines and appurtenances, on property serviced by the city. The city reserves the right to disconnect the service to any property that does not maintain its system. In addition, should the customer require reclaimed water service at different pressures, or in any way different from that normally supplied by the city, that customer shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make these adjustments and for obtaining approval from the administrator to make these adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-303. - Inspections. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter any building, structure or property serviced by a connection to the reclaimed water system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems, backflow preventer, valves and/or all devices installed by the customer which connect to or control the reclaimed water distribution system or use of reclaimed water on such property. 
(b)  Consent to such access shall be obtained from a person of a suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof. The refusal of such information of refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of violation of the policies and regulations adopted herein. 
(c)  Inspections shall be at reasonable times and reasonable frequency. Where there exists cause to believe that a violation is committed, the city may cause the property to be inspected as necessary to prevent or terminate the occurrence of such violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-304. - Discontinuance of service. 
The administrator or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue reclaimed water service to any property, after notice, where any violation of this chapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public potable water supply system. Reclaimed water service to such property shall not be restored until the violation has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-305. - Unlawful works or connections to the reclaimed water system. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to work on the reclaimed water distribution system without written consent of the city, and then only under the direction and supervision of the city. No person shall tamper with, alter, damage, cut into or make connection with, the reclaimed water system or damage a city reclaimed water facility. 
(b)  No person shall open or close valves to the system, turn on hydrants or cause water to flow from the reclaimed water system without prior written notice consent of the city. 
(c)  Any person found violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in sections 21-307 and 21-308 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-306. - Exemptions and variances. 
Exemptions and variances shall be approved or denied by the City Council of the City Titusville, after public hearing, based upon the recommendation of the director, and upon consideration of the following conditions: 
(1)  Alternate reuse sites. Properties being developed under the provisions of Planned Unit Developments or Developments of Regional Impact may be exempted from the requirements of reuse connection if a binding contract is executed for the provision of alternate reuse sites and lines that otherwise would not require the installation of reuse lines. For each acre of wetted surface to be exempted from the reuse requirement, one and one-half (1.5) acres of alternate reuse wetted surface will be provided, including all lines and sprayheads necessary to irrigate the area. Any site considered as an alternate site shall be ready to receive reclaimed water no later than one (1) year after the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy in the exempted area. For the purpose of this exemption, golf courses are normally required to utilize reuse and therefore are not considered as an alternate site. 
(2)  Low income housing subdivisions. Those housing projects receiving federal housing subsidies and other similar financial assistance may be exempted, upon recommendation of the director, after submittal of information documenting that the future residents of the project will be unable to purchase and maintain the necessary in-ground irrigation equipment. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEABILITY 
 
Sec. 21-307. - Violation liability. 
(a)  Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any written order of the city pursuant thereto, shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of the City Code. In addition, such person or customer shall pay all costs and expenses involved in this case, including attorney's fees. Notice of such violation shall be given by delivering the same to the premises and a copy thereof mailed to the billing address as it appears on the city's billing records. Each day upon which a violation of this chapter occurs, shall constitute a separate and additional violation. 
(b)  Any person or customer in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expenses, loss or damage incurred by the city by reason of such violation, including attorney's fees and costs of correcting unauthorized work, tampering or damage to the system. 
(c)  In addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any provisions of this chapter, the city may bring suit in the appropriate court to enjoin, restrain, or otherwise prevent the violation. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-308. - Code enforcement board authority. 
As an additional means of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Titusville Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction and authority to hear and decide alleged violations occurring in the corporate limits of the City of Titusville. Proceedings before the code enforcement board shall be governed by its rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 21-309. - Liability; public employees. 
No provisions of this chapter designating the duties of any city officer or employee shall be construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty for failure to perform such duty. 
(Ord. No. 31-1994, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Chapter 22 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business tax receipt shall mean a business tax receipt issued by the city in accordance with section 11-31 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Permit shall mean the permission granted by the city manager, or his designee, to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets within the city. 
Rate card shall mean a card printed by the owner or operator of the taxicab and signed by the city manager, or designee, for display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare then in force. 
Taxicab shall mean a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than nine (9) persons and not operated on a fixed route. 
(Code 1963, § 25-1; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09) 
Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-28. - Enforcement. 
The police department of the city is hereby given the authority and is hereby instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this chapter. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the police department shall report the same to the city manager, who will order or take appropriate action. 
(Code 1963, § 25-19)  
Sec. 22-29. - Business tax receipt required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business of operating motor vehicles for transportation of passengers for hire, either with or without drivers, within the city, other than buses operating on regularly scheduled routes under franchise from the city, without first obtaining a business tax receipt from the city. 
(Code 1963, § 25-2; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-30. - Liability insurance—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, driver or chauffeur of any taxicab to drive or operate the same, or to permit the same to be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless such owner, operator, driver or chauffeur shall have first procured and filed with the administrator a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, or a surety bond issued by a good and responsible surety company authorized to do business in the state and must be acceptable to and approved by the administrator. 
(Code 1963, § 25-3; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-31. - Liability insurance—Amount. 
The amount of liability insurance or surety bond for each taxicab shall be as required by state law. 
(Code 1963, § 25-4; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-32. - Liability insurance—Fleet policy. 
The policy of insurance or surety bond required by this chapter may be in the form of a separate policy or separate surety bond for each taxicab or may be in the form of a fleet policy covering all taxicabs operated by such owner, operator, driver or chauffeur, which such policy of insurance or surety bond shall provide the same liability for each taxicab operated in service as specified above. 
(Code 1963, § 25-5; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-33. - Liability insurance—Notification of cancellation. 
No policy of insurance or surety bond required by this chapter shall be cancelled by the insurer or by the insured until the expiration of five (5) days after notice of intended cancellation thereof has been given in writing to the building official by registered mail or personal delivery of such notice, and a provision therefore shall be embodied in such policy or surety bond. 
(Code 1963, § 25-6; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-34. - Designation of taxicabs. 
Every taxicab shall bear on the outside of the front or rear door on each side, in painted letters not less than two (2) inches nor more than six (6) inches in height, the name of the owner or name in which the business tax receipt is registered with the city; and in addition, may bear an identifying design. 
(Code 1963, § 25-13; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-35. - Rates of fare—Rate card required. 
(a)  Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth the rates of fare, displayed in such a place as to be in view of all passengers. 
(b)  Rate cards shall list each individual rate which may be charged to a person including, but not limited to, hour rates, mileage rates, waiting time, trunk and baggage fees and applicable costs for each additional passenger. 
(Code 1963, § 25-14)  
Sec. 22-36. - Rates of fare—Refusal of passenger to pay posted fare. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the posted fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same. It shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a passenger shall not be deemed to have hired a vehicle as set out above until such person has been advised of the rates as shown on the rate card posted in the vehicle. 
(Code 1963, § 25-15; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-37. - Passengers—Taking on additional passengers. 
No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in a taxicab, unless the persons first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers. 
(Code 1963, § 25-16)  
Sec. 22-38. - Passengers—Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the normal seating capacity for which the vehicle was constructed. At no time shall such number exceed four (4) persons in the rear seat nor three (3) (including the driver) in the front seat, where the driver is located. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(Code 1963, § 25-17; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-39. - Passengers—Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. 
(Code 1963, § 25-18; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 7, 6-9-09)  
Secs. 22-40—22-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-56. - Required. 
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets within the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab holding a business tax receipt by the city shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 25-7; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-57. - Application. 
An application for a taxicab drivers' permit shall be filed with the administrator on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name, permanent address, current address, birth date and citizenship of the applicant. 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(3)  The educational background of the applicant. 
(4)  A concise history of his employment. 
(5)  Current state driver's license number applicable to for-hire drivers with date of expiration. 
(6)  The names and addresses of three (3) people who have known the applicant for a period of at least one (1) year and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
(7)  The name and address of the liability insurance carried or surety company providing liability coverage on the taxicab to be driven by the applicant. 
(Code 1963, § 25-8; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-58. - Application fee, photograph. 
At the time the application for a taxicab drivers' permit is filed, the applicant shall pay to the administrator the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00), which sum shall be nonrefundable and attach thereto two (2) passport-size photographs of a good likeness of the applicant. 
(Code 1963, § 25-8; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-59. - Police investigation of applicant. 
The applicant for a taxicab drivers' permit shall be required to report to the police department to submit to being fingerprinted on one (1) applicant fingerprint card to be supplied by the police department. The applicant shall also submit two (2) passport-size photographs of a good likeness of the applicant to be attached to the fingerprint card. 
(Code 1963, § 25-9; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-60. - Investigation. 
The administrator shall forward the completed application for a taxicab drivers' permit to the police department who shall, with the aid of the completed fingerprint card, conduct an investigation of the applicant. A report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application which shall then be returned to the administrator. 
(Code 1963, § 25-9; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-61. - Consideration of application. 
(a)  The administrator shall, upon receipt of the application for a taxicab drivers' permit and investigation from the police department, forward the same to the administrator for consideration. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby given authority to reject any application for a taxicab drivers' permit to operate a motor vehicle for the transportation of persons for hire within the city when the applicant is incapacitated by reason of infirmities due to age, physical defects or is addicted to the use of narcotics or the habitual use of intoxicating liquors which would render such person unfit to operate a motor vehicle for hire within the city, and the city manager, in determining whether such person is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, may consider any applicant's reputation for sobriety as reflected by the record of the applicant's convictions before any court having jurisdiction in the city as disclosed by the records of such court. 
(c)  The city manager shall also have the authority to reject any such application when it appears to him, as reflected in the police investigation and court records of the applicant, that the applicant has been convicted of any crime which would be considered hazardous to any prospective passenger who may be transported in a taxicab driven by the applicant. 
(d)  If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the city council in appeal of the city manager's decision, to offer evidence why his application should be accepted. The city manager shall, after the city council's decision upon the appeal, act in concurrence therewith and issue the permit if so decided by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 25-10; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 22-62. - Issuance, duration and annual fee. 
(a)  Upon approval of an application for a taxicab drivers' permit, the administrator shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
(b)  Such permit shall be in effect after issuance and shall be due and payable on September 30 of each year and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. Any permit that is issued on or after April 1 of the current receipt year shall be required to pay one-half (½) of the amount of the permit for the applicable classification under the provisions of this chapter and shall expire on September 30 of the current year, unless the permit for the preceding year has been revoked or suspended. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax shall be due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. 
(c)  Such permit shall be issued and/or renewed by the administrator upon the payment of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Code 1963, § 25-11; Ord. No. 24-2009, § 8, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 55-2018, § 2, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 22-63. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The city manager is vested with the power and authority to suspend the taxicab drivers' permit of any operator who shall have been convicted before any court of competent jurisdiction for the offense of operating a vehicle negligently or at a speed or in such a manner as to endanger or to be likely to endanger the life, limb, or property, of a person or driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The permit of any persons so suspended or revoked by the city manager by reason of conviction of the offenses named in this subsection shall be suspended for a period not exceeding six (6) months. 
(b)  The city manager is further vested with the power and authority to suspend or revoke the permit of any operator who shall have been convicted before any court of competent jurisdiction for any crime which would be considered hazardous to any prospective passenger who may be transported in a taxicab by the operator. The permit of any persons so suspended or revoked by the city manager by reason of such conviction for the offenses described in this subsection shall be suspended or revoked for a period of not less than six (6) months. Such period of suspension or revocation shall be set by the city manager who shall have discretion in the same as the nature of the crime shall dictate. 
(c)  The city manager is further vested with the power and authority to suspend and reject for a period of six (6) months the permit of any persons granted for the operation of a motor vehicle for the transportation of persons for hire within the city upon the conviction of such person before any court having jurisdiction in the city of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any of the ordinances of the city regulating the operation of motor vehicles for hire. 
(d)  A permit may not be suspended or revoked unless the driver has received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf. 
(Code 1963, § 25-12)  
ARTICLE III. - HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES OR CARRIAGES 
 
Sec. 22-64. - Definitions. 
Applicant means any person who makes an application to the City of Titusville for a horse-drawn vehicle for hire permit. 
Business tax receipt shall mean a business tax receipt issued annually by the city in accordance with section 11-31 of the Code of Ordinances. The business tax receipt shall apply to the operation of the horse-drawn vehicle business, and each horse-drawn vehicle for hire shall obtain an individual permit in accordance with this article. 
City manager shall mean the city manager or his/her designee. 
Horse-drawn vehicle shall mean any vehicle or carriage which is drawn or pulled by a horse, mule or any other beast of burden which may be hired for the transportation of passengers and which is operated within the limits of the City of Titusville. 
Operate or operation shall include operation by the business owner or any agent of the business owner or by any person with the business owner's knowledge, consent or permission, expressed or implied. 
Permit means the grant by the city to operate an individual horse-drawn vehicle upon the streets of the City of Titusville. 
Person shall include an individual, a firm, a co-partnership, a corporation, a company or any others whatsoever owning, controlling, or having charge or possession of a horse-drawn vehicle for hire in the City of Titusville. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-65. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a horse-drawn vehicle in or upon any street in the City of Titusville unless and until such person shall have first obtained a horse-drawn vehicle permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and from the State of Florida a driver's license. 
(b)  An individual permit is required for each horse-drawn vehicle under this section, in addition to a business tax receipt required in accordance with section 11-31 of the Code of Ordinances. Said permit shall be of a type provided by the city manager, shall be affixed to the horse-drawn vehicle in a manner prescribed by the city manager, and shall be non-transferable from the vehicle for which the same was issued except as may be authorized by the city. The city manager is hereby authorized to establish a fee for each transfer. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-66. - Business tax receipt required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business of operating a horse-drawn vehicle or carriage for transportation of passengers for hire, either with or without drivers, within the city, without first obtaining a business tax receipt from the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-67. - Application for permit; approval, denial of application; appeal; permit fee; lost, destroyed permits; renewal of permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a horse-drawn vehicle in the City of Titusville shall submit to the city a written application which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, driver's license number with date of expiration, and form of business of the applicant. The trade name, if any, under which the applicant has been issued a business tax receipt by the City of Titusville. 
(2)  The business tax receipt for owning and operating the business of horse-drawn vehicles. 
(3)  At the time the application for a horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit is filed, the applicant shall pay to the administrator the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00), which sum shall be nonrefundable and attach thereto two (2) passport-size photographs of a good likeness of the applicant. 
(4)  A thorough description including photographs of the proposed horse-drawn vehicle business to be operated; the manner in which the applicant proposes to operate the business; the proposed hours of operation; proposed location from which the business is to be operated; the proposed route or routes to be served or utilized, together with a map or maps describing the proposed routes; the type of animal or beast of burden to be used to draw any vehicle; the kind, make and model of the vehicles to be used in the business. City approval of proposed routes shall not substitute any required owners authorization. 
(5)  A thorough description of the proposed manner and location in which the applicant proposes to feed, shelter, quarter and stable and otherwise care for the animal to be used in the business, and the method to be used in transporting the animals within and without the city. 
(6)  An individual certificate of soundness identifying each animal that will be pulling a permitted vehicle that is issued by an equine veterinarian licensed in the State of Florida. The certificate of soundness must specify that the inspected animal is free from infectious disease and is fit for service. Each animal shall thereafter be re-inspected at intervals of no more than twelve (12) months, and a certificate of soundness shall be issued by such veterinarian and filed with the city in order for each such animal to remain in service. No animal shall be used to draw a horse-drawn vehicle without such certificate of soundness certified and dated within any preceding six-month period from the date of permit application. 
(7)  An insurance certificate proving that the applicant has met the insurance requirements of section 22-69. 
(8)  A notarized statement acknowledging the applicant's familiarity with and eligibility under the provisions of this section and any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, and the applicant's intention to abide by the same. 
(9)  A thorough description of the proposed manner and location in which the applicant proposes to dispose of animal waste together with the safety and sanitation devices and methods to be employed. 
(10)  A sworn written statement as to whether or not the applicant has been either charged or convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the disposition or penalty assessed therein. 
(11)  A copy of an Equine Infectious Anemia (EIA) Laboratory Test form issued by an equine veterinarian licensed in the State of Florida for each individual horse to be used in a horse-drawn vehicle service, and which form indicates a negative test result within the past six (6) months. 
(12)  Any such supplementary information the city shall at any time demand in order to reasonably determine whether the request for a permit should be granted. 
(b)  Upon receipt and acceptance of a complete application for a permit, city staff shall evaluate the application for public health, safety and welfare concerns as pertains to his or her area of regulation. If the applicant's plan for service meets with the approval of the reviewing official, the official shall report said approval in writing to the city manager. If said plan or application does not meet the approval of the reviewing official, the official shall report said disapproval to the city manager with reasons for disapproval listed in writing. If the application is disapproved by the city manager, the application for permit shall be denied, and no permit to operate horse-drawn vehicles shall be issued to the applicant. 
(c)  Once the application is approved, the city shall issue an operating permit to the applicant in accordance with this article. Said permit shall be renewed or expire annually in accordance with the associated business tax receipt. 
(d)  If the application is denied, or if the permit is revoked under the enforcement of this article, an appeal may be taken to the city manager by any applicant or individual affected by any decision of the city. Such appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days after a decision by the city, by filing in writing with the city a notice of appeal, and specifying the grounds thereof. 
(e)  If a permit issued under this section is lost or destroyed, the permit holder may obtain a duplicate upon payment of ten dollars ($10.00) administrative charge. 
(f)  Any person to whom a permit has been issued, under the provisions of this article, shall be entitled to renew such permit from year to year; provided, however, that such person shall fully comply with the provisions of this article and such other ordinances, rules and regulations as shall be enacted or adopted from time to time by the city; provided further, renewal of said permit shall be issued by the city manager upon payment of the annual fifteen dollar ($15.00) permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-68. - Adherence to plan submitted in application. 
Permittees must adhere to the routes and vehicle number and design as specified in their application for permits. Any deviance from said application without the approval of the city shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-69. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  A permittee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a permit specifically agrees to pay, any and all damages or penalties which the city may be legally required to pay as a result of the permittee's operation or maintenance of a horse-drawn vehicle under this article, whether or not the acts or omissions complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the city. 
(b)  A permittee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (1) above. The expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee and the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of the city. 
(c)  The permittee shall maintain, throughout the term of the permit, liability insurance insuring the city and the permittee with regard to all damages mentioned in subsection (1) above caused by the grantee or its agents, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  Workers' and unemployment compensation insurance as provided by the laws of this state. 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one (1) person within the limit, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any one (1) accident, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. 
(d)  The insurance policies obtained by a permittee in compliance with this section shall be insured by a company or companies acceptable to the city and a current certificate or certificates of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the city during the term of the permit. The policies shall name the city as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered by registered mail to the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-70. - Compliance with traffic regulations. 
(a)  A permittee, having been issued a permit under this article to engage in the business of operating horse-drawn vehicles, shall be subject to all traffic provisions of this Code and all other ordinances, rules and regulations now in effect in the city or the State of Florida and all traffic ordinances and rules and regulations which may pertain to the operation of horse-drawn vehicles, hereafter enacted or adopted by the city or the State of Florida, and such rules and regulations formulated and promulgated under authority of this article, and as set forth in chapter 20 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a horse-drawn vehicle to take on or discharge passengers while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-71. - Sanitation. 
All permittees shall comply with the following sanitation requirements: 
(a)  All horses, mules and other animals shall be equipped with adequate devices to prevent manure and other excrement from falling upon the streets of the city. Any excrement which remains upon the streets of the city shall be removed at the expense of permittee. 
(b)  All animal waste for disposal shall be promptly transported to a site designated for waste disposal. The city reserves the right to approve or disapprove sites taking into account routes within the city, and the rules and regulations of the governmental body having jurisdiction over said sites or facilities. 
(c)  A permittee shall further comply with all applicable health and sanitation provisions of the Sanitary Code of Florida and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-72. - Condition and inspection of horse-drawn vehicles. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn vehicle shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. The city shall have the right to inspect or cause to be inspected any horse-drawn vehicle as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any unsafe or unsanitary conditions or any violations of this article or any other rule, regulation, ordinance or law relating to the operating of such horse-drawn vehicles. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to establish a fee for each such inspection, and is further authorized to establish and promulgate rules and regulations and minimum standards for the inspection and condition of horse-drawn vehicles. 
(c)  If any horse-drawn vehicle shall fail to pass such inspection, it shall be removed from service on the day of inspection, and shall remain out of service until it has passed inspection. 
(d)  All horse-drawn vehicles used by a permittee shall have conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the vehicle the name of the business under which such permittee operates. A copy of the permit shall be displayed inside the vehicle or carriage at all times. 
(e)  Equipment and safety requirements. 
(1)  Every animal-drawn vehicle in service shall have the following equipment on the vehicle, which equipment shall be maintained in good repair: 
a.  Body condition. 
b.  Reflectors, front and rear. 
c.  Grab handles. 
d.  Traces. 
e.  Harness. 
f.  Seats. 
g.  Rubber surfaced wheels. 
h.  Horn. 
i.  Shafts. 
j.  Steps. 
k.  Lights on any vehicle licensed to operate at night. 
l.  Brakes. 
m.  Sign located on the rear of the vehicle indicating that the vehicle is "slow moving." 
n.  Equine emergency supplies. 
(2)  An animal-drawn vehicle shall be maintained in a clean well-painted manner and provide a generally good appearance. 
(3)  Failure to comply with this section of the Code shall be considered a violation subject to penalty. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-73. - Animal safety. 
(a)  Animals shall not engage in work with harnesses or bits which harm or are unsafe to the animal. 
(b)  Harnesses, bridles, bits and padding shall be properly fitted and kept oiled, clean and in good repair. 
(c)  Harnesses shall be kept free of makeshift materials like wire, rope and rusty chain. 
(d)  Trace chains shall not put pressure on the collar and shoulders of the animal when it starts pulling the vehicle or carriage resulting in a jolting start versus a smooth start with a snug collar already in place. 
(e)  Breeching shall fit so that it will not rub or hinder the hind leg movement of the animal. 
(f)  Service with horse-drawn vehicles shall terminate during adverse weather conditions. When either the ambient temperature reaches ninety-five (95) degrees Fahrenheit or the heat index reaches one hundred five (105) degrees Fahrenheit, as determined by the weather station at the Titusville Weather Station (KFLTITUS13) the operators and drivers shall discontinue working their animals and pull them off the street until the temperature decreases below the above-stated temperatures as directed by the city manager or the fire department. 
(g)  Permittee is responsible for seeing that the animals used shall be adequately cared for and are not overworked. Any abuse or neglect of these animals shall be grounds for the revocation of permit(s). Adequate records to determine the hours the animal worked must be maintained by each permittee. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-74. - Revocation of permits. 
Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a person holding a permit to operate a horse-drawn vehicle is violating the provision of this article, the city manager may, upon written, certified notice of said violation to the permittee, suspend the permits issued to such person until such time as the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the city or within a period of thirty (30) days, whichever is less. If said violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days the permit will be automatically revoked. Any permittee whose permits have been revoked under this subsection may within thirty (30) days after said revocation, appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-75. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this article and shall be punishable as such and/or said violation may be processed as a code violation pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162 and the municipal code enforcement board. 
(b)  The City of Titusville City Attorney's Office is authorized to pursue temporary or permanent injunctive relief or any other legal or equitable remedy authorized by law in courts of competent jurisdiction to cure, remove or end any activity which violates this article. 
(c)  Permittees shall have a private right of action to pursue all legal and equitable remedies necessary to ensure full compliance with this article against any other permittee, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
Sec. 22-76. - Conflict with state law. 
Nothing in this article is intended to conflict with the provisions of the Florida Constitution or the State Uniform Traffic Control Law, Ch. 316, F.S. In the event of a direct and express conflict between this article and either the Florida Constitution or F.S. Ch. 316, then the provisions of the Florida Constitution or F.S. Ch. 316, as applicable, control. 
(Ord. No. 13-2015, § 2, 4-14-15)  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES 
[]Listed below are the franchises of the city, their enactment and expiration dates or terms. The instruments granting the franchises can be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Granted 	Date 
Granted 	Expiration 
Date/Term 	Enacted By 
City Gas Company of Florida 	11-27-62 	11-27-92 	Ordinance No. 52-1962 
TCI (cable television) 	 9-22-82 	10-22-92 	Ordinance No. 56-1982 
Florida Power and Light 	 1-11-83 	30 years 	Ordinance No. 7-1983 
Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph 	10- 9-84 	30 years 	Ordinance No. 34-1984 
City Gas Company 	11-27-92 	30 years 	Ordinance No. 4-1993 
Time-Warner* (cable television) 	 5-27-93 	10 years 	Resolution No. 25-1993 
Adelphia Business Solutions Investment, L.L.C 	12-12-00 	5 years 	Ordinance No. 49-2000 
Florida Power and Light 	1-11-83 	30 years 	Ordinance No. 60-2007 
 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note— On May 27, 1993, a ten-year nonexclusive franchise was granted to TCI Cablevision. On July 13, 1993, Resolution No. 25-1883 transferred that franchise to Time-Warner, d/b/a Cablevision of Central Florida. 



CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA VOLUME II 
____________ 
LAND DEVELOPMENT 
REGULATIONS 

____________ 
Published in 1992 
Republished in 2017 
____________ 

> 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE-1990 CODE 
ORDINANCE NO. 20-1990 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES BY ADOPTING VOLUME II OF THE CODE ENTITLED CITY OF TITUSVILLE LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS PROVIDING FOR AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS, ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATIONS, ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEES AND BOARDS, PROVIDING PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES FOR FILING FOR PERMITS, SITE PLANS, SUBDIVISION APPROVAL, ZONING, CONDITIONAL USES, VARIANCES, APPEALS, ENFORCEMENT, FEES AND OTHER PROCESSES, ESTABLISHING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR REMOVAL OF TREES, LANDSCAPING, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, PROTECTION OF NATURAL TOPOGRAPHY, FLOOD DAMAGE, WETLANDS, THREATENED AND ENDANGERED PLANTS AND WILDLIFE; ESTABLISH PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS, SIDEWALK, BIKEWAYS, PARKING, UTILITIES, SIGNS, ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL, HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MANAGEMENT, CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS; ESTABLISHING ZONING DISTRICTS AND CLASSIFICATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, GOVERNMENTAL AND OTHER DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHING OVERLAY DISTRICTS OF PUD, PIP, COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT, TITUSVILLE SHORELINE; AIRPORT IMPACT, CONSERVATION, AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN, FLOOD PLAINS, HISTORIC PRESERVATION, PUBLIC USES AND CONDITIONAL USES, ESTABLISHING REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS PROCESSING AND PROCEDURES, ADOPTING CERTAIN APPENDIXES, ILLUSTRATIONS AND EXHIBITS; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING VESTED RIGHTS ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING CLAIMS, PROCEDURES FOR CHALLENGING DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND OTHERWISE PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, Florida is a municipal corporation organized and existing pursuant to Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963, Article VIII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the State of Florida, and Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville possesses certain governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to conduct and perform municipal functions; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, pursuant to its Home Rule Powers, possesses full governmental authority to manage and determine growth within its corporate limits subject to and only limited by applicable law; and, 
    WHEREAS, the legislature of the State of Florida has enacted the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act commonly referred to as Sections 163.3161 through 163.3243, Florida Statutes (1989); and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, pursuant to its governmental and proprietary powers, and Home Rule Powers and pursuant to Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, prepared a comprehensive plan together with certain elements and maps; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville on September 27, 1988, adopted a Comprehensive Plan to preserve, promote, protect, and improve the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville's Comprehensive Plan was adopted, pursuant to Section 163.3177, consisting of certain elements, capital improvements element, future land use element, traffic circulation element, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, and natural groundwater, aquifer recharge element, conservation element, recreation and open space element, coastal management element, intergovernmental coordination element, and housing element; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville desires to implement said Comprehensive Plan by adopting certain Land Development Regulations as authorized by Section 163.3202, Florida Statutes, and as authorized by Article VIII, Section 2, Constitution of the State of Florida and Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, and Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville has provided for public participation in the formulation and development of these regulations and has received input from the Local Planning Agency and a Special Committee known as LDR Ad Hoc Committee and the general public; and, 
    WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission on April 25, 1990 has made a recommendation to the City Council as to the consistency of the Land Development Regulations with the Comprehensive Plan; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City Council, pursuant to Chapters 163 and 166, Florida Statutes, held a public hearing on said Land Development Regulations on May 10, 1990 and May 24, 1990 after due public notice and received public input; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City Council desires to adopt the attached Land Development Regulations with the effective date specified in this Ordinance; 
    WHEREAS, the City Council finds the regulations to be consistent with the City of Titusville Comprehensive Plan. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA as follows: 
Section 1. Authority. 
    This Ordinance is being adopted pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2, Constitution of the State of Florida; Chapter 163, Florida Statutes; Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963; Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and Chapter 163, Florida Statutes entitled Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
Section 2. Purpose and Intent. 
    The City hereby declares that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to provide for the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations which will guide future growth and development; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and other resources consistent with the public interest; preserve, promote, and protect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, and general welfare; preserve the residential or historical character of neighborhoods, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration of population; provide adequate and energy-efficient transportation, water, sewage, drainage, fire protection, law enforcement, schools, parks, recreation facilities, housing and other services, facilities and resources; enhance the aesthetic appeal of the community; and conserve and protect natural resources within the City of Titusville, while protecting private property rights. 
Section 3. Adoption of Land Development Regulations. 
    That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida, is hereby amended by adopting by reference as Volume II of the Code of Ordinances the attached City of Titusville Land Development Regulations which reads as set forth in said volume. 
Section 4. Effective Date. 
    That Part I, General Provisions , Sections 1-5, Part II, Sections 10-18, Part III, Procedures and Process , Sections 20-33, Part IV, Environmental Protection and Conservation , Sections 40-46, Part V, General Performance Requirements , Sections 50, 51, 52, 53, 57, Part VI, Zoning , Sections 60, 62.10, 62.20, 64 and 65, Sections 67.20, 67.30, 67.40, 67.50, 67.60, 67.70, 67.80, 67.90, Part VII, Subdivisions , Sections 70, 72, 73 and Part VIII, Appendixes/Illustrations/Exhibits , Sections 83, 83.10, 83.20, 83.30, 83.40, 83.50, 83.60, 83.70, 83.71, 83.72, 83.73, 83.74, 84, 84.10, 84.20, 84.30, 84.60, 84.70, 84.80 and 84.90 is hereby adopted effective July 1, 1990. All other remaining Parts or Sections not expressly adopted as of July 1, 1990 shall become effective on December 17, 1991. All future development shall comply with these regulations in accordance with the above effective date provisions unless said development is entitled to Vested Rights. 
(Ord. No. 5-1991, § 4, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 14-1991, § 1, 5-28-91) 
Section 5. Grandfather Provision. 
    All lawful existing development to the extent of any conflict with these regulations shall be entitled to be continued as provided for in Part III, Section 31, of the Land Development Regulations. 
Section 6. Vested Rights. 
    In the event any provision of these regulations would limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any development that has been previously authorized, then in that event, the City may recognize said right to complete said development as provided herein. The City hereby recognizes the right of any person to complete the following development: 
a.  Development that has received a building permit; 
b.  Development that has received final plat approval or final site plan; 
c.  Development that has received preliminary plat approval, preliminary subdivision approval, preliminary PUD approval or preliminary site plan approval provided said development has secured a permit to construct all or any phase of said development and is continuing said development in good faith; 
d.  Any development that has on file with the City completed application for building permit and required exhibits and continues to process and obtain a building permit within sixty (60) days. 
    Any person who has a right to complete said development and has secured a building permit, final plat approval, final site plan approval, or preliminary approval as provided above shall lose its right to complete said development if said development does not maintain a current building permit, or current site plan or development approval as provided for by the Code of Ordinances of the City. Once a development has lost its current approval, then in that event, future development shall comply with applicable regulations. 
    The City may recognize other applications for vested rights in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  Any property owner who claims to have vested rights based upon a prior approval from the City other than as provided above, may submit to the City Manager, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this Ordinance, a written request for recognition of said vested rights. 
2.  The applicant shall submit such information as he deems appropriate to demonstrate his claim of vested rights including legal description of property, dates of any recent rezoning, preparation of any plans, approval of any plans, any action of the City upon which applicant has relied, facts showing substantial reliance or change in position. 
3.  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of said application, the City Council shall either recognize or reject the applicant's claim of vested rights. In reviewing the application, the City Council shall be guided by the case of Hollywood Beach Hotel v. City of Hollywood , 329 So.2d 10 (Fla. 1976) and other applicable law. If this City fails to act upon said request within ninety (90) days, then said application shall be deemed to be denied. No suit shall be filed by the applicant unless prior thereto the applicant has made a request of the City prior to said litigation. 
Section 7. Constitutional Claims. 
    In the event any person claims that any provision of the Land Development Regulations constitute a taking of the land owner's property without due process of law and the payment of just compensation as provided for in the Florida Constitution and the Constitution of the United States of America, then in that event, said person shall first present said claim to the City of Titusville. 
    Any person claiming said taking shall: 
1.  Submit said claim in writing identifying the name and address of the property owner. 
2.  The present use of the property. 
3.  The present land use designation and zoning classification. 
4.  The particular provision of the LDR that said person believes to have constituted a taking. 
5.  The remedy requested. 
6.  Documentation or other evidence demonstrating the economic deprivation. 
7.  Case law or authority, if any, which demonstrates the taking. 
8.  Such other information demonstrating how said LDR constitutes a taking. 
    After the City has received said request, it shall have ninety (90) days to review and act upon said request. Due public notice as required by Chapters 163 and 166 shall be provided prior to granting any relief under this Section. The City reserves its full legislative function to act upon requests under this Section and said actions shall be presumed to be fairly debatable. 
Section 8. Administrative Revisions of LDR. 
    The City hereby adopts by reference the provisions of Section 163.3213, Florida Statutes (1989). All challenges to any land development regulations by any substantially affected person shall first be presented to the City of Titusville and reviewed and acted upon in accordance with said statutes prior to any court action. 
Section 9. Repeal. 
1.  The following Sections of the Code of Ordinances are hereby repealed simultaneous with the adoption of comparable provisions in the Land Development Regulations, Chapter 2, Article II, Sections 2-41 to 2-43, Chapter 4B, Sections 4B-1 to 4B-15, Chapter 5, Article V, Sections 5-66 to 5-86, Chapter 6C, Sections 6C-1 to 6C-8, Chapter 8A, Article I, Sections 8A-1 to 8A-8, Article 1A, Landscaping, Sections 8A-9 to 8A-15, Article III, Sections 8A-23 to 8A-43, Article IV, Sections 8A-44 to 8A-52, Chapter 12B, Sections 12B-1 to 12B-28, Chapter 12C, Sections 12C-1 to 12C-15, Chapter 19, Sections 19-1 to 19-5, Chapter 22, Sections 22-4, 22-7 to 22-12 and 22-14, Chapter 23, Sections 23-1 to 23-36, Chapter 29, Sections 29-1 to 29-34 and 29-50. 
2.  In the event any Section of the Code is repealed and said section is referenced in another section of the Code, then for purposes of that section not repealed, the referenced section shall remain in full force and effect. 
3.  These Land Development Regulations shall supersede any other regulations or Codes of the City to the extent of any conflict. In the event of any doubt as to which regulation prevails, the more restrictive regulation shall prevail. 
Section 10. Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED this 22nd day of January, 1991. 
(Ord. No. 5-1991, § 10, 1-22-91) 
/s/ Thomas R. Mariani 
      THOMAS R. MARIANI, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Janet R. Camacho 
      JANET R. CAMACHO, City Clerk   ADOPTING ORDINANCE-1992 CODE 
ORDINANCE NO. 7-1992 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA, PROVIDING FOR AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND INTENT; AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES BY AMENDING VOLUME II OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS BY AMENDING SECTION 5 BY CHANGING AND ADDING CERTAIN DEFINITIONS; AMENDING SECTIONS 25.20(C) BY REQUIRING PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION TO SUBMIT A REPORT MAKING CERTAIN FINDINGS; AMENDING THE CODE BY ADOPTING REGULATIONS REGARDING SIGNAGE; ADOPTING SECTION 61 BY ESTABLISHING CERTAIN ZONING DISTRICTS; ADOPTING SECTIONS 62.00 THROUGH 62.09, ESTABLISHING GENERAL REGULATIONS OF RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS; AMENDING SECTIONS 62.10 THROUGH 62.17, RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICTS (RE); AMENDING SECTIONS 62.20 THROUGH 62.27, RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (RR); ADOPTING SECTIONS 62.30 THROUGH 62.37, SINGLE FAMILY LOW DENSITY (R-1a); SECTIONS 62.40 THROUGH 62.47, SINGLE FAMILY MEDIUM DENSITY (R-1b); SECTIONS 62.50 THROUGH 62.57, SINGLE FAMILY HIGH DENSITY (R-1c); SECTIONS 62.60 THROUGH 62.68, MULTIFAMILY MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL, (R-2); SECTIONS 62.70 THROUGH 62.78, MULTIFAMILY HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-3); SECTIONS 62.80 THROUGH 62.88, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOUSING (RMH-1); SECTIONS 62.90 THROUGH 62.99, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK (RMH-2); SECTIONS 63.00 THROUGH 63.18, COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - GENERAL PROVISIONS; SECTIONS 63.10 THROUGH 63.18, HOSPITAL-MEDICAL (HM); SECTIONS 63.20 THROUGH 63.28, TOURIST (T); SECTIONS 63.30 THROUGH 63.39, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC); SECTIONS 63.40 THROUGH 63.49, COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC); SECTIONS 63.50 THROUGH 63.59, REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RC); SECTIONS 63.60 THROUGH 63.69, OFFICIAL-PROFESSIONAL (OP); SECTIONS 63.70 THROUGH 63.79, COMMERCIAL MARINE (CM); AMENDING SECTION 64 BY REPEALING SECTIONS 64.01 THROUGH 64.42 AND ADOPTING SECTIONS 64.00 THROUGH 64.07, GENERAL PROVISIONS, SECTIONS 64.10 THROUGH 64.19, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL SERVICES AND WAREHOUSING (M-1), SECTIONS 64.20 THROUGH 62.29, INDUSTRIAL, (M-2), SECTIONS 64.30 TROUGH 64.39, HIGHWAY INDUSTRIAL (M-3), SECTIONS 64.40 THROUGH 64.49, PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID); AMENDING SECTIONS 65.00 THROUGH 65.05 BY ESTABLISHING GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL DISTRICTS; AMENDING SECTION 65.10 THROUGH 65.15 BY CHANGING GENERAL USE (GU) DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND ADOPTING SECTIONS 65.10 THROUGH 65.18; AMENDING SECTIONS 65.20 THROUGH 65.25 BY REPEALING SAID SECTIONS AND ADOPTING NEW SECTIONS 65.20 THROUGH 65.28, OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION (OR) REGULATIONS; ADOPTING SECTIONS 65.30 THROUGH 65.39, DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT (DMU) REGULATIONS, DISTRICT AND STANDARDS; ADOPTING SECTIONS 65.40 THROUGH 65.49, URBAN MIXED USE (UMU) DISTRICT AND STANDARDS; ADOPTION SECTION 65.50 THROUGH 65.59, SHORELINE MIXED USE (SMU); ADOPTING SECTIONS 65.60 THROUGH 65.69, RHP DISTRICTS; ADOPTING SECTIONS 67.10 THROUGH 67.19, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (PUD); REPEALING SECTIONS 67.20 THROUGH 67.23; REPEALING SECTIONS 67.30 THROUGH 67.39; AMENDING SECTION 70 BY REPEALING SAID SECTION AND ADOPTING SECTIONS 70 THROUGH 70.40, GENERAL SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS; ADOPTING SECTIONS 71.00 THROUGH 71.60, PROVIDING FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION AND REGULATIONS; AMENDING SECTIONS 72.00 THROUGH 72.34 BY CHANGING REQUIREMENTS FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE, GRANDFATHERING PROVISION, VESTED RIGHTS, CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIMS, ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS, REPEAL OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, Florida is a municipal corporation organized and existing pursuant to Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963, Article VIII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the State of Florida, and Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville possesses certain governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to conduct and perform municipal functions; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, pursuant to its Home Rule Powers, possesses full governmental authority to manage and determine growth within its corporate limits subject to and only limited by applicable law; and, 
    WHEREAS, the legislature of the State of Florida has enacted the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act commonly referred to as Chapter [Sections] 163.3161 through 163.3243, Florida Statutes (1989); and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, pursuant to its governmental and proprietary powers, and Home Rule Powers and pursuant to Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, prepared a comprehensive plan together with certain elements and maps; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville on September 27, 1988, adopted a Comprehensive Plan to preserve, promote, protect, and improve the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville's Comprehensive Plan was adopted, pursuant to Chapter [Section] 163.3177, consisting of certain elements, capital improvements element, future land use element, traffic circulation element, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, and natural groundwater, aquifer recharge element, conservation element, recreation and open space element, coastal management element, intergovernmental coordination element, and housing element; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville desires to implement said Comprehensive Plan by adopting certain Land Development Regulations as authorized by Chapter [Section] 163.3202, Florida Statutes, and as authorized by Article VIII, Section 2, Constitution of the State of Florida and Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, and Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville has provided for public participation in the formulation and development of these regulations and has received input from the Local Planning Agency and a Special Committee known as LDR Ad Hoc Committee and the general public; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville on June 19, 1990 adopted certain Land Development Regulations and desire to adopt additional Land Development Regulations; and, 
    WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission on March 18, 1992, has made a recommendation to the City Council as to the consistency of the Land Development Regulations with the Comprehensive Plan; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City Council, pursuant to Chapters 163 and 166, Florida Statutes, held a public hearing on said Land Development Regulations on April 2, 1992 and April 16, 1992 after due public notice and received public input; and, 
    WHEREAS, the City Council desires to adopt the attached Land Development Regulations with the effective date specified in this Ordinance; 
    WHEREAS, the City Council finds the regulations to be consistent with the City of Titusville Comprehensive Plan. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA as follows: 
Section 1. Authority. 
    This Ordinance is being adopted pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2, Constitution of the State of Florida; Chapter 163, Florida Statutes; Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963; Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and Chapter 163, Florida Statutes entitled Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
Section 2. Purpose and Intent. 
    The City hereby declares that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to provide for the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations which will guide future growth and development; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and other resources consistent with the public interest; preserve, promote, and protect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, and general welfare; preserve the residential or historical character of neighborhoods, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration of population; provide adequate and energy-efficient transportation, water, sewage, drainage, fire protection, law enforcement, schools, parks, recreation facilities, housing and other services, facilities and resources; enhance the aesthetic appeal of the community; and conserve and protect natural resources within the City of Titusville, while protecting private property rights. 
Section 3. Adoption of Land Development Regulations. 
    That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville, Florida, is hereby amended by adopting by reference the attached changes or amendments to Volume II of the Code of Ordinances Land Development Regulations which reads as set forth in the attachments. 
Section 4. Effective Date. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption. All future development shall comply with these regulations unless said development is entitled to Vested Rights. 
Section 5. Grandfather Provision. 
    All lawful existing development to the extent of any conflict with these regulations shall be entitled to be continued as provided for in Part III, Section 31, of the Land Development Regulations. Any property or development which is currently zoned in a zoning district repealed by this Ordinance (i.e. BR) shall be entitled to be continued to be used or developed under the former zoning district until such time as the property is administratively rezoned in a new zoning district. Once administratively rezoned, new development shall conform to the new zoning district and these Regulations. Existing development shall be entitled to continue as provided for in Part III, Section 31, of the Land Development Regulations. 
Section 6. Vested Rights. 
    In the event any provision of these regulations would limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any development that has been previously authorized, then in that event, the City may recognize said right to complete said development as provided herein. The City hereby recognizes the right of any person to complete the following development: 
a.  Development that has received a building permit; 
b.  Development that has received final plat approval or final site plan; 
c.  Development that has received preliminary plat approval, preliminary subdivision approval, preliminary PUD approval or preliminary site plan approval provided said development has secured a permit to construct all or any phase of said development and is continuing said development in good faith; 
d.  Any development that has on file with the City completed application for building permit and required exhibits and continues to process and obtain a building permit within sixty (60) days. 
    Any person who has a right to complete said development and has secured a building permit, final plat approval, final site plan approval, or preliminary approval as provided above shall lose its right to complete said development if said development does not maintain a current building permit, or current site plan or development approval as provided for by the Code of Ordinances of the City. Once a development has lost its current approval, then in that event, future development shall comply with applicable regulations. 
    The City may recognize other applications for vested rights in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  Any property owner who claims to have vested rights based upon a prior approval from the City other than as provided above, may submit to the City Manager, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this Ordinance, a written request for recognition of said vested rights. 
2.  The applicant shall submit such information as he deems appropriate to demonstrate his claim of vested rights including legal description of property, dates of any recent rezoning, preparation of any plans, approval of any plans, any action of the City upon which applicant has relied, facts showing substantial reliance or change in position. 
3.  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of said application, the City Council shall either recognize or reject the applicant's claim of vested rights. In reviewing the application, the City Council shall be guided by the case of Hollywood Beach Hotel v. City of Hollywood , 329 So.2d 10 (Fla. 1976) and other applicable law. If this City fails to act upon said request within ninety (90) days, then said application shall be deemed to be denied. No suit shall be filed by the applicant unless prior thereto the applicant has made a request of the City prior to said litigation. 
Section 7. Constitutional Claims. 
    In the event any person claims that any provision of the Land Development Regulations constitute a taking of the land owner's property without due process of law and the payment of just compensation as provided for in the Florida Constitution and the Constitution of the United States of America, then in that event, said person shall first present said claim to the City of Titusville. 
    Any person claiming said taking shall: 
1.  Submit said claim in writing identifying the name and address of the property owner. 
2.  The present use of the property. 
3.  The present land use designation and zoning classification. 
4.  The particular provision of the LDR that said person believes to have constituted a taking. 
5.  The remedy requested. 
6.  Documentation or other evidence demonstrating the economic deprivation. 
7.  Case law or authority, if any, which demonstrates the taking. 
8.  Such other information demonstrating how said LDR constitutes a taking. 
    After the City has received said request, it shall have ninety (90) days to review and act upon said request. Due public notice as required by Chapters 163 and 166 shall be provided prior to granting any relief under this Section. The City reserves its full legislative function to act upon requests under this Section and said actions shall be presumed to be fairly debatable. 
Section 8. Administrative Revisions of LDR. 
    The City hereby adopts by reference the provisions of Chapter [Section] 163.3213, Florida Statutes (1989). All challenges to any land development regulations by any substantially affected person shall first be presented to the City of Titusville and reviewed and acted upon in accordance with said statutes prior to any court action. 
Section 9. Repeal. 
1.  The following Sections of the Code of Ordinances are hereby repealed simultaneous with the adoption of comparable provisions in the Land Development Regulations, Sections 16A, 20-21 through 20-29, 27-1, 27-2(b) and (d), 27-3, through 27-8, 27-10 through 27-21, 29-35, 29-36, 29-50 through 29-56, 29-58, 29-60, 29-61, 29-63, 29-64 through 29-67, 29-69, 29-75 through 29-94, 29-109, 29-116, 29-155 through 29-197, 29-199 through 29-231, 29-244, 29-270 through 29-279, 67.20 through 67.23, and 67.30 through 67.39. 
2.  In the event any Section of the Code is repealed and said section is referenced in another section of the Code, then for purposes of that section not repealed, the referenced section shall remain in full force and effect. 
3.  These Land Development Regulations shall supersede any other regulations or Codes of the City to the extent of any conflict. In the event of any doubt as to which regulation prevails, the more restrictive regulation shall prevail. 
Section 10. Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED this 16th day of April, 1992. 
/s/ Thomas R. Mariani 
      THOMAS R. MARIANI, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Janet R. Camacho 
      JANET R. CAMACHO, City Clerk   ADOPTING ORDINANCE-2017 CODE 
ORDINANCE NO. 27-2016 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA, AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS; SPECIFICALLY AMENDING AND REFORMATTING VOLUME II "LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS"; SPECIFICALLY AMENDING CHAPTER 27 "GENERAL PROVISIONS" BY REMOVING ARTICLE II "DEFINITIONS" AND RENUMBERING ARTICLE III "INTENT" TO ARTICLE II "INTENT", ADDING ARTICLE III "FUTURE LAND USE MATRIX" AND ARTICLE IV FUTURE LAND USE I ZONING COMPATIBILITY MATRIX; RENUMBERING CHAPTER 59 "ZONING" TO NEW CHAPTER 28 "ZONING", AMENDING PROVISIONS RELATED TO DISTRICT BOUNDARIES, ADDING A ZONING USE TABLE, CONSOLIDATING AND AMENDING ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS, DELETING INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS TO BE RELOCATED TO OTHER CODE SECTIONS, ADDING DEFINITIONS, ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS RELATED TO ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND MINIMUM CONDITIONS RELATED TO CHURCHES, REMOVING THE CONDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS FOR ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES AND REFERENCES TO STATE REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES, ADDING ANIMAL KENNEL USE TO CERTAIN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS, AMENDING REGULATIONS RELATED TO ACCESSORY USES IN CERTAIN ZONING DISTRICTS, ADDING REGULATIONS RELATED TO OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS, REMOVING THE COMMERCIAL MARINA (CM) ZONING DISTRICT, DELETING THE COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT WAIVER SUBCOMMITTEE; ADDING NEW CHAPTER 29 "SPECIAL DISTRICTS AND OVERLAYS", AMENDING TITUSVILLE SHORELINE AREA OVERLAY BE CORRECTING THE TERM MEAN HIGH WATER LINE, CONSOLIDATING AIRPORT IMPACT OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND ADDING REFERENCED MAPS, REMOVING STATE REGULATIONS FROM WETLAND AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT, REPLACING HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY LANGUAGE WITH LANGUAGE FROM EXISTING LANGUAGE RELATED TO HISTORIC RESOURCES FROM CHAPTER 48, REMOVING LANGUAGE RELATED TO PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK OVERLAY, ADDING EXISTING STANDARDS RELATED TO ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY DISTRICTS, AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN OVERLAY AND SPECIAL LAND USE STANDARDS, AMENDING REGULATIONS RELATED TO VILLAGE CENTERS, CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS, AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS; CREATING CHAPTER 30 "DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS", ESTABLISHING ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS AND OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS, AMENDING DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS RELATING TO TREES AND VEGETATION, REMOVING REGULATIONS SUPERCEDED BY FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS RELATED TO HABITAT OF PROTECTED SPECIES, REFERENCING STANDARDS FOR WETLANDS AND RIPARIAN BUFFERS, AMENDING BULKHEAD/DREDGE AND FILL PERMITS REQUIREMENTS, RENUMBERING SECTIONS RELATED TO TOPOGRAPHY AND FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT, ESTABLISHING INTENT FOR REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS; AMENDING CHAPTER 31 "ADMINISTRATION" BY RENAMING TO "AGENCIES AND BOARDS", ESTABLISHING A DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE TO REVIEW AND APPROVE CERTAIN DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS; RENUMBERING AND CONSOLIDATING EXISTING CODE SECTIONS TO CREATE CHAPTER 32 "SIGNS", REMOVING REFERENCES TO COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD) ZONING DISTRICT, AMENDING REGULATIONS RELATED TO BUSINESS LICENSES AND SIGN REGULATIONS, COMMERCIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES, PENNANT SIGNS, AND SIGNS WITHIN THE DOWNTOWN MIXED USE DISTRICT; RENUMBERING AND AMENDING SECTIONS OF CHAPTER 59 "ZONING" TO CREATE NEW CHAPTER 33 "DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS" TO INCLUDE REGULATIONS RELATED TO PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD), PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID), PLANNED OFFICE PARK (POP), REGIONAL MIXED USE (RMU), URBAN VILLAGE (UV), NEIGHBORHOOD VILLAGE, CLUSTER SUBDIVISION, CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN, AND TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS; RENUMBERING AND CONSOLIDATING EXISTING CODE SECTIONS TO CREATE NEW CHAPTER 34 "PROCEDURES" RELATING TO PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL FOR OBTAINING COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS, REZONINGS, MASTER PLANS, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, SUBDIVISIONS, MINOR DIVISIONS, SMALL SCALE PLATS, PLATS AND SITE PLANS, ADDING ENABLING LANGUAGE RELATED TO DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES MANUALS, SETTING FORTH PROCEDURES RELATED TO VARIANCES, APPEALS, WAIVERS, ENFORCEMENT, NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES/VESTED RIGHTS AND ESTABLISHING CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMING USE; RENUMBERING PORTIONS OF CHAPTER 27 "GENERAL PROVISIONS" TO CREATE NEW CHAPTER 37 "DEFINITIONS" AND ADDING NEW DEFINITIONS; CONSOLIDATING EXISTING CODE FROM CHAPTER 34 "PROCEDURES" INTO A PROCEDURES MANUAL; CONSOLIDATING EXISTING CODE AND CREATING TECHNICAL MANUALS ENTITLED "ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION", "HAZARDOUS MATERIALS", "LANDSCAPING", "STORMWATER MANAGEMENT", "TRANSPORTATION" AND "CONCURRENCY"; DELETING CHAPTER 35 "ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION", CHAPTER 39 "GENERAL PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS", CHAPTER 43 "MOBILE AND MODULAR HOUSING", CHAPTER 47 "PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES, CHAPTER 48 "PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND ZONES", CHAPTER 51 "SUBDIVISIONS", CHAPTER 55 "WATERWAYS", CHAPTER 59 "ZONING", AND CHAPTER 63 "APPENDICES/ILLUSTRATIONS/ EXHIBITS AND INCORPORATING PROVISIONS WITHIN THE REFORMATTED CODE; PROVIDING FOR AUTHORITY; PURPOSE AND INTENT; SEVERABILITY; REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; INCORPORATION INTO THE CODE; GRANDFATHERING; AND AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, Florida is a municipal corporation organized and existing pursuant to Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963, Article VII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the State of Florida, and Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville possesses certain governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to conduct and perform municipal functions; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville, pursuant to its Home Rule Powers, possesses full governmental authority to manage and determine growth within its corporate limits subject to and only limited by applicable law; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Titusville has adopted an comprehensive plan consistent with Chapter 163, Florida Statutes; and 
    WHEREAS, on June 19, 1990 the Titusville City Council adopted certain Land Development Regulations and additional Land Development Regulations on April 16, 1992; and 
    WHEREAS, the Titusville City Council has subsequently amended the Land Development Regulations as needed to address changing conditions as well as correct errors and omissions; and 
    WHEREAS, the Titusville City Council desires to make corrections as needed and update the current Land Development Regulations for ease of use, and so directed staff to undergo a process to update the current Code; and 
    WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission have considered the proposed Code amendments on numerous occasions, and on October 5, 2016 made a recommendation to the City Council as to the adoption of the Land Development Regulations amendments; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council, pursuant to Chapter 163 and 166, Florida Statutes, and after due public notice held a public hearing to receive public input on said Land Development Regulations on October 11, 2016 and October 25, 2016, and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council desires to adopt the attached Land Development Regulations with the effective date specified in this Ordinance. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED by the City of Titusville, Florida as follows: 
Section 1. Authority. 
    This ordinance is being adopted pursuant to Article VII, Section 2, Constitution of the State of Florida; Chapter 163, Florida Statutes; Chapter 63-2001, Laws of Florida, Special Acts of 1963; Chapter 166, Florida Statutes; and Chapter 163, Florida Statutes entitled "Growth Policy; County and Municipal Planning; Land Development Regulation." 
Section 2. Purpose and intent. 
    The City hereby declares that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to provide for the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations which will guide future growth and development; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and other resources consistent with the public interest; preserve, promote, and protect the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience and general welfare; preserve the residential or historical character of neighborhoods; provide adequate and energy-efficient transportation, water, wastewater treatment, stormwater treatment, fire protection, law enforcement, schools, recreational facilities, housing and other services, facilities and resources; enhance the aesthetic appeal of the community; and conserve and protect natural resources within the City of Titusville, while protecting private property rights. 
Section 3. That the Land Development Regulations of the City of Titusville, Volume II, is hereby repealed and replaced by reference the attached exhibit "A", which reads as set forth in the attachments. 
Section 4. SEVERABILITY. If any provisions of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
Section 5. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances or parts of ordinances, and all resolutions and parts of resolutions, in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
Section 6. INCORPORATION INTO CODE. This ordinance shall be incorporated into the City of Titusville Code of Ordinances and any section or paragraph, number or letter, and any heading may be changed or modified as necessary to effectuate the foregoing: Grammatical, typographical, and like errors may be corrected and additions, alterations, and omissions, not affecting the construction or meaning of this ordinance and the Code may be made. 
Section 7. GRANDFATHERING. All lawful existing development to the extent of any conflict with these regulations shall be entitled to be continued as provided for in the Land Development Regulations. 
Section 8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be become in full force and effect upon adoption by the City Council in accordance with the Charter of the City of Titusville, Florida. Adoption of this ordinance provides a hiatus of the effective date by 180 days from the adoption date of this ordinance. This hiatus period will allow for an evaluation period to determine how the ordinance can be modified to be implemented. This hiatus period can be extended an additional 180 days at the discretion of the City Council. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED this 25 th day of October, 2016. 
/s/ James H. Tulley, Jr. 
      JAMES H. TULLEY, JR., Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Wanda F. Wells 
      WANDA F. WELLS, City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number 15-2017  6-13-17 Included 1 19-2017  8- 8-17 Included 1 30-2017 10-24-17 Included 1 31-2017 10-24-17 Included 1 35-2017 10-10-17 Included 1 37-2017 11-14-17 Included 1 38-2017 11-14-17 Included 1 44-2017 12-12-17 Included 1 45-2017 12-12-17 Included 1 49-2017 12-12-17 Included 1 5-2018  2-13-18 Included 2 6-2018  2-27-18 Included 2 8-2018  2-27-18 Included 2 9-2018  2-27-18 Included 2 12-2018  2-27-18 Included 2 17-2018  3-13-18 Included 2 18-2018  3-27-18 Included 2 23-2018  7-10-18 Included 3 24-2018  7-10-18 Included 3 25-2018  7-10-18 Included 3 31-2018  7-24-18 Included 3 32-2018  7-24-18 Included 3 33-2018  7-24-18 Included 3 34-2018  7-24-18 Included 3 35-2018 10- 9-18 Included 3 37-2018  8-28-18 Included 3 38-2018  8-28-18 Included 3 39-2018  8-28-18 Included 3 50-2018 11-13-18 Included 4 51-2018 11-13-18 Included 4 52-2018 11-13-18 Included 4 53-2018 11-13-18 Included 4 54-2018 12-11-18 Included 4 3-2019  2-26-19 Included 4 4-2019  2-26-19 Included 4 5-2019  2-26-19 Included 4 12-2019  4- 9-19 Included 4  
TITUSVILLE LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 27 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - PREFACE 

Sec. 27-1. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Land Development Regulations" or the "LDRs" of the City of Titusville. 
Sec. 27-2. - Authority. 
(a)  These Land Development Regulations are adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Florida and Chapters 163 and 166 of the Florida Statutes and pursuant to the Charter of the City of Titusville. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a section of the Florida Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, this ordinance shall be deemed amended and refer to the amended section or the section that superseded the original section. 
Sec. 27-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  These regulations are applicable within the corporate limits and planning jurisdiction of the City of Titusville, as generally shown on the Future Land Use Map (FLUM) adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Titusville, as most recently amended. A copy of the FLUM is available for public inspection in the Community Development Department located in City Hall. 
(b)  These regulations shall be applicable to all development within the City of Titusville. These regulations shall apply to all applications submitted to the City by an applicant pursuant to securing approval of any development order within the corporate limits as now and hereafter established by the City of Titusville, Florida, which shall include, but not be limited to, industrial parks, planned developments, subdivisions, mobile home parks, travel trailer parks, townhouses, multifamily or motel hotel units, or any other development projects of any kind and nature whatsoever, except those that are specifically excluded herein from any or part of these regulations. 
Sec. 27-4. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  As used in this ordinance, words denoting the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
(b)  Words used in the singular in this ordinance include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
Sec. 27-5. - Remedies. 
    Any person found to have violated any provision of this Code may: 
(a)  Be punished as provided in Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances (original volume). 
(b)  Be prosecuted before the Code Enforcement Board (see Chapter 31, Article 5 of these regulations). 
(c)  Be enjoined by the City from violating these regulations. 
(d)  Be denied future permits until Code compliance is achieved by the violator. 
(e)  Be denied a certificate of occupancy or permit reasonably related to the violation. 
(f)  Be issued a citation by the Code Enforcement Officer (see Chapter 34, Article VI). 
    The above remedies are in the alternative and the City Manager through his Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to determine which remedy or remedies shall be pursued by the City. In the event litigation is filed by the City against said violator, the City shall be entitled to assess its reasonable attorney's fees and costs against said violator. 
Secs. 27-6-27-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTENT 

Sec. 27-11. - Intent. 
    The general intent of this ordinance is to establish procedures and standards for the development of land within the corporate limits and planning jurisdiction of Titusville in an effort to: 
(a)  Ensure proper legal description, identification, monumentation, and recordation of real estate properties. 
(b)  Provide for the harmonious development of the City. 
(c)  Realize a coordinated design pattern of streets, sidewalks and other transportation facilities. 
(d)  Encourage sufficient recreational facilities. 
(e)  Preserve water resources. 
(f)  Provide for flood prevention, proper storm drainage, and appropriate utility systems. 
(g)  Conserve valuable and scenic natural features, with provision for adequate open space. 
(h)  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(i)  Encourage a high degree of quality and aesthetics in developments. 
Sec. 27-12. - Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan. 
    It is the intention of the City Council and Local Planning Agency that this ordinance serve to implement the requirements of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes, that requires the adoption of Land Development Regulations. These Land Development Regulations specifically address the following provisions: 
(a)  The subdivision of land, including provisions that meet the statutory requirements of Chapter 177, Part I, Florida Statutes, including review procedures, design and development standards, provisions for adequate public facilities, mitigation of development impacts, land dedications, fees and administrative provisions; 
(b)  The regulation of the use of land and water for the use categories included in the Titusville Comprehensive Plan as implemented by a set of zoning districts and a zoning map; 
(c)  The protection of potable water supply sources through the control of land uses and activities within the identified cones of influence and general areas of influence for the City of Titusville's wells and wellfields; 
(d)  The regulation of the areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and the provision of drainage and storm water management through the control of the type, location, density and intensity of land uses located within these areas; 
(e)  The protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in the Comprehensive Plan, particularly the wetlands areas identified in the conservation land use category; 
(f)  The regulation of signage; 
(g)  The provision of public facilities and service concurrent with the impacts of development based upon adopted levels of service (LOS); 
(h)  The provision of safe and convenient on site traffic flow, considering the need for vehicle parking and pedestrian movement; and 
(i)  The implementation of the regulations specifically stated in the adopted policies of the Titusville Comprehensive Plan. 
(j)  In the event of a conflict between these regulations and the Comprehensive Plan, the Comprehensive Plan shall prevail. It is the intent of the City to have the more stringent regulations prevail in the event of any conflict. 
Sec. 27-13. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionally or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Ordinance since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation into this Ordinance of such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 4, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 27-14. - Computation of time. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded, making the next regular working day the last day. 
(b)  Saturday, Sunday and City legal holidays shall be excluded from time computation (working day basis). 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, whenever a person has the right or is required to perform an act within a prescribed period of time after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice of paper is served by mail, five (5) days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 27-15. - No use or sale of land or building except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(a)  No person may use, occupy or sell any land or building, or authorize, or permit the use, occupancy or sale of land or buildings under this control except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on or in that building or land. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 6, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 27-16. - Relationship to existing zoning, subdivision and environmental regulations, including flood control ordinances. 
    To the extent that the provisions of this Ordinance are the same in substance as the previously adopted provisions that were contained in the City of Titusville Code, 1963, Chapters 1 through 29, these provisions shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise specified. In particular, if a situation did not constitute a lawful nonconforming situation under the previously adopted ordinances, it does not achieve lawful nonconforming status under this Ordinance merely by the repeal of the prior ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 7, 10-24-17) 
Secs. 27-17-27-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FUTURE LAND USE MATRIX 

Sec. 27-21. - Comprehensive Plan future land use categories. 
    (CLI) Commercial Low Intensity 
    (CHI) Commercial High Intensity 
    (CONS) Conservation 
    (DMU) Downtown Mixed-Use 
    (ED) Educational 
    (PSP) Public/Semi-Public 
    (IND) Industrial 
    (PIP) Planned Industrial Park 
    (REC) Recreational 
    (RES-1) Residential One 
    (RES-2) Residential Two 
    (LDR) Low Density Residential 
    (MDR) Medium Density Residential 
    (HDR) High Density Residential 
    (PUD) Planned Unit Development 
    (RMU) Regional Mixed-Use 
    (SMU) Shoreline Mixed-Use 
    (UMU) Urban Mixed-Use 
    (US1) U.S.1 Corridor 
Titusville Future Land Use/Zoning Consistency Matrix 
Zoning/FLU CHI CLI CONS DMU ED PSP IND PIP REC US1 RES-1 RES-2 LDR HDR MDR PUD RMU SMU UMU GU x x x x x x OR x x x x x x x x x x x x x x P x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x RE x x x x x x RR x x x x R-1A x x x x R-1B x x x x R-1C x x x x R-2 x x x R-3 x x x RMH-1 x x RMH-2 x x RHP x x x x HM x x x x T x x x x x NC x x x x CC x x x x x RC x x OP x x x x x x x x M-1 x x M-2 x M-3 x PID x UMU x SMU x x RMU x UV x x PD x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x DMU x IRCN x  
(Ord. No. 5-2019, § 1, 2-26-19) 
Secs. 27-22-27-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FUTURE LAND USE/ZONING MATRIX STANDARDS 

Sec. 27-26. - Commercial zoning districts located in the Low Intensity Commercial land use category. 
    In addition to the restrictions and requirements of each zoning district established in the Chapter 28, "Zoning", commercially zoned property identified on the adopted Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map as Low Intensity Commercial shall be developed according to the criteria set forth in Chapter 29, Special Districts and Overlays, Article VIII, Special Land Use Standards, Division 1, "Commercial Zoning Districts in the Commercial Low Intensity Future Land Use." 
Sec. 27-27. - Community Commercial (CC) zoning district. 
    Sites zoned Community Commercial (CC) must either be located at the intersection of two (2) collector roadways or have frontage on an arterial or higher classification roadway. Community Commercial (CC) districts may only be located in a Commercial Low Intensity or Commercial High Intensity land use designation on the Future Land Use Map. 
Sec. 27-28. - Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning. 
    In addition to the restrictions and requirements of the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district established in Chapter 28, Zoning, properties zoned M-1 but identified on the adopted Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map not designated with the Industrial land use shall be developed according to the criteria set forth in Chapter 29, Special Districts and Overlays, Article VIII, Special Land Use Standards, Division 2, "Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) Zoning District." 
Sec. 27-29. - Wetland and Conservation Overlay (WCA) and the Conservation future land use category. 
(a)  The Conservation Area Overlay District shall conform to the Conservation Land Use designation noted on the City of Titusville Future Land Use Map. 
(b)  An illustration of the areas affected by the Conservation Area Overlay District is to be found in Chapter 29 - Special Districts and Overlays. 
Sec. 27-30. - Additional requirements for zoning districts consistent with Downtown Mixed-Use land use. 
    In addition to the applicable requirements contained elsewhere in these regulations, all property developed after the date of adoption of this section [October 26, 2010] and zoned R-1C, R-3, T, NC, CC, OP, CM, M-1 and P, that is located in a Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use as shown on the adopted Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map shall comply with the additional requirements set forth per Chapter 28, Zoning, Article I, General Provisions, Section 28-7, "Additional requirements for zoning districts consistent with Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use", and Chapter 29, Special Districts and Overlays, Article VIII, Special Land Use Standards, Division 3, Downtown Mixed-Use Future Land Use. 
Sec. 27-31. - Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zoning district. 
    The Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district is designed as a Commercial Low Intensity land use category on the Future Land Use Map. 
Secs. 27-32-27-40. - Reserved. 
Chapter 28 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 28-1. - Designation of district boundaries. 
    The maps delineating the boundaries of the various zoning districts, together with all items shown on such maps, are adopted and approved by the City Council. These documents collectively constitute the "official zoning map." The official zoning map is incorporated by reference and made a part of the Land Development Regulations. This map is on file in the office of the Administrator and in the office of the Clerk of the City of Titusville. All amendments to the official zoning map shall be listed in the order adopted in a separate register maintained in and kept current by the Administrator. The official zoning map carries the zoning district designations established in this chapter. 
Sec. 28-2. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  Location of district boundary lines. 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, alleys, or right-of-way lines of highways, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line. 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of water said boundary line shall be construed to be the limit of the jurisdiction of the City of Titusville, unless otherwise indicated. 
(5)  All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water and are not shown as included within any district shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more districts the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district. 
(6)  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated in the manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation. All areas included in the vacation shall be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(7)  Where district boundaries are indicated as following platted lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the district boundaries. 
(8)  Where district boundaries are indicated by specific dimensions, such specific dimensions shall control. 
(9)  Where district boundaries divide platted lots or cross un-subdivided property, and where no specific dimensions are indicated on the zoning map, the scale of the zoning map shall control. 
(10)  Where the street or property layout or other physical features existing on the ground are at variance with the zoning map, or where other uncertainties exist as to interpretation of the future land use map, the City Manager or his designee shall interpret the map to fix the exact location of the boundaries. 
(b)  Provisions for parcels divided by district boundaries. Where any parcel of land is divided into two (2) or more zoning districts, the regulations of each individual district shall apply to that part of the parcel so zoned, except that when a parcel is divided into two (2) or more residential districts, the permitted intensity of development may be averaged over the entire parcel as long as the remaining applicable dimensional requirements are followed. 
(c)  Unzoned property generally. If, because of error or omission in the zoning map, any property in the City is not shown as being in a zoning category; or if property in newly-annexed territory is unzoned; or if the zoning of any property is vacated or invalidated, for any reason, either judicially or legislatively; then the classification of any of such properties shall be deemed to be Open Space and Recreation (OR) unless and until a different zoning is provided for such property by ordinance amending the zoning map; and, until such amendment is provided for, no use may be made of any such property except in accordance with the regulations for the OR district. 
(d)  Unzoned property owned by governmental agency. Any unzoned land owned by a governmental agency may be exempted by the City Council from compliance with these district regulations, and from the requirements of applying for a specific zoning category, for any proposed development, expansion, or change of use, based upon a specific proposed site plan and following recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Sec. 28-3. - Buffers. 
    Landscape buffers between uses shall be determined according to the "Required Landscape Yard Type" table specified in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10. 
Sec. 28-4. - Conflicting sections. 
    Where sections of these regulations are in conflict, the more restrictive section shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between the City-wide Land Development Regulations and the regulations specific to the Downtown Mixed-Use Smart Code, the regulations in the Downtown Mixed-Use Smart Code shall prevail. 
Sec. 28-5. - Property frontage/access. 
(a)  In all districts, except residential districts, no building or structure shall be erected on a parcel of land which does not abut a public street for a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  In Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), and Single-Family High Density (R-1C) districts, no dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one (1) public street for at least sixty-five (65) feet, except that a minimum street abutment distance of twenty-five (25) feet shall apply to properties of an irregular shape provided that the minimum lot width is met at the building line. These requirements shall not apply to lots created through the Lot Split and Small-Scale Plat process contained in Chapter 34, Article III, Division 2 and Division 4. 
(c)  In all other residential districts, access, in lieu of frontage, may be provided to lots platted in accordance with Chapter 34, Article III. Access shall meet the requirements contained in Chapter 28, Article I. 
Sec. 28-6. - Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Smart Code. 
    The Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district is specific to the Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA). It is recognized that the DCRA has unique characteristics and development patterns, which the DMU zoning district compliments and enhances. The regulations specific to the DMU zoning district are located throughout the code, and major categories of regulations can be found in the following locations: 
(a)  Administration, relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and City-wide Land Development Regulations and establishment of the sub-districts within the DMU zoning district are located in Chapter 28, Article III. 
(b)  Use Regulations and Development Standards are located in Chapter 28, Article IV through Article IX. 
(c)  Parking Regulations are located in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 9. 
(d)  Landscaping Regulations are located in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10. 
(e)  Signage Regulations are located in Chapter 32, Article II. 
Sec. 28-7. - Additional requirements for zoning districts consistent with Downtown Mixed-Use land use. 
(a)  In addition to the applicable requirements contained elsewhere in these regulations, all property developed after the date of adoption of this section and zoned Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Office Professional (OP), Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) and Public (P), that is located in a Downtown Mixed-Use land use as shown on the adopted Future Land Use Map shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Office Professional (OP), and Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning shall be permitted where: 
a.  Property has frontage on and access only from a collector of higher roadway; or 
b.  Property has frontage on Orange Street; or 
c.  Property has frontage on Buffalo Road; or 
d.  Property abuts a railroad right-of-way. 
(2)  Ground signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(3)  Fences, walls, and/or screens exceeding thirty (30) inches in height shall be prohibited forward of the front or street side facade of the principal structure. 
(4)  If all required off-street parking can otherwise be accommodated on site, the required front and street side setbacks can be substituted with a minimum ten-foot deep landscaped buffer area. Within this area, impervious coverage shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in any front or street side yard. 
(5)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Office Professional (OP) and Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning districts, outdoor storage, retail sales and/or display shall be prohibited between the principal structure and any road right-of-way. 
(6)  In the Tourist (T) and Community Commercial (CC) zoning districts, outdoor retail sales and display may be permitted as a Conditional Use within the DMU Land Use designation except as noted: 
a.  A conditional use permit shall not be required for retail sales and display of automobiles. 
b.  Outdoor retail sales and/or display shall not be permitted when such activity is specifically prohibited by use restrictions within the particular zoning district. 
(7)  Outdoor storage is permitted in the rear and interior side area provided this area is enclosed with a six-foot high opaque screen and no items so stored are visible over the enclosure/opaque screen. 
(8)  A conditional use permit shall not be required for outdoor storage and/or display in the Public (P) zoning district. 
Sec. 28-8. - Trailers, mobile homes, and residential coaches. 
(a)  Use. The use of a trailer, mobile home or residential coach as a dwelling or living unit on any lot, other than licensed and approved mobile home park within the corporate limits of the City, shall not be permitted, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(b)  Conditional use permit for trailers and mobile homes. 
(1)  Security purposes. Any person, firm or corporation may apply for a conditional use permit to the provisions of paragraph (a), in accordance with the provision and terms outlined herein, for the temporary location of trailers or mobile homes for security purposes in the following zoning districts: Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1), Industrial (M-2), Highway Industrial Infill (M-3), and Public (P) zoning districts. The Conditional Use Permit shall be for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval by Council. All applications submitted under the provisions of this paragraph shall include a binding site plan meeting the requirements of Section 34-205 of the Land Development Regulations. The purpose and intent of this requirement is to provide for the replacement of the temporary trailer/mobile home with a permanent activity within the one (1) year temporary permit period. Such temporary permit may be extended for a period not to exceed six (6) months by the City Building Official, under the conditions that the applicant has obtained the necessary permits to begin construction of the permanent structure and has initiated construction activity. 
(2)  Church school purposes. Any religious institution may apply for a conditional use permit to the provisions of paragraph (a), in accordance with the provisions and terms outlined herein, for the location of trailers or mobile homes for the sole purpose of conducting church school or Sunday School classes, not to include day care/school purpose. Said trailer or mobile home shall be located on the same premises on which the principal house of worship is located. The Conditional Use Permit shall be for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval by City Council and may be renewed in accordance with the above procedure stated in subsection (b)(1). 
(c)  Design requirements. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Building Official shall inspect the property to determine whether or not the applicant meets the following design requirements: 
(1)  Location of parcel. No mobile home shall be located in an area which would constitute a health or safety hazard to the residents. 
(2)  Screening. The mobile home unit shall be screened from the public right-of-way and from surrounding property by a planted and/or structural screen of sufficient height to block visual access to the mobile home. Planted screens shall achieve opacity within six (6) months. The City Council may waive this requirement upon showing there is no need for screening. 
(3)  Density. No more than one (1) mobile home unit shall be allowed on a parcel except in a mobile park. 
(4)  Minimum site size. A minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of eighty (80) feet. 
(5)  Height and setback requirements. No mobile home or accessory structure shall exceed twenty (20) feet in height. All setback and lot coverage requirements of the zoning district of the site shall be required to be met. No mobile home shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from any other structures on the site. 
(6)  Anchorage of mobile homes. Each mobile home site shall provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie down of the mobile home, per standard building code requirements. 
(7)  Parking. Two (2) stabilized off-street parking spaced. See Chapter 30, Article III, Division 9, for parking requirements. 
(8)  Porches, cabanas, awnings and accessory additions. Porches and other additions to the mobile home shall be permitted provided the setback requirements are complied with. Only one (1) porch, cabana or awning shall be permitted to a mobile home site. No addition to a mobile home shall exceed ten (10) feet in height. All porch, cabana, awning and carport additions shall be constructed so as to permit dismantling and storage within eight (8) hours. The floors of such additions to mobile homes shall be of concrete or other hard-surfaced material. No addition to a mobile home shall contain kitchen facilities or plumbing. 
(9)  Water supply. Each mobile home shall be connected to the City's water supply system in accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the statutes and regulations of the State of Florida, and shall be separately metered for the purpose of billing. 
(10)  Sewage disposal. City of Titusville plumbing codes shall apply to all mobile home units and with the statutes and regulations of the State of Florida. All mobile home shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. 
(11)  Electricity. Electricity and grounding for each mobile home site shall be provided in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville. Each mobile home site shall be individually metered by the supplying electrical utility company. 
(d)  Other provisions. The mobile home shall not be used for any purpose until such approval has been made. The Building Official or their designee are hereby authorized to make periodic inspections of the mobile home site and the mobile home for the purpose of determining compliance with this section. Whenever any of the above officials upon inspection of the mobile home site or the mobile home, determine that any of the provisions of this section have been violated they shall furnish the owner of the parcel and the resident of the mobile home with a list of such violations. All violations shall be remedied within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the written notices. If violations are not corrected in the specified time period, the Building Official shall revoke the permit. 
Sec. 28-9. - Short-term rental of single-family dwellings. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of a single-family detached dwelling to rent or lease the dwelling to another person(s) for periods of three (3) months or less, or to lease or rent the subject dwelling more than four (4) times in a twelve-month period. The lease or rental of a single-family detached dwelling more than four (4) times within a twelve-month period shall create a presumption that the owner is acting in violation of this section. These prohibitions shall only apply in the following zoning districts: Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), and Residential Historic Preservation (RHP). 
    Any owner that claims a vested right to continue an existing short-term rental as prohibited above, shall be entitled to submit an application for vested rights pursuant to Chapter 34, Article VII, Division 3 to determine whether or not the owner has a vested right to continue a short-term rental. 
Sec. 28-10. - Administrative waiver of setback requirements. 
    In all zoning classifications, front, rear, side and side corner setbacks may be partially waived by the Administrator if the request meets the criteria specified in Chapter 34, Article V, Division 7. 
Sec. 28-11. - Administrative waiver of lot size, width or depth requirements. 
    In all zoning classifications, a waiver of minimum lot size, width or depth may be partially waived by the Administrator if the request meets the criteria specified in Chapter 34, Article V, Division 8. 
Sec. 28-12. - Overlay districts. 
    Properties located within an overlay district shall be developed in accordance with the underlying zoning district or the provisions of the overlay zone, whichever is stricter. 
Sec. 28-13. - Existing churches and schools. 
    Churches and schools, existing as of June 9, 1964, shall be identified as such on the zoning map and such churches and schools indicated on the zoning map will not be subject to the regulations of the nonconforming use, in the event they are situated in a district which would otherwise cause them to be a nonconforming use, and will have the same status as though specifically permitted in said district. 
Sec. 28-14. - Public service and facilities required. 
    Development of commercially zoned property shall only be permitted where public services and facilities are available or will be available in accordance with concurrency management provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 28-15. - Commercially zoned districts located in Low Intensity Commercial future land use categories. 
    In addition to the restrictions and requirements of each zoning district created by this section, commercially zoned property identified in the adopted Future Land Use Map as Low Intensity Commercial shall be developed according to the following criteria: 
    The Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district shall be exempt from criteria (a), (c), and (d). 
(a)  Site requirements. 
(1)  For development which is to contain more than one (1) business use in a single center or as part of a single development, the maximum allowable leasable floor area for the total development shall not exceed seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet. Forty thousand (40,000) square feet if the development does not contain a retail food market or supermarket. 
(2)  No more than two (2) individual uses shall contain more than three thousand (3,000) square feet. The average area of uses in the development shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(3)  Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the gross area of the site. 
(b)  Maximum building height. Except as noted herein, the maximum height for all buildings shall be thirty-five (35) feet. However, architectural features and appurtenances such as, but not limited to, clock towers, identification monuments, chimneys and other similar features, shall be allowed in excess of the stated height, subject to the approval of City Council after recommendation of Planning and Zoning Commission. Development in the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district shall increase setbacks consistent with Section 28-311(c) for buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height with a maximum permitted building height of fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Streetside setback area. The entire area between the curb and property line shall be landscaped. Landscaping in these areas shall consist of an effective combination of street trees, grass, ground cover and shrubbery and may include such items as sidewalks and access driveways. 
(d)  Storage and refuse collection areas. 
(1)  All outdoor areas and refuse collection areas shall be screened so that materials stored within these arenas shall not be visible from access streets or adjacent properties. 
Sec. 28-16. - Preexisting conditions. 
    Existing conditions on improved parcels not meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming. The regulations regarding these properties are established in Chapter 34, Article VII, Division 1. 
Sec. 28-17. - Architectural control. 
    Any poured concrete or concrete block wall facing a residential district shall at a minimum be finished, sealed, or painted. Non-stressed skin metal buildings or corrugated metal siding shall be prohibited. Reflective surfaces that produce glare or visual hazards in public access areas shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 28-18. - Zoning districts consistent with the Titusville Shoreline Area (TSA) overlay district. 
(a)  The following zoning districts are consistent with the Titusville Shoreline Area (TSA) overlay district: 
(1)  Residential Estate (RE) 
(2)  Rural Residential (RR) 
(3)  Single-Family Low Density (R-1A) 
(4)  Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B) 
(5)  Single-Family High Density (R-1C) 
(6)  Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) 
(7)  Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) 
(8)  Residential Historic Preservation (RHP) 
(9)  Neighborhood Commercial (NC) 
(10)  Tourist (T) 
(11)  Open Space and Recreation (OR) 
(12)  Community Commercial (CC) 
(13)  Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) 
(b)  Additional regulations relating to use and development standards within the TSA Overlay District are established in Chapter 29, Article II. 
Sec. 28-19. - Dog-friendly dining. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to implement 509.233, Florida Statutes, by permitting public food service establishments in the City of Titusville, subject to the terms of this ordinance [section], to become exempt from certain portions of the Food and Drug Administration Food Code, as adopted by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, in order to allow patrons' dogs within certain designated outdoor portions of their respective establishments. 
(b)  [Exemption created.] Pursuant to Section 509.233(2), Florida Statutes there is hereby created in the City of Titusville, Florida, a local exemption procedure to certain provisions of the Food and Drug Administration Food Code, in order to allow patrons' dogs within certain designated outdoor portions of public food service establishments. 
(c)  Definitions. For use in application of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Public food service establishment means any building, vehicle, place, or structure, or any room or division in a building, vehicle, place, or structure where food is prepared, served, or sold for immediate consumption on or in the vicinity of the premises; called for or taken out by customers; or prepared prior to being delivered to another location for consumption as defined in Section 509.013, Florida Statutes. 
(2)  Dog means an animal of the subspecies Canis lupus famiiiaris. 
(3)  Patron means "guest" as set forth in Section 509.013, Florida Statutes. 
(4)  Outdoor area means an area adjacent to a public food service establishment that is predominantly or totally free of any physical barrier on all sides and above. 
(5)  Division means the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation. 
(d)  Permit required; submittals. 
(1)  In order to allow patrons' dogs on their premises, a public food service establishment shall secure a valid permit issued in accordance with this subsection. The City Manager or designee is authorized to issue permits consistent with this section. 
(2)  Applications for a permit under this subsection shall be made to the City Manager or designee, on a form provided for such purpose, and shall include, along with any other such information deemed reasonably necessary by the City Manager or designee, in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this subsection, the information required by Section 509.233(4)(b) Florida Statutes 2006, including, but not limited to: 
i.  The name, location, and mailing address of the public food service establishment; 
ii.  The name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the permit applicant; 
iii.  A diagram and description of the outdoor area to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated area and of other areas of outdoor dining not available for patrons' dogs; any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; and such other information reasonably required by the City Manager or designee. The diagram or plan shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional; 
iv.  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area; 
v.  All application materials shall contain the appropriate State of Florida, Division of Hotels and Restaurants (the "Division") issued license number for the subject public food service establishment; 
vi.  The contents and proposed location of a kit for the cleaning and sanitizing of any dog waste accidents; and 
vii.  The proposed location of all signs required by subsection (e)(1), below. 
(3)  The City Council may adopt by resolution or ordinance reasonable fees necessary to: 
i.  Recoup the costs of processing the initial application, permitting, and inspections; and 
ii.  Provide for an annual renewal, and enforcement. 
(e)  General regulations. 
(1)  In order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and pursuant to Section 509.233, Florida Statutes, all permits issued pursuant to this subsection are subject to the requirements contained within Section 509.233(3)(c) Florida Statutes and including, but not limited to: 
i.  All public food service establishment employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting, or otherwise handling dogs. Employees shall be prohibited from touching, petting, or otherwise handling dogs while serving food or beverages or handling tableware or before entering other parts of the public food service establishment. 
ii.  Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised that they should wash their hands before eating. Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
iii.  Employees and patrons shall be instructed that they shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or any other items involved in food service operations. 
iv.  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under reasonable control. 
v.  Dogs shall not be allowed on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. 
vi.  All table and chair surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized with an approved product between seating of patrons. Spilled food and drink shall be removed from the floor or ground between seating of patrons. 
vii.  Accidents involving dog waste shall be cleaned immediately and the area sanitized with an approved product. A kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose shall be kept near the designated outdoor area. The contents of the kit shall be identified at the time of application and approved by the City Manager or designee. 
viii.  At least one (1) sign reminding employees of the applicable rules including those contained in this subsection, and those additional rules and regulations, if any, included as further conditions of the permit by the City Manager or designee, shall be posted in a conspicuous location frequented by employees within the public food service establishment. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half inches in width and eleven inches in height (81/2" x 11") and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
ix.  At least one (1) sign reminding patrons of the applicable rules including those contained in this subsection, and those additional rules and regulations, if any, included as further conditions of the permit by the City Manager or designee, shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half inches in width and eleven inches in height (81/2" x 11") and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than twenty (20) point font size. The number and location of the sign(s) shall be determined by the City Manager or designee. 
x.  At all times while the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment is available to patrons and their dogs, a sign shall be posted in a conspicuous and public location near all entrances to the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment, the purpose of which shall be to place patrons on notice that the designated outdoor portion of the public food service establishment is currently available to patrons accompanied by their dog or dogs. The mandatory sign shall be not less than twelve inches in width and fifteen inches in height (12" x 15") and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than twenty (20) point font size. The notice shall state in like or similar language "Dogs are permitted in outdoor seating areas". In addition, table place cards shall be required on or at all seating areas indicating in like or similar language "Dogs are permitted in this seating area". 
xi.  Dogs shall not be permitted to travel through indoor or non-designated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment, and ingress and egress to the designated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment must not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area of the food establishment. 
(2)  A permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall not be transferred to a subsequent owner upon the sale or transfer of a public food service establishment, but shall expire automatically upon such sale or transfer. The subsequent owner shall be required to reapply for a permit pursuant to this subsection if such owner wishes to continue to accommodate patron's dogs. 
(3)  Permits shall expire on June 30 of each year, with any required annual renewal fee being due and payable on or before September 30 of the prior year, concurrent with payment of a business tax receipt. 
(4)  Procedure for processing complaints: In accordance with Section 509.233(6), Florida Statutes, the City Manager or designee shall accept, document, and respond to complaints, and timely report to the Division all such complaints and the City's enforcement responses to such complaints. The City Manager or designee shall also timely provide the Division with a copy of all approved applications and permits issued pursuant to this subsection. 
(5)  Any public food service establishment that fails to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be guilty of violating this subsection of the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations and shall be subject to any and all enforcement proceedings consistent with the applicable provisions of the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations and general law. 
(Ord. No. 45-2017, § 1, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 28-20. - Shipping containers. 
    Shipping containers are not permitted in any zoning category for use as a residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 8-2018, § 2(28-19), 2-27-18) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 8-2018, adopted Feb. 27, 2018, enacted provisions to be designated as § 28-19. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 28-19, said new provisions have been redesignated as § 28-20. 
ARTICLE II. - INDIAN RIVER CITY NEIGHBORHOOD ZONING 

Sec. 28-21. - Indian River City Neighborhood Zoning. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Indian River City Neighborhood zoning district is created to implement the goals, objectives, and recommendations of the Indian River City Neighborhood Plan, adopted by the City of Titusville on March 27, 2012, by Resolution 8-2012. The overall purpose of this zoning district is to promote single-family uses in the core residential area of the community while providing for a mixed-use commercial area along the major commercial corridors of the neighborhood. The regulations are intended to provide for a compatible buffering between commercial and residential areas, as well as to phase out incompatible uses in the core residential area that have negatively impacted the neighborhood over time. 
(b)  Sub-districts established. The Indian River City Neighborhood Zoning District has two (2) sub-districts, each with separate uses and regulations. The Commercial Mixed-Use Sub-District is generally located on properties with direct access to Washington Avenue and Hopkins Avenue. The Residential Sub-District is generally located within the interior of the neighborhood and is described in the Indian River City Neighborhood Plan as the "Core Residential Area." It is the clear intention of the City that the boundaries established for the single-family "Core Residential Area" are firm and shall not be changed unless the City has gone through the appropriate process of changing the IRC Neighborhood Plan to justify the changes. The Sub-District boundaries are provided in the Map below: 

(c)  Nonconforming uses. Social services, within the IRCN zoning classification shall be defined as public, not-for-profit or private business or use that provides services to persons including, but not limited to, counseling, food provisions, emergency or short-term housing services, and employment services, excluding community residential homes as defined by Section 419.001, Florida Statutes. These services shall be governed by Chapter 34, Article VII. Any existing Social Services shall be considered lawful nonconforming uses and shall not be allowed to expand. The existing social service at 4050 Coquina Avenue (Liberty Lodge) shall be allowed to continue and may be rebuilt in the event that structure is damaged more than fifty (50) percent. 
(d)  Exhibit A below, illustrates the multifamily dwelling designated as 4230 Mt. Vernon Avenue. 

(e)  Permitted and conditional uses of the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district may be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Must be on property with an approved industrial use existing as of August 12, 2012 (effective date of Ord. 25-2012). 
(2)  Uses which require a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) within the M-1 zoning district shall require a CUP and shall meet all criteria of the specified use. 
(f)  Any nonresidential use in the IRCN-C district not listed shall be considered by Conditional Use Permit. All nonresidential uses permitted by conditional use under this provision may have other requirements as approved by the City to protect the interests of surrounding properties. The CUP shall, at a minimum, meet the criteria below: 
(1)  The property shall provide appropriate screening and buffering, such as fencing and landscaping. 
(2)  The use shall be compatible with the surrounding area, specifically with providing appropriate on-site parking provisions and limited noise. 
(3)  The structure/building must be architecturally compatible with the surrounding residential structures. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 8, 10-24-17) 
Secs. 28-22-28-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE SMART CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 28-26. - Intent/purpose. 
    The general intent of this Land Development Code provision is to establish procedures and standards for the development of land within the City of Titusville Downtown Community Redevelopment Area (DCRA) boundary, enforceable under the planning jurisdiction of the City of Titusville in an effort to: 
(a)  Provide for and encourage development within the DCRA in a manner that is harmonious with its environs, consistent with the Downtown CRA Plans, and Plans and Codes of the City. 
(b)  Stimulate economic growth and redevelopment of not only the downtown, but the U.S. 1 corridor and other major corridors leading thereto. 
(c)  Coordinate design pattern of streets, sidewalks, and other transportation facilities, including multi-modal forms of transportation. 
(d)  Encourage public and civic spaces for recreation, water resource management, public gatherings, and placemaking. 
(e)  Assure flood prevention, proper storm drainage, and appropriate utility systems so development is not a burden to the DCRA. 
(f)  Conserve valuable and scenic natural features, with provision for adequate open space. 
(g)  Conserve valuable and culturally significant historic structures and characteristics. 
(h)  Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by creating incentives for or eliminating impediments to a quality, well-planned development. 
(i)  Require a high degree of quality and aesthetics in developments. 
Sec. 28-27. - Relationship to downtown Master Plan from the downtown Master Plan. 
    The purpose of the Community Redevelopment Plan Update was to develop a plan for coordinated growth in the Downtown CRA through a series of strategic initiatives that can be realized over the next fifteen (15) to twenty (20) years. The plan identifies investments aimed at preserving the established qualities of the Downtown area and creating a vibrant mixed-use town center environment. The plan also identifies redevelopment opportunities to enhance local market conditions for new commercial and residential development, and to maximize the revitalization potential of the entire DCRA. The long-range vision reflects the objectives articulated by residents at workshops. These objectives include creating a series of clearly defined centers along the length of the DCRA. The plan envisions the addition of new mixed-use buildings on infill lots along the Washington/Hopkins one-way pairs, new open space amenities, enhanced streetscape conditions, and new public facilities (parking structures and stormwater ponds) that will increase the area's capability to accommodate new growth. 
    The plan envisions new standards for future development. These standards or regulations will be aimed at preserving the historic character while creating more appealing physical conditions. The goal is to realize a downtown area through "smart growth" that will attract and sustain private investment and create a unique sense of place. The following implementation recommendations in the plan are intended as follow-up measures in the Downtown CRA over the next five (5) to eight (8) years. 
    The private sector initiatives indicated include the following: 
(a)  Implement the River Park mixed-use development next to the Stormwater Park. 
(b)  Develop a variety of new residential opportunities throughout the DCRA. 
(c)  Develop in-fill housing in the North and South Palm Street areas and adjacent to the FEC railroad. 
(d)  Begin development of the Sand Pointe Plaza project and general area. 
    The public sector initiatives are as follows: 
(a)  Conduct a real estate/market analysis and feasibility study for the DCRA. 
(b)  Acquire land and assemble feasible development parcels around the Garden Street and U.S. 1 intersection. 
(c)  Acquire land in the North Palm Street and South Palm Street areas. 
(d)  Implement the Stormwater Park project. 
(e)  Acquire land in the Town Center, Civic Center, and Southern Gateway areas for central parking and stormwater facilities. 
(f)  Implement a priority streetscape enhancement program throughout the DCRA and at major entry points. 
(g)  Implement proposed FDOT improvements along Washington Avenue and Hopkins Avenue. 
(h)  Implement effective historic preservation measures. 
    The recommended regulatory issues include the following: 
(a)  The adoption of a long-range development plan for the DCRA. 
(b)  Modify the Comprehensive Plan to reflect the Town Center concept. 
(c)  Modify existing zoning or establish an overlay district to attract desired types of development. 
(d)  Adopt a "form-based" code and development standards. 
(e)  Create a local historic district for the Old Town residential area. 
(f)  Establish historic preservation criteria for commercial properties in the Town Center area. 
    These strategies are aimed at leveraging and maximizing the impact of future public investment in attracting private sector investment, and ensuring that the area develops in a manner consistent with the "vision" of the community. 
    This hybrid, form-based code seeks to implement the strategies identified above through a variety of tools: 
(a)  Updating and integrating the existing Land Development Codes into one (1) concise document containing "everything anyone ever wanted to know" about development in Downtown Titusville. This makes it easier on the public sector, but more importantly, on the private, who needs to have consistency, clarity, and known expectations in order to assume the risk associated with redevelopment projects. It also attempts to streamline the process by having more flexibility, less travel through various boards/agencies, and more control for staff and the DCRA. 
(b)  Using the concept of Smart Growth, and the model for Smart Codes, which looks at communities from the standpoint of a "transect", which are development areas lying between rural, suburban, and urban development zones. 
(c)  Visually expressing the codes to streamline and be "user-friendly". Pictures tell a story and the graphic depiction of what the words mean can allay problems with interpretation, semantics, and expectations. 
Sec. 28-28. - Relationship to Comprehensive Plan and City's Land Development Regulations. 
    It is the intention of the City Council and Local Planning Agency that this Chapter also serves to implement the requirements of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, Section 163.3202 of the Florida Statutes, which requires the adoption of Land Development Regulations. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and the Comprehensive Plan, the Comprehensive Plan shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and the Citywide Land Development Regulations, this chapter shall prevail. In the event of any conflict, the Administrator shall make a determination that may be appealed to the DCRA. 
Sec. 28-29. - Location, land use and zoning maps. 
    Maps 1-7 in Section 28-32 depict the general location, land use, zoning, DCRA sub-districts, and existing street network. 
Sec. 28-30. - Applicability. 
    The Central Business District (CBD), and any other zoning district in the Community Redevelopment Area with the exception of the Residential Historic Preservation District is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with a new district entitled: 
(a)  Downtown Mixed-Use Zoning District. The Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district is hereby established to promote the health, safety, social and economic welfare of the residents of the City by increasing the City's tax base and promoting the long-term economic growth and vitality of the downtown area. This district enables the City to encourage public and private development compatible with the character of the downtown area and in conformance with the Community Redevelopment Plan. The DMU encourages a mix of uses and development form throughout the District. Through the DMU, the City can become the center for economic and business affairs, expand employment and living opportunities, protect historic resources, promote new investment, protect the natural beauty and public spaces that make Titusville special, and encourage public use (not necessarily ownership) of the waterfront. It is further intended that this district will use the existing grid street network as the spine or bones of improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking management, and encouragement of excellence in urban design, preserving the unique character and historic fabric of the downtown. In this way, the City will have a diverse, welcoming downtown for entertainment, tourism, employment, recreation, business, and living. 
(b)  Downtown Mixed-Use Zoning District (DMU) Boundaries. The boundaries of the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district are the same as the boundaries of the Downtown Community Redevelopment Area, with the exception of the Residential Historic Preservation Zoning District. The Residential Historic Preservation District shall retain the same zoning designation; however, all properties in this district with the DCRA shall comply with the Administrative procedures of Chapter 28, Article III, Division 1. The Downtown Community Redevelopment Area as created by City Council under Ordinance 66-1982 pursuant to the powers conferred by Section 163.330, Florida Statutes, entitled "The Community Redevelopment Act of 1986" and any amendments thereto, specifically those powers granted in Section 163.330 et seq. [Florida Statutes], and as refined within this subsection. The boundaries of the Community Redevelopment area are as follows: 
(1)  North. The northwest property line of Parcel 28, Section 33, running southwest-northeast and extending from FEC Railroad on the west to the center of the navigable portion of the Indian River on the east. 
(2)  South. An east-west line running parallel with the center line of Grace Street and extending from the FEC Railroad to the west, to the center of the navigable portion of the Indian River on the east. 
(3)  East. A line running generally north and south, but continuous to the center of the navigable portion of the Indian River, and extending from the intersection with the south boundary as described above [and the] intersection with the north boundary as described above. 
(4)  West. A line running generally north and south and parallel to the FEC Railroad, and extending from the intersection of the north boundary to the center line of Grace Street on the south. 
(5)  Exception. Except the following: Beginning at the confluence of the west mean high water line of the Indian River and the east terminus of the River View Place right-of-way; thence west along the north right-of-way line of River View Place to the west right-of-way line of Indian River Avenue; thence south along the west right-of-way line of Indian River Avenue to the south right-of-way line of Palmetto Street; thence west along the south right-of-way line of Palmetto Street one hundred twenty-five (125) feet; thence south and parallel to the west right-of-way of Indian River Avenue to the south right-of-way line of Grace Street; thence east along the south right-of-way line of Grace Street to the west mean high water line of the Indian River; thence north along the west mean high water line of the Indian River to the point of beginning. (See Community Development Department for any question pertaining to boundaries.) 
Within the Downtown Mixed-Use District (DMU) and the Residential Historic Preservation Zoning District, all applicable laws pertaining to the DCRA and including the goals and objectives of the Community Redevelopment Plan shall be adhered to. 
The regulations established in the DMU have been established in accordance with the Community Redevelopment Plan with reasonable consideration, among other things, to prevailing land uses, growth opportunities, the elimination of slum and blight and to encourage the development and redevelopment of land in the community redevelopment area and community input. Therefore, the district provides regulations to implement applicable goals, objectives and policies of the City's redevelopment efforts so as to be consistent with the applicable goals, policies and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Severability. If any part or provision of this section or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provisions or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. That judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this section or the application thereof to any other persons or circumstances. 
(d)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. The provisions of this section shall supersede any ordinance in conflict herewith. The procedure for processing development within the redevelopment area shall be in accordance with this ordinance and shall supersede conflicting provisions. 
(e)  Enactment. This section shall take effect as provided by law; provided that when any provisions of this ordinance [section/article] are amended, the effective date of such amendment shall apply for the purposes of deciding any question directly controlled by such amendment. 
Sec. 28-31. - Guiding principles. 
    Decision making by City staff, boards, agencies, and Council should be influenced by the following guiding principles: 
(a)  That development within the DMU should be compact, pedestrian oriented, and Mixed-Use. 
(b)  That ordinary activity of daily living should occur within walking distance of most dwellings, allowing independence to those who do not drive. 
(c)  That interconnected networks of streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, and greenways should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce the length of automobile trips. 
(d)  That within neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels should be provided to accommodate diverse ages and incomes. 
(e)  That appropriate building densities, intensities, heights, and land uses should be provided within the DMU to create a viable, thriving urban center. 
(f)  That development should encourage or be served by transit and within walking distance of transit stops. 
(g)  That Civic, Institutional, and Commercial activity should be embedded in downtowns. 
(h)  That a range of open space including parks, squares, playgrounds, and other civic spaces should be distributed within the neighborhood and downtown. 
(i)  That buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of streets, sidewalks, outdoor seating, plazas, and similar civic places. 
(j)  That development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting the pedestrian and the spatial form of public areas. 
(k)  That the design of streets and buildings should reinforce safe environments, but not at the expense of accessibility. 
(l)  That architecture and landscape design should reflect the Titusville climate, topography, history, and building practice. 
(m)  That buildings, infrastructure, site design, and features should utilize energy-efficient methods. 
(n)  That civic buildings and public gathering places should be provided to reflect and reinforce community identity. 
(o)  That the preservation and renewal of historic buildings should be facilitated, to affirm the continuity and evolution of this community and our society. 
(p)  That new construction should be compatible with adjacent uses, respect the natural environment, and create little impact on the adjacent built environment. 
Sec. 28-32. - Preexisting conditions/applicability. 
(a)  Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the Administrator may require that a proposed building be compatible with the adjacent buildings rather than the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Any addition to or modification of a structure that has been designated as historical or located within the Historical District by the Local Preservation Organization or to a building actually or eligible for inclusion on a state, local or national historic register, shall be subject to approval by the local Historic Preservation Board or other City designated organization. 
(c)  The restoration or rehabilitation of an existing building shall not require the provision of (1) parking in addition to that existing or (2) on-site stormwater retention/detention in addition to that existing or to provide same if neither is provided. Provisions for regional parking and regional stormwater programs and payments in-lieu of on-site provision are found in Chapter 30. Existing parking requirements that exceed those for this Code may be reduced as provided by the waiver provisions outlined in Section 28-34. 
(d)  All new buildings, renovations of thirty-five (35) percent of the square footage, or improvements involving roof, structural, window replacement, painting, facade repair/replacement, additions or demolition/repair of existing buildings are subject to the Downtown Mixed-Use District Code and Downtown Urban Design Manual. 
(e)  Existing buildings which have a change of use shall be reviewed by the Administrator for a modification determination. An example of a change of land use is from commercial to residential, office to commercial, office to mixed use, and so on. Any waivers to these requirements shall be determined as outlined in Section 28-34. Modification determination shall include consideration of the last time improvements were made to a structure: 
(1)  If a structure has not been modified or updated within five (5) years, the following minimum improvements shall be required consistent with all current land development regulations and the Urban Design Manual: 
a.  If painting of structure. 
b.  If landscaping. 
c.  If new signage (must conform to current standards). 
d.  If replacement of safety hazards. 
e.  If addition of one (1) design feature from the Urban Design Manual appropriate to the style of the building. 
(2)  If a structure has not been modified or updated between five (5) and ten (10) years, the following minimum improvements shall be required consistent with all current Land Development Regulations and the Urban Design Manual: 
a.  Painting, landscaping, new signage and replacement of safety hazards. 
b.  Repair, replacement, or fixing of broken windows, structural problems, roof problems. 
c.  Addition of three (3) design features from the Urban Design Manual appropriate to the style of the building. 
(3)  If a structure has not been modified or updated in more than ten (10) years, and not of historic character or on a register, the following minimum improvements shall be required consistent with all current Land Development Regulations and the Urban Design Manual: 
a.  If compliance with the Land Development Regulations, unless and variances and/or waivers are approved per Section 28-34. 
b.  If compliance with the Urban Design Manual. 
Sec. 28-33. - Administration, submittals and review process. 
(a)  Interpretation. Interpretation of the standards in this section shall be the responsibility of the City Manager or designee. Appeals from his/her interpretations shall be taken to the Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA). 
(b)  Design review process. The DRC shall have authority to review and approve all aspects of exterior architecture, signage, landscape, streetscape or hardscape improvements for aesthetic appropriateness, and conformance to the adopted DMU District Code and Design Guidelines; and, for conformance to the City Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code for all projects equal to or less than one and one-half (1.5) acres in size or with buildings up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size. The DCRA shall receive recommendations from the DRC and make final approval on all projects in excess of one and one-half (1.5) acres or ten thousand one (10,001) square feet. Any appeals to a decision of the DRC shall be heard by the Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA). Said decision must be appealed within thirty (30) days after rendered. The fee for the appeal shall be as adopted by the City. 
(c)  Minimum submittal requirements for design review for DMU projects. At a minimum, the following shall be required for review of projects to be located within the redevelopment area on undeveloped sites, all sites greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or on sites where a building is to be demolished or renovated to more than fifty (50) percent of its current assessed value: 
(1)  A current certified site survey. 
(2)  A conceptual site plan, drawn to either one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, which shall contain: 
a.  Building locations and orientations and landscape areas; 
b.  Parking locations and number of spaces; 
c.  Paved surfaces, materials, and locations; 
d.  Site location diagram, map and legal description: 
1.  Signage; and 
2.  Tree survey of all trees larger than eight (8) inches dbh. 
e.  Building elevations illustrating all sides of structures that face public streets or spaces and specific architectural design elements for which bonuses may be sought. 
f.  Description of density or height bonuses being applied for and justification, as applicable. 
g.  Other supporting documentation as may be requested or required. 
(d)  Site Development Agreement or Binding Development Agreement. May be used to confirm or establish via negotiation the form of on- or off-site improvements that are required to be performed by either an owner, developer, or stakeholder and the DCRA. Such agreements shall be adopted in accordance with Chapter 34, Article VIII of the City's Land Development Regulations. 
Sec. 28-34. - Project procedures for the community redevelopment area. 
(a)  Conditional uses. The location, design and condition for operation of these uses require special review and approval by the Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA) in accordance with procedures set forth in Chapter 34, Article II, Division 4 of the City's Land Development Regulations. Such uses may be developed in the districts specified if special findings are made that the standards and conditions as set forth in Chapter 28 have been met. 
(b)  Variances/waivers. 
(1)  Variances and waivers. This section supersedes the City's Land Development Code provisions for variances in Chapter 34, Article II, Division 4, Conditional use permit process. Where the strict application of the code provisions cannot be met, variances or waivers may be granted within the DCRA. 
Waivers may be granted by the DRC as provided in Chapter 34, Article V, Division 6. Waivers are small deviations from the Code for specific issues outlined in Chapter 34, Article V, Division 6 and are necessary when trying to redevelop an area with small lots, existing buildings, and when codes or regulations have been designed for vast suburban vacant land instead of urban vacant lands. Waivers allow the DCRA the flexibility desired in moving quickly to facilitate development. Waivers are a variation from particular standards of this code that is justified by need, hardship, physical constraint, or to improve the overall design of the project, but is done through an administrative process rather than as a variance, in order to implement the Downtown Redevelopment Plan. 
Sec. 28-35. - Community Redevelopment Agency development approval authority. 
(a)  Variances on any item that would be considered within the DCRA shall be approved by the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(b)  Conditional use permits within the DCRA shall be approved by the City Council. 
Sec. 28-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 9 of Ord. No. 31-2017, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, deleted § 28-36, No use or sale of land or building except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, which derived from the original codification. User is directed to § 27-15 for provisions pertaining to said subject matter. 
Sec. 28-37. - Incentives. 
(a)  To encourage development within the DCRA, the City Council may grant the following incentives, to the extent authorized by state law: 
(1)  Applications for development within the DCRA shall be processed with priority over those in other areas of the City. 
(2)  The DCRA sub-committee may grant waivers for parking, setbacks, and on-site stormwater as set forth or others as may be provided for herein. 
(3)  The City may waive or reduce review fees for a certain period of time to the extent allowable or practical (under staff review). 
(4)  The DCRA may recommend, and City Council approve, increased density by the use of Transfer of Development Rights. 
(5)  As U.S. 1 is being improved and the City is a "Dense Urban Land Area" (DULA), the City may waive the traffic impact report, and allow a deferment of impact of fees. 
(6)  The DCRA may consider constructing those portions of a development that are for the public purpose: parking, stormwater, landscaping, plazas, civic spaces, required improvements in open space areas accessible for use by the public, roadway connectivity, pedestrian/bike paths, and the like. 
(7)  The DCRA may consider the reimbursement of Tax Increment Revenues anticipated to be derived from a development to that development over a negotiated period of time in order to help the project be financially feasible or meet their pro forma. 
Secs. 28-38-28-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE (DMU) DISTRICT 

Sec. 28-41. - Intent/purpose. 
    In 2008, the Titusville Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA) updated the adopted Redevelopment Plan. It states: "Overall, as redevelopment occurs in the City there is a need to remain flexible. Second, there is a need to identify the market forces that are shaping the available options and target efforts to take advantage of these forces. Third, redevelopment is generally more expensive than new development. We, therefore, need to offer developers the support of the DCRA, including the investment of the tax increment revenues generated by their projects back into the redevelopment area." This section of the new code seeks to identify opportunities for both the overall new Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) District, and the sub-areas, contained therein. 
Sec. 28-42. - Instructions. 
    Through the City's visioning and the recent workshops, there is a clear desire to recognize the Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA) as the urban core and to create standards to allow for an urban style of development. There is a clear and present desire to integrate Smart Code principles. Smart Code principles are based upon a system known as the Transect, which divides an "environment" into segments based upon its geological, or in terms of a "City", its development form. 
Sec. 28-43. - Downtown Mixed-Use Zoning District. 
    The Downtown Mixed-Use Zoning District (DMU) is established to promote the health, safety, social and economic welfare of the residents of the City by increasing the City's tax base and promoting the long-term economic growth and vitality of the downtown area. This district enables the City to encourage public and private development compatible with the character of the downtown area and in conformance with the Community Redevelopment Plan. The DMU encourages a mix of uses and development from throughout the District. Through the DMU, the City can become the center for economic and business affairs, expand employment and living opportunities, protect historic resources, promote new investment, protect the natural beauty and public spaces that make Titusville special, and encourage public use (not necessarily ownership) of the waterfront. It is further intended that this district will use the existing grid street network as the spine or bones of improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking management, and encouragement of excellence in urban design, preserving the unique character and historic fabric of the downtown. In this way, will the City have a diverse, welcoming downtown for entertainment, tourism, employment, recreation, business and living. 
Sec. 28-44. - Sub-districts described. 
    The specific uses, dimensions and development criteria are defined in Chapter 28, Article IV through Article IX. The sub-districts are described in the map below: 

(a)  Uptown: Located at the North end of the DCRA, this district has land on both sides of U.S. 1. The just north of Garden Street consists of smaller residential and commercial parcels to the south of a large vacant parcel. The privately held land on the east side of U.S. 1 is a marina and has opportunities to bring commerce to the waterfront and engage the public. 
Uptown-The Smart Code Perspective: This area shall contain the higher density and height allowances, flexibility for building types, uses, and building placements and contain the greatest variety of uses, and civic buildings of regional importance. It may have smaller blocks; streets have steady street tree planting and buildings are set close to wide sidewalks. 
General character: Medium to High-Density Mixed-Use buildings, entertainment, civic and cultural uses. Attached buildings forming a continuous street wall; trees within the public right-of-way; highest pedestrian and transit activity. 
Building placement: Shallow setbacks or none; buildings oriented to street, defining a street wall. 
Frontage types: Stoops, dooryards, forecourts, shopfronts, galleries, and arcades. 
Typical building height: Maximum of five (5) stories with a few shorter buildings; and up to ten (10) stories for convention/hotel/entertainment facilities and/or transit oriented development as approved by the City Council with a recommendation from the DCRA. 
Type of civic space: Parks, plazas and squares. 
(b)  Civic Waterfront: This is the soul of the DCRA where there are physical, visual, and spatial connections to the water by the public and the uses found on the land. Uses are primarily to be water dependent and water related and open to the public. Uses also do not have to be publicly owned, but open and available for public use at least ten (10) hours per day. 
(c)  Residential Historic District: 
Historical Residential-Smart Code Perspective: As a neighborhood with the largest concentration of historic homes in the City, this area consists of unique architecture and low density residential areas, adjacent to higher zones that have some mixed residential uses, home occupations, professional offices, some personal service, accessory or outbuildings. Planting is naturalistic and setbacks are relatively deep. Blocks may be large and the roads irregular to accommodate natural conditions. 
General character: Lawns, and landscaped yards surrounding detached single-family houses; pedestrians occasionally. 
Building placement: Large and variable front and side yard setbacks. 
Frontage types: Porches, fences, freestyle tree planting. 
Typical building height: One- to two-story with some three-story buildings. 
Type of civic space: Parks, greenways. 
(Editor's note: The Residential Historic District is governed by the Residential Historic Preservation District.) 
(d)  Downtown: This area is the heart of the DCRA. Predominately developed, downtown should contain the highest densities, intensities and heights creating a true downtown, urban area. 
Downtown-The Smart Code Perspective: The heart of the DCRA, this urban center area shall consist of higher density mixed-use buildings that accommodate retail, offices, government, civic, and public buildings, along with a mix of housing types including rowhouses and multifamily units. It has a tight network of streets, with wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and buildings set close to the sidewalks. 
General character: Specialty, retail, general shopping mixed with residential, Offices, workplace, and civic buildings; predominantly attached buildings; trees within the public right-of-way; substantial pedestrian activity. 
Building placement: Shallow (little space between building and sidewalk) Setbacks or none; buildings oriented to street defining a street wall. 
Frontage types: Stoops, shopfronts, galleries, dooryards, large window areas, higher first floor elevations. 
Typical building height: Maximum five (5) stories with a one-story waiver per Section 59-1440.2. 
Type of civic space: Parks, plazas and squares. 
Downtown Historic Village: Reserved. 
(e)  Midtown: The southern gateway into the DCRA, Midtown, appears as more suburban than the other areas. Uses which can be dual classified between commercial and industrial are located within this area (or sub-district). The Midtown area is structured such that many of the uses are to be validated as part of sustainability, and guide their change through design elements. Redevelopment and new criteria will attempt to create a tighter urban environment to enhance the core. 
Midtown-The Smart Code Perspective: General Urban Zone consists of mixed use. In this district, it is a heavier commercial fabric, with larger lot uses and development, such as vehicle sales, auto repair shops, some industrial uses, and scattered older residential uses within an urban fabric. It contains a wide range of building types more suburban in nature than urban, even though it is adjacent to the urban core. Setbacks and landscaping are variable. Streets with curbs and sidewalks define medium-sized blocks. 
General character: Mix of houses, older, small apartment buildings with scattered industrial and commercial activity; little balance between landscape and buildings; large lots and uses are not conducive to pedestrians. 
Building placement: Should have shallow to medium front and side yard setbacks. 
Frontage types: Porches, fences, dooryards. 
Typical building height: Three (3) stories. 
Type of civic space: Squares, greens. 
(f)  Transit Oriented Development (TOD) defined: This Land Development Code envisions one (1) or more opportunities for a TOD: the area north of Garden in the Uptown District. TOD is an approach to development that focuses land uses around a transit station or within a transit corridor typically characterized by: 
•  A mix of uses. 
•  Moderate to high density. 
•  Pedestrian orientation/connectivity. 
•  Transportation choices. 
•  Reduced parking. 
•  High-quality design. 
TODs shall be located within one-quarter-mile, or a five- to seven-minute walk, of a transit station. TODs may incorporate transit stations into a development, or focus on building reuse and infill. In more suburban areas, TOD often takes the form of new development clustered around a station on underutilized or vacant sites. TODs use landscaping, street furniture, street lighting, and other urban and site design features that encourage pedestrian activity to integrate the station area into the surrounding community. An essential ingredient of any successful TOD, whether in a large urban center or smaller village is connectivity between street networks and adjoining uses, which can be achieved through landscape design, sidewalks and pathways, signage, building facade treatments, parking strategies, and a variety of land uses. Historically, bus transit stops have not generated TODs because bus routes and stops, as well as level of services can be relocated at any time and vary. The trend toward public investment in busways with a dedicated right-of-way and large bus transit centers may make bus transit stations more attractive for transit-oriented development. The standard density for TODs is twelve (12) to fifteen (15) units per acre to make them feasible. A section of the Appendix will be devoted to design standards for TOD forms of development. 
(1)  Transit-Oriented design maximum height with bonus described. A TOD design may apply for a height bonus of up to ten (10) stories for projects that meet the intent of TOD and requirements as described in Section 28-324. This approval shall be completed through Design Approval by the DCRA as described in Section 28-33 of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
Secs. 28-45-28-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE TABLE 

Sec. 28-51. - Intent. 
    The use table contained in Section 28-54 is intended to serve as a central location to establish the permitted, permitted uses with limitations, and conditional uses within each zoning district. In the table there are general uses and more specific uses, which could be included within the general use category. An example of a general use is "retail sales and service," and an example of a more specific use that could be included within that general use is "sporting goods store." The reason for listing both uses in the use table stems from the purposes and intents of each zoning district. Using the commercial example above, a commercial zoning district created to facilitate commercial uses at a neighborhood level warrants more specific use types to control the intensities of uses within a neighborhood commercial node. The more general use is applicable to commercial zoning districts intended to allow regional shopping centers to serve more than a specific neighborhood. 
Sec. 28-52. - Prohibited uses. 
    The uses in this section are specifically prohibited in the zoning districts listed with each use. These uses are in addition to the prohibited uses illustrated in the use table by a blank cell. Any use not permitted by right, or as a conditional use or accessory use, in a zoning district shall be prohibited in such district. 
(a)  Marijuana cultivation is prohibited in all zoning districts in the City of Titusville. 
(b)  Pain management clinics and cash-only pharmacies are prohibited in all zoning districts except the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district. A Conditional Use Permit must be obtained prior to the establishment of any pain management clinic or cash-only pharmacy within the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district. 
(c)  Special education classes for juvenile delinquents, correctional facilities, drug or alcohol dependency/abuse or similar programs are prohibited uses in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Office Professional (OP) zoning districts. 
(d)  Outdoor storage is prohibited in the Regional Mixed-Use (RMU) zoning district, including all sub-districts. 
(e)  Drive-through services are prohibited in the Regional Mixed-Use 200 sub-district (RMU-200). 
(f)  Internet cafés are prohibited in the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district. 
(g)  Soup kitchens are prohibited in the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, including all sub-districts. 
(h)  Mobile home parks are prohibited in the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, including all sub-districts. 
(i)  In addition to other prohibited uses listed in this section, the following uses are prohibited in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zoning district: 
(1)  Adult businesses. 
(2)  Pawnshops. 
(3)  Flea markets/farmer's markets. 
(4)  Physical contact establishments. 
(5)  Transient merchants, itinerant merchants, and itinerant vendors. 
(6)  Automotive sales and service. 
(7)  Sales and/or service of household appliances, gasoline-powered mowers, garden tillers, outboard engines, motor scooters, motor bikes, or motorcycles. 
(8)  Outdoor sales display or storage of merchandise. 
(j)  Additional uses may be prohibited on property within any overlay district. Overlay districts are established in Chapter 29 of these regulations. 
Sec. 28-53. - Use table key. 
(a)  In the event of a conflict between the use table contained in Section 28-54 and any other use table listed in Article V, Zoning Use Standards, the use table contained in Section 28-54 shall prevail. 
(b)  Types of use. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right "P". A "P" indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective district. Such uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  Uses permitted with limitations "L". An "L" indicates a use that will be permitted subject to the use limitations in Chapter 28, Article V, Zoning Use Standards). Such uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  Conditional use "C". A "C" indicates a use that is allowed only where approved as a conditional use by the City Council and require public hearings. Such uses are subject to the use limitations in Chapter 28, Article V, Zoning Use Standards, and all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(c)  Uses not allowed. A blank cell in the use table indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective district. 
(d)  Standards. The "Standards" column on the use table is a cross-reference to any limited or conditional use standards in Chapter 28, Article V, Zoning Use Standards. All uses are also required to comply with the appropriate dimensional standards in Chapter 28, Article VI, Zoning District Standards. 
Sec. 28-54. - Use Table. 
    Click here to view the Use Table as a PDF. 
Agriculture and Public Residential Districts Commercial Districts Industrial Districts Mixed-Use Standards Permitted Principal Use GU OR P RE RR R1A R1B R1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN See Noted Section for Use Specific Standards Key: P = Permitted; L = Permitted subject to limitations; C = Condition; Blank Cell = Use Prohibited Downtown Uptown Midtown Civic Waterfront 100 200 300 400 500 C R Agricultural Uses Agricultural pursuits L 28-61 Horse boarding L 28-62 Processing, packaging, and sale of agricultural products and commodities produced on-site P 28-63 Residential Additional residential density C 28-71 Assisted living facility (ALF) L L L C C C L C L L 28-72 Live/work unit P P P 28-73 Manufactured housing P P 28-74 Multifamily dwellings (duplex, triplex, quadplex, etc.) P P P P P P L C P P P L 28-75 Neighborhood group home P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C C P P 28-76 Patio homes P P 28-77 Residential/professional use C C C C C C C C 28-78 Residential treatment facilities C C 28-79 Single-family dwelling (detached) L C P P P P P P P C C P P C P L P 28-80 Townhomes L L L L L P L C P P P L 28-81 Commercial Advertising agency P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-91 Animal kennel P L C L L C L C L L 28-92 Animal shelter P C C L C C L L L 28-93 Arcade amusement center C 28-94 Art, craft, and hobby shop P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-95 Art studio P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-96 Automobile repair P P P P P L C P L 28-97 Automobile/vehicle sales P P L L L C P L L 28-98 Bakery, retail P P P L P P P P P P P P L 28-99 Barber/beauty shop/salon P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-100 Bed and breakfast inns L L L L L L L L L L L L C L L C C L L L 28-101 Bicycle sales/service P P P P P P P P P 28-101.1 Billboard (principal use) L L L L L L L 28-102 Billiards/pool hall C C P P P P L C P P 28-103 Boat sales P P P L 28-104 Book store P P P P P P P P P P P 28-105 Buildings over 60 feet in height C 28-106 Car rental agencies P P P C P 28-107 Car wash L L L L L L L L C C L 28-108 Ceramic shop P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-109 Child care facility C C C C C C C C C C L L L L C C C C L C C C L C 28-110 Clothing and shoe stores P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-111 Convenience store (without retail gasoline sales) C C C L L L C C L C L L C 28-112 Copy center P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-113 Crematory services C C C C C C 28-114 Delicatessens P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-115 Docks (principal use) P 28-116 Drinking establishments (bar, tavern, lounge) P P P P P P C L C P P L 28-117 Dry cleaner P P P P P P P L C P P P P 28-118 Electronic gaming establishment C 28-119 Emergency clinics P P P P P P P P P P 28-120 Farmers market/food stand L P 28-121 Financial institutions (bank) P P P P P P P P P L P C P P P 28-122 Fitness center C C P P C C P P P L C P P P P 28-123 Florists P P P L P P P P P P P P P 28-124 Funeral home (without cemetery) P P P P L P P 28-125 Furniture store P P P P P P L P P P P P 28-126 Gift shops P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-127 Graphic printing and copying services P P P P P P P P P 28-128 Grocery store P P P P P P L C P L P 28-129 Hardware store P P P P P P P L P P L 28-130 Hospitals P C C C 28-131 Hotel/motel P P P P C P C P P 28-132 Ice cream parlors P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-133 Ice vending buildings L L L 28-134 Insurance office P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-135 Jewelers P P P P P P P P P P P 28-136 Laboratory (medical) P C C C C 28-137 Laundromat P P P P P P P P L L C P P 28-138 Legal office P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-139 Liquor store C P P C C P 28-140 Lumber and building supplies sales L C 28-141 Lumber yard L L 28-142 Marina and yacht basin C P C C C 28-143 Medical equipment and supplies sales P P P P 28-144 Medical marijuana dispensing facility L L L L L L L L L L C L L L 28-144.7 Medical office/clinic P P P P P L P P P L P P P P P P 28-145 Mobile vendor L L L L 28-146 Movie theater C C 28-147 Newstands P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-148 Off-street parking lots P C C C P P P P C C C P P 28-149 Open air market L C L L L L 28-150 Outdoor storage L L L 28-151 Package and parcel delivery service P P P P 28-152 Pain management clinic/cash only pharmacy C 28-153 Parking structures L L L L P 28-154 Passive commercial uses C C L 28-155 Personal services P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-156 Pet grooming services P P P C P L P P P L 28-157 Pet stores P P P P 28-158 Pharmacies P P P L P P P P P L C P P L 28-159 Photographic shops P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-160 Postal and mailing services P P P P P P P P L P P P P 28-161 Printing and copying stores P P P P P P P L P P P P L 28-162 Private club C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C L L C C C 28-163 Professional offices P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-164 Radio and television sales P P P P P P P P P P 28-165 Repair and service for small equipment items P P P P P 28-166 Restaurants/caterers P L P P L L L/C P P P C L P P P P P L 28-167 Retail gasoline sales C C L L L L C C C L L C 28-168 Retail sales and service (see section 28-51) P P P P P P P P C P P 28-169 Screen printing shops P P P P P P P P P P L P P P P L 28-170 Shoe repair P P P P P P P P P P P 28-171 Spa C C P P C C P P P P C P P P 28-172 Sporting goods store P P P P P P P 28-173 Tailor services P P P P P P P P P 28-174 Temporary labor agency L C 28-175 Transient accommodations C C C 28-176 Travel agencies P P P P P L P P P P P P P P P 28-177 Travel trailer park C C 28-178 Truck stop plaza C C 28-179 Upholstery shops P P P P L P P P 28-180 Veterinarian P L L L L P C C L L L P L 28-181 Video game arcades P C P P P P P C P C P 28-182 Industrial Bakeries and confectioneries P P P L P 28-201 Bottling plants P P P P L P 28-202 Building trades services P P P L L P 28-203 Craft brewery/craft distillery P P P P L P 28-204 Dry-cleaning plants P P P P L P 28-205 Freight distribution P P P P L P 28-206 Heavy industrial use C 28-207 Heavy manufacturing P P 28-208 Laboratory (research and testing) C C P P P 28-209 Light manufacturing L P P P C C L L L P 28-210 Machine shop P P L P 28-211 Mechanical service and repair P P P L P 28-212 Microbrewery L L 28-213 Mini-warehouse L C C C C 28-214 Plant nursery L P P L P 28-215 Production print shops, printing, engraving P P P 28-216 Recycling and mulching/composting C 28-217 Retail or wholesale sale of products manufactured on site L L L L L P 28-218 Transportation facilities P P 28-219 Transmission tower C C C C 28-220 Vehicle-for-hire establishments P C L P 28-221 Warehousing/wholesale L P C P P L L 28-222 Welding, metal working, fabrication P P P L P 28-223 Civic, Public and Institutional Airpark C C C C C C C C C C P C C C C 28-231 Airports C C C C C C C C C C P C C C C 28-232 Ambulance service P 28-233 Art centers P P P P P P P 28-234 Ceneteries P 28-235 Churches C C C C C C C C C C C L L L L L L P P L C C L L 28-236 College/university P P P P P 28-237 Community centers P C C C C C C C C C P P L L L C P P P P P C P P 28-238 Community service P C C C C C C C C C P P L L L C C C 28-239 Convention center C L 28-240 Domestic violence shelter L 28-241 Family day care homes P P P P P P P P P L L L P P P P P 28-242 Government facilities P C C C C C C C C C P P P P P L L L L P P 28-243 Heliports or landing pads P 28-244 Incinerators C 28-245 Landfill C 28-246 Library P C C C C C C C C C C C C C 28-247 Nursing homes, convalescent homes and extended care facilities C C P C L 28-248 Passenger terminal facilities P P P 28-249 Performing arts theater P P P P 28-250 Post office P P P P 28-251 Prison, detention facilities and work camps C 28-252 Public utility C P P C C C C 28-253 Recovery/halfway house C 28-254  
Agriculture and Public Residential Districts Commercial Districts Industrial Districts Mixed-Use Standards Permitted Principal Use GU OR P RE RR R1A R1B R1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN See Noted Section for Use Specific Standards Key: P = Permitted; L = Permitted subject to limitations; C = Condition; Blank Cell = Use Prohibited Downtown Uptown Midtown Civic Waterfront 100 200 300 400 500 C R Schools (public or private) C L C C C C C C C C C C C C L L L C C C C C 28-255 Vocational school L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-256 Recreation Community gardens L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-271 Golf course P P 28-272 Park (private) P P P P P P P P P P P C P 28-273 Parks (public or non-profit) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-274 Recreational and commercial amusement (indoor) C C C C P C 28-275 Recreational and commercial amusement (outdoor) C C C C C C C 28-276 Tennis clusbs P 28-277  
(Ord. No. 15-2017, § 1, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 19-2017, § 1, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 31-2017, § 10, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 37-2017, § 1, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 5-2018, § 1, 2-13-18; Ord. No. 17-2018, § 1, 3-13-18; Ord. No. 23-2018, § 1, 7-10-18; Ord. No. 24-2018, § 1, 7-10-18; Ord. No. 37-2018, § 1, 8-28-18; Ord. No. 3-2019, § 1, 2-26-19) 
Secs. 28-55-28-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE STANDARDS 
    All uses shall be developed in accordance with the standards specified in this Article through Article VIII. 
DIVISION 1. - AGRICULTURAL 

Sec. 28-61. - Agricultural pursuits. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the General Use (GU) zoning district, buildings or structures used for dairy barns, hog pens, poultry houses and stables shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
Sec. 28-62. - Horse boarding. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the General Use (GU) zoning district, buildings or structures used for dairy barns, hog pens, poultry houses and stables shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
Sec. 28-63. - Processing, packaging, and sale of agricultural products and commodities produced on-site. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Secs. 28-64-28-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL 

Sec. 28-71. - Additional residential density. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  Performance requirements: 
a.  Frontage on a collector or arterial roadway. 
b.  Access only from a collector or arterial roadway. 
c.  Minimum living area - Two thousand (2,000) square feet 
(2)  Additional density per acre may be allowed based upon the following design features or combination thereof: 
Design Feature Maximum Allowable Additional Density All required parking provided in an enclosed structure 2 Mixed-use development  Residential/office 1  Residential/retail 2  Residential/retail/office 3 Public shoreline access 3 Public parking 2 Additional breezeway where required (per 5% incremental increase) 1 Additional landscaping 1  
(3)  For properties with access on a collector or higher roadway classification and a gated pedestrian access on a local street or Riveredge Drive, additional density above six (6) units per acre may be permitted subject to the following design features or combination thereof being provided with the maximum density not to exceed fifteen (15) units per acre. 
Design Feature Maximum Allowable Additional Density per Acre Primary access on a collector or higher roadway 3 Required parking provided in an enclosed structure 2 Mixed-use development  Residential/office 1  Residential/retail 2  Residential/retail/office 3 Public shoreline access and public parking 3 Additional breezeway where required (per 5% incremental increase) 1 Additional landscaping 1  
Sec. 28-72. - Assisted living facility (ALF). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C C L C L L  
(b)  Definition. "Assisted living facility (ALF):" An institution, building or buildings, or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which through its operation provides one (1) or more personal services for one (1) or more persons not related by blood or marriage to the owner or operator, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours for primary purpose of elderly care. Personal services are in addition to housing and food service and include, but are not limited to: personal assistance with bathing, dressing, housekeeping, supervision, eating, supervision of self-administered medication, and assistance in securing health care from appropriate sources. ALFs shall be licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration and under Chapter 408, Part II, Florida Statutes, Chapter 429, Part I, Florida Statutes, Chapter 58A-5, Florida Administrative Code. 
(c)  Permitted uses with limitations. In the Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Hospital Medical (HM), and Regional Mixed-Use 300 and 400 sub-districts (RMU-300, RMU-400), Assisted Living Facilities: 
(1)  In the Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) zoning district, assisted living facilities shall be permitted if the proposed development is no greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or is located on a roadway that is classified as a collector or arterial. 
(2)  In the Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) zoning district, assisted living facilities shall be permitted if the proposed development is no greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or is located on a roadway that is classified as a collector or arterial. 
(3)  In the Shoreline Mixed Use (SMU) zoning district, assisted living facilities shall be permitted if the proposed development is no greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or is located on a roadway that is classified as a collector or arterial. 
(4)  In the Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Hospital Medical (HM), Shoreline Mixed Use (SMU) and Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-district zoning districts shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  No certificate of occupancy and no business tax license shall be issued unless a license has first been obtained from the Agency for Health Care Administration or its successors and any other permitting agency as required by law including the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Applicant must clearly demonstrate that the facility will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking and appearance. Traffic circulation and parking of the proposed development shall not negatively impact adjacent uses. 
c.  All structures shall be residential in character, street oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street, and compatible with surrounding residential development. Properties within the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district are exempt from this requirement. 
d.  All facilities containing more than one (1) story shall have an elevator large enough to carry a stretcher. 
e.  A minimum common area of fifty (50) square feet shall be provided per bed. For the purposes of this use, "common area" shall be defined as: Areas within a building, available for use by all residents of the building including centralized dining areas, group activity rooms, lobbies, vestibules, reception areas, parlors/sitting rooms, public toilets, game rooms/craft rooms, resident laundry rooms, conference rooms, snack bars, libraries, gift shops, chapels, greenhouses, auditoriums, and exercise rooms/gyms. Areas within a building not considered common area are: corridors/circulation areas, mechanical rooms, facility storage, kitchen and pantries, offices, medical areas and exam rooms, maintenance rooms, and staff facilities. 
f.  A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of outdoor recreation area shall be required per bed. 
1.  Outdoor recreation areas may consist of walking and bicycling trails (trail area only), porches, patios, courtyards, gazebos, sitting areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, shuffleboards and other similar outdoor recreation activity areas. These areas shall not include unimproved isolate areas. 
2.  Stormwater retention area and common open space shall not be eligible for being used for calculating outdoor recreation area. 
g.  Living unit shall be defined as a separate space within the facility/development having one (1) bed, living, food preparation, and bathing areas. If food preparation and/or cooking facilities are to be provided within a living unit the minimum living area shall not be less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
h.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet may be reduced as follows; however, in no instance shall the minimum living area be less than two hundred (200) square feet: 
(NOTE: A combination of these listed items may be used to obtain reduced living unit area) 
1.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet per living unit may be reduced by one hundred (100) square feet if one hundred (100) square feet of common area per living unit is provided. 
2.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet per living area may be reduced by one hundred (100) square feet if a centralized common dining area is provided. If a common dining area is provided the storage and preparation of food shall be accomplished at an on-site control kitchen. 
3.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet may be reduced by fifty (50) square feet if one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor recreation area is provided per living unit. 
i.  A detailed floor plan and site plan identifying allow rooms/areas shall be required to be submitted. An itemized list of all room function and square footage shall be included with the site plan and floor plans. This list shall separate the common area, outdoor recreation areas and non-common/other areas square footages. 
(d)  Conditional uses these uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-districts, and Regional Mixed-Use 200 sub-district (RMU-200), assisted living facilities shall meet the criteria in (c) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(2)  In the Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) zoning district, assisted living facilities shall be required to proceed through the Conditional Use Permit process if the proposed development is greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or is located on a roadway that is not classified as a collector or arterial. 
(3)  In the Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) zoning district, assisted living facilities shall be required to proceed through the Conditional Use Permit process if the proposed development is greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or is located on a roadway that is not classified as a collector or arterial. 
(4)  In the Shoreline Mixed Use (SMU) zoning district, assisted living facilities shall be required to proceed through the Conditional Use Permit process if the proposed development is greater than one and one-half (1.5) acres, or is located on a roadway that is not classified as a collector or arterial. 
(Ord. No. 15-2017, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 28-73. - Live-work unit. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L C  
(b)  Definition. "Live-work Unit:" Buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed Use (UMU) zoning district. Live-work units: 
a.  Shall limit nonresidential uses to only those uses allowed within the district and shall comply with any conditions of said use. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 2, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-74. - Manufactured housing. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Manufactured housing unit:" Designed and built in accordance with the Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. A mobile structure manufactured upon a chassis or undercarriage which is an integral part of the structure and which is transported to the site on wheels; comes fully equipped with flush toilet, tub or shower and kitchen facilities; is ready for immediate occupancy upon its arrival to the site and its connection with utilities; and is designed for long-term use as a single-family residence. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-75. - Multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P L C P P P L  
(b)  Definition. "Multifamily dwellings:" A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) zoning district, multifamily uses: 
a.  Must be an existing multifamily structure with approved multifamily zoning as of August 16, 2012 (Effective date of Ord. 25-2012). 
b.  Shall only be considered for expansion on the existing property located at the northeast corner of the intersection of Knox McRae and Mount Vernon Avenue, and currently identified as 4230 Mt. Vernon Avenue (as described in Article II, IRCN Zoning, Section 28-21(d) of this chapter) if the development standards of the R-3 zoning classification, and other applicable development standards, can be met. 
c.  Shall allow multifamily structures consistent with this section to be rebuilt in the event the structure is damaged more than fifty (50) percent and shall be limited to the existing density and intensity before damage occurred. 
(2)  In the Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) zoning district, multifamily dwellings: 
a.  Shall have a minimum distance between structures of twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Shall contain a private storage area of one hundred (100) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 11, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 28-76. - Neighborhood group home. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P C C P P  
(b)  Definition. "Neighborhood group home:" A community residential home of six (6) or fewer residents as further defined in Chapter 419, Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-77. - Patio homes. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P  
(b)  Definition. "Patio home:" A one-family dwelling on a separate lot with setbacks on three (3) sides. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-78. - Residential/professional use. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Definition. "Residential/professional use:" Business services and professional services (excluding the general retail sales of goods and commodities. However, incidental retail sales directly related to the business or primary professional use shall be allowed. Examples of such accessory retail sales and their primary uses shall include, but not be limited to: hairdresser/beautician-hair care products; optometrists/opticians-eye care products; dentists/oral hygienists-dental care products, etc.). 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), and Regional Mixed-Use 300 sub-district (RMU-300) zoning districts, residential/professional uses shall have all frontage from a collector or higher roadway. 
Sec. 28-79. - Residential treatment facilities. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Residential treatment facilities (RTF):" A facility providing residential care and treatment to individuals exhibiting symptoms of mental illness who are in need of a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day-a-week structured living environment, respite care, or long term community placement, and are licensed by the Agency for Healthcare Administration and under Chapter 394, Part IV, F.S., Chapter 408, Part II, Florida Statutes, and Chapters 65E-4.016, Florida Administrative Code. Such facility is provided for developments of licensed fifteen (15) beds or more and do not meet the definition of a neighborhood group home or a community residential home as defined in Chapter 37 of the Land Development Regulations. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) and Hospital Medical (HM) zoning districts, residential treatment facilities: 
a.  Minimum (1) acre lot size. 
b.  In the Multifamily High Density (R-3) district, residential treatment facilities shall be limited to fifteen (15) units per acre and shall not exceed forty-five (45) units for the entire project. 
c.  In the Hospital Medical (HM) district, residential treatment facilities shall be limited by the floor area ratio of 0.2 as listed in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
d.  Applicant must clearly demonstrate that the facility will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, including the following, but not limited to, traffic circulation, parking and appearance. 
e.  All structures shall be architecturally compatible with any surrounding residential development. 
f.  All facilities containing more than one (1) story shall have an elevator large enough to carry a stretcher. 
g.  A minimum common area of fifty (50) square feet shall be provided per bed. For the purposes of this use, "common area" shall be defined as: Areas within a building, available for use by all residents of the building including centralized dining areas, group activity rooms, lobbies, vestibules, reception areas, parlors/sitting rooms, public toilets, game rooms/craft rooms, resident laundry rooms, conference rooms, snack bars, libraries, gift shops, chapels, greenhouses, auditoriums, and exercise rooms/gyms. Areas within a building not considered common area are: Corridors/circulation areas, mechanical rooms, facility storage, kitchen and pantries, offices, medical areas and exam rooms, maintenance rooms, and staff facilities. 
h.  A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of outdoor recreation area shall be required per bed. 
1.  Outdoor recreation areas may consist of walking and bicycling trails (trail area only), sitting areas, swimming pools, tennis court, shuffleboards and other similar outdoor recreation activity areas. These areas shall not include unimproved isolated areas. 
2.  Stormwater retention area and common open space shall not be eligible for being used for calculating outdoor recreation area. 
i.  Each living unit within the facility shall have a minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet. "Living unit" shall be defined as a separate space within the facility/development having living, food preparation, bathing and sleeping areas. If food preparation and/or cooking facilities are to be provided within a living unit the minimum living area shall not be less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
j.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet may be reduced as follows: 
(NOTE: A combination of these listed items may be used to obtain reduced living unit area.) 
1.  If food preparation and/or cooking facilities are provided in living units the minimum living area shall not be less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet and no reduction in square feet as noted in this section may be applied. 
2.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet may be reduced by one hundred (100) square feet subject to common area of one hundred (100) square feet per living unit being provided. 
3.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet may be reduced by one hundred (100) square feet subject to a centralized common dining area being provided. If a common dining area is provided the storage and preparation of food shall be accomplished at an on-site central kitchen. 
4.  The minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet may be reduced by fifty (50) square feet subject to a minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet outdoor recreation area being provided per unit, in addition to the existing requirement of fifty (50) square feet. 
5.  In no instance shall minimum living area be less than two hundred (200) square feet. 
k.  A detailed floor plan list shall separate the common area, outdoor recreation areas and non-common/other areas square footages. 
l.  In the Multifamily High Density (R-3) district, a residential treatment facility that is located within a radius of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of another existing RTF, neighborhood group home or community residential home in a single-family or multifamily use or zone shall be an over concentration of such homes/facility that substantially alters the nature and character of the area and shall not be allowed. 
m.  In the Hospital Medical (HM) district, a Residential Treatment Facility that is located within a radius of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of another existing RTF, neighborhood group home or community residential home in a single-family or multifamily use or zone shall be an over concentration of such homes/facility that substantially alters the nature and character of the area and shall not be allowed. A home/facility that is located within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of an area of single-family zoning substantially alters the nature and character of the area and shall not be allowed. 
n.  All residential treatment facilities shall provide a twenty-foot landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10 on all non-street property lines. 
o.  In order to protect the facility residents and the surrounding community privacy fences shall be required at the entrance of the facility. No chain link fences shall be allowed. The privacy fence shall be an entrance gate that is similar in nature to residential gated communities and shall be of similar aesthetic quality to the architecture of the building. 
p.  All units shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) beds per unit. 
q.  In the Multifamily High Density (R-3) district, residential treatment facilities shall be limited to levels III, IV and V which are listed in Rule 65E-4.016 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
r.  In the Hospital Medical (HM) district, all residential treatment facilities shall provide one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet for all setbacks, in addition to the setback requirements of this section. 
Sec. 28-80. - Single-family dwellings (detached). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L C C C P P P L P  
(b)  Definition. "Single-family dwelling (detached):" A detached building on a single lot containing one (1) dwelling unit, or a factory assembled structure constructed to state building code standards. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the General Use (GU) zoning district, single-family dwellings may be permitted at a density of one (1) dwelling for each three (3) acres of land or more under single ownership. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, existing single-family dwellings shall be allowed as permitted in the IRCN-C sub-district. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Open Space and Recreation (OR) zoning district, single-family dwellings may be approved through the conditional use permit process at a density of one (1) dwelling unit per five (5) acres. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Downtown and Midtown sub-districts, single-family dwellings are only permitted as part of a Planned Development. 
Sec. 28-81. - Townhomes. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L P L C P P P L  
(b)  Definition. "Townhomes:" A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located above or below another unit. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Multifamily Medium Density (R-2) and Multifamily High Density (R-3) zoning districts, townhomes: 
a.  Shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 34, Article III. 
b.  Shall have a maximum of six (6) dwelling units allowed in a building group of townhome units. Staggered setbacks are encouraged to lessen the straight row effect. 
c.  Shall have a minimum distance between structures of twenty (20) feet. 
d.  Shall have minimum landscape easement of ten (10) feet in width be provided along the perimeter boundary of the project site. This requirement shall apply to boundaries adjoining other property excluding public rights-of-way. 
e.  Shall require a minimum land area of five (5) acres. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-districts, zoning district, townhomes: 
a.  Shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 34, Article III. 
b.  Shall have a maximum number of ten (10) dwelling units allowed in a building group of townhomes. Staggered setbacks are encouraged to lessen the straight row effect, unless designed around a parking garage structure to lessen the visual impact of the parking structure. 
(3)  In the Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) zoning district, townhomes: 
a.  Shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 34, Article III. 
b.  Shall have a maximum number of six (6) dwelling units allowed in a building group of townhomes. Staggered setbacks are encouraged to lessen the straight row effect. 
c.  In addition to the townhome front and side corner setback requirements contained in Section 28-326, no accessory structure shall be located closer than five (5) feet from any property line or closer than ten (10) feet from any other structure. 
d.  Shall have a minimum distance between structures of twenty (20) feet. 
e.  Shall require pool enclosures to meet the same front and side requirements as the principal structure and shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the rear lot line. 
f.  Shall require swimming pools to meet the same requirements as pool enclosures plus three (3) feet and shall be no closer than five (5) feet from any structure. 
g.  Shall have minimum landscape easement of ten (10) feet in width provided along the perimeter boundary of the project site. This requirement shall apply to boundaries adjoining other property excluding public rights-of-way. 
(4)  In the Urban Village (UV) zoning district, townhomes: 
a.  Shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) dwelling units in a building group. 
b.  Shall encourage staggered setbacks to lessen the straight row effect, unless designed around a parking garage structure to lessen the visual impact of the parking structure. 
(5)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) zoning district, townhomes: 
a.  Must be an existing townhome dwelling with approved zoning as of August 16, 2012 (effective date of Ord. 25-2012). 
b.  Shall allow multifamily structures consistent with this section to be rebuilt in the event the structure is damaged more than fifty (50) percent and shall be limited to the existing density and intensity before damage occurred. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Regional Mixed-Use 200 sub-district (RMU-200) zoning district, townhomes may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Secs. 28-82-28-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL 

Sec. 28-91. - Advertising agency. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 3, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-92. - Animal kennel. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L C L L C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L C L L  
(b)  Definition. "Animal kennel:" An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are temporarily boarded for pay; provided, however, this definition shall not apply to animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Tourist (T), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC) and Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Downtown and Midtown sub-districts, zoning district, animal kennels: 
a.  Shall have a minimum lot area of one-half (1/2) acre for each twenty-five (25) animals to be boarded. 
b.  Shall have no buildings housing animals and exercise and confinement yards located closer than fifty (50) feet from any adjacent residential use. 
c.  Shall conduct all activities, with the exception of animal exercise yards, within an enclosed building. 
d.  Shall dispose of dead animals by means approved by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. No facilities for cremation of animal remains shall be permitted on the site. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, animal kennels: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall conduct all activities within a completely enclosed structure and screened from view from adjoining properties. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Office Professional (OP) and Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Uptown sub-district, zoning district, animal kennels shall meet the same criteria in (c)(1) above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-93. - Animal shelter. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C L C C L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L C  
(b)  Definition. "Animal shelter:" A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Industrial (M-2) and Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) zoning districts, animal shelters: 
a.  Shall have all facilities within an enclosed structure. No outside runs permitted. 
b.  Shall have all facilities set back no less than seventy-five (75) feet from residentially zoned property or residential use. 
(2)  In the Regional Mixed-Use 400 sub-district (RMU-400) zoning district, animal shelters 
a.  Shall have all facilities within an enclosed structure. No outside runs permitted. 
b.  Shall have all facilities set back no less than fifty (50) feet from residentially zoned property or residential use. 
c.  Shall not have animal disposal facilities. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Office Professional (OP) zoning districts, animal shelters: 
a.  Shall have all facilities within an enclosed structure. No outside runs permitted. 
b.  Shall have all facilities set back no less than seventy-five (75) feet from residentially zoned property or residential use. 
c.  Shall not have animal disposal facilities. 
(2)  In the Community Commercial (CC) zoning district, animal shelters: 
a.  Shall have all facilities within an enclosed structure. No outside runs permitted. 
b.  Shall have all facilities set back no less than fifty (50) feet from residentially zoned property or residential use. 
c.  Shall not have animal disposal facilities. 
(3)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district, animal shelters: 
a.  Shall have all facilities within an enclosed structure. No outside runs permitted. 
b.  Shall have all facilities set back no less than seventy-five (75) feet from residentially zoned property or residential use. 
Sec. 28-94. - Arcade amusement center. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Arcade amusement center:" Adult arcade amusement centers are any place of business having at least fifty (50) coin-operated amusement games or machines on premises which are operated for the entertainment of the general public and tourists that are over eighteen (18) years of age as a bona fide amusement facility, and comply with Section 849.161, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. This definition shall include those arcade amusement centers which seek to restrict admission to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  Must comply with Section 849.161, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Any prizes or awards must be provided with on-site merchandise only, and shall not include cash, gift cards, or alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  There shall be no sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(4)  Parking requirements must be demonstrated in the conditional use permit application, including any locations within an existing building or shopping plaza. The requirements must be demonstrated with a survey of the parking lot indicating individual parking spaces and the applicant must provide the total square footage of the building the arcade will be occupying and the total number of machines or games to be located on the premises. If the arcade is applying to locate in an existing shopping plaza, the applicant must provide the total number of parking spaces in the plaza, the total square footage of each store space within the plaza, the total number of machines or games to be located on the premises and the types of uses that occupy each store space. 
(5)  The facility (the arcade) shall be located no less than one hundred (100) feet, measured from the outer wall of the facility to the closest property line, of any residentially zoned land, as well as any land designated or utilized for park purposes. 
(6)  The facility shall be located no less than one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from the outer wall of the facility to the closest property line of any school. Any school that is located in the future within the above distance shall execute a waiver of the distance restriction if any existing arcade amusement center already is in existence. 
(7)  No two (2) facilities, operating pursuant to this subsection or subsection (8), shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from one another, measured from the closest outer wall of each facility. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prevent a business from operating under both subsection (7) and subsection (8) in the same facility without the need for additional approval, provided the machines and business operations are kept separate and apart from one another, preventing comingling of usage, and do not otherwise violate the provisions of Chapter 849, Florida Statutes, or any regulation of the state. 
(8)  The business location shall operate under the following management plan: 
a.  The facility shall not have any reflective or other opaque material on the exterior windows which limits or restricts the visibility of the interior of the facility from the exterior of the facility under normal circumstances; however a portion of the exterior window may be covered with frosting or other materials when necessary to cut the sun glare in order to view operating machines and computer screens; 
b.  Upon initially opening, and on June 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the business shall report to the Growth Management Director the number of machines being operated within the facility; and 
c.  The business shall not operate in violation of county, state or federal law. 
(9)  The business shall not operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays, Sunday night through Thursday night and 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on the weekend, Friday night and Saturday night. 
(10)  In the event an arcade amusement center is operating in a dual-capacity under subsection (8), patrons utilizing sweepstakes computers shall be made aware of the rules of the sweepstakes, as required by state law or the regulation of any appropriate state agency, and shall otherwise comply with the laws and regulations of the state in regard to such sweepstakes gaming. 
(11)  The consumption, possession, dispensation, or sale of alcohol shall be prohibited. 
(12)  Applicant shall prohibit minors (persons under the age of eighteen (18) within the facility. 
(13)  In addition to the required materials for an application for a CUP, each applicant shall submit for the business: 
a.  Articles of incorporation/sole proprietorship documents; 
b.  Tax ID number; 
c.  License or permits from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; 
d.  Software compliance documents showing compliance with state regulations; 
e.  Rules and regulations governing the drawing by chance, sweepstakes or game promotion which includes the odds of winning and the prize table and rules showing that no purchase is required to enter sweepstakes; 
f.  Probability chart; 
g.  Lease or ownership of location information; 
h.  Product/service list; 
i.  Proposed security plan designed to protect employees, patrons and the general public; 
j.  Number of machines. 
Sec. 28-95. - Arts, crafts and hobby shop. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 4, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-96. - Art studio. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Art studio:" A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by artisans engaged in any visual and performing arts, including, but not limited to, dance, music, photography, and painting. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 5, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-97. - Automobile repair. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L C P L  
(b)  Definition. "Automobile repair:" Any building, structure, or improvements used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or similar vehicles including, but not limited to, body, fender, muffler, or upholstery work, oil change and lubrication, painting, tire service and sales, or installation of automobile electronics, but excludes dismantling or salvage. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district, zoning district, automobile repair: 
a.  Shall have no driveway of an automobile service station or automobile repair shop located within thirty (30) feet of a street intersection. 
b.  Shall have no gasoline or other fuel pump located within thirty (30) feet of a street line or of an adjoining property line. 
c.  Shall have all minor vehicle repairs take place within an enclosed building. 
d.  Shall have no motor vehicle parked or stored out of doors on the premises for more than sixty (60) days. Vehicles parked or stored out of doors on the premises shall be located within an area screened by a minimum six-foot privacy fence located to the rear of the principle structure. 
e.  Shall have the entire premises on which there is an automobile service station or an automobile repair shop be kept clean and free of debris such as used auto parts, tires, oil cans or drums, rags, papers or any other used or discarded materials. 
f.  Shall have all hydraulic hoists, pits, lubrication, repair and service work conducted entirely within a building. 
g.  Shall have all merchandise and material for sale displayed within an enclosed building. 
h.  Shall require the property owner to remove or treat in a safe manner approved by the E.P.A. (Environmental Protection Agency) all flammable materials or storage tanks on the site when a service station dispensing flammable materials becomes vacant for a period exceeding ninety (90) days. 
i.  Shall have all gasoline or other fuel pumps supported by a dedicated standby generator to ensure continuity of service after severe weather events, or acts of God, subject to approval by the City. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, new automobile repair: 
a.  Shall be located on the west side of Hopkins Avenue. 
b.  Shall have all outside repair screened from street view and from adjoining properties with fencing and landscaping to provide an opaque visual barrier. 
Sec. 28-98. - Automobile/vehicle sales. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L C P L L  
(b)  Definition. "Automobile sales:" The use of any building or portion thereof for the display, sale, rental, or lease of motor vehicles (including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, boats, and motorcycles) and any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Downtown and Midtown sub-districts, zoning district, automobile sales: 
a.  Shall have all sales from a permanent structure, and the parking area must meet the requirements of the site plan and landscaping regulations. 
b.  Shall have no outside storage other than vehicles for sale or rent, and all repairs must be in an enclosed structure with no bay door openings located in the front face of the building. 
c.  Shall meet all DMU requirements when the use of a parcel of property is changed to allow automobile sales and storage. 
d.  Shall have all gasoline or other fuel pumps supported by a dedicated standby generator to ensure continuity of service after severe weather events, or acts of God, subject to approval by the City. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, automobile sales: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall have a maximum lot size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(3)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood (IRCN-C) zoning district, automobile sales: 
a.  Maximum lot size of one (1) acre. 
b.  Must be located with frontage on South Washington Avenue. 
(4)  In the Urban Village (UV) zoning district, only automobile/vehicle sales: 
a.  Shall be limited only to the sales and accessory service of motorcycles as defined by Chapter 320, Florida Statutes. 
b.  Motorcycle sales shall be located in proximity to the principal building and shall not impede pedestrian or traffic flow and shall not encroach into designated parking areas unless designated on a proposed plot plan approved by the Community Development Engineer and included with a Business Tax Receipt application. The designated areas shall be well maintained, provide for walking and accessibility, be free of debris, and have proper lighting, seating, and trash receptacles. All other areas of the site shall be free of merchandise. 
d.  Shall limit outdoor motorcycle sales to an area less than or equal to fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the building or unit in which the use is conducted. 
f.  Shall have all outdoor motorcycle sales meet the following locational requirements: 
1.  Shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
2.  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of a primary roadway access into a parcel. 
3.  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of another outside vending location. 
4.  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of a building exit. 
5.  Shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
g.  Shall limit outdoor motorcycle sales to only during the hours of operation of the associated business. Goods displayed outdoor shall not be left outdoors when the associated business is not operating. 
h.  Shall conduct all service and repair of motorcycles within an enclosed building. 
i.  Shall not have bay or service doors oriented towards a public right-of-way. 
j.  Shall not include paint booths. 
k.  Shall not have any outdoor storage 
l.  Shall not include as part of operations riding lessons or motorcycle license classes/testing. 
(Ord. No. 19-2017, § 2, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 28-99. - Bakery, retail. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Bakery, retail:" A place for preparing, cooking, baking, and selling of products on the premises. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, bakeries, retail shall only be permitted as part of a Master Development Plan that designates a "commerce component" and designates the associated area on the Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 6, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-100. - Barber/beauty shop/salon. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, barber shops shall only be permitted as part of a Master Development Plan that designates a "commerce component" and designates the associated area on the Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 7, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-101. - Bed and breakfast inns. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L C L L C C P L L  
(b)  Definition. "Bed and breakfast inns:" A bed and breakfast inn is a structure originally built as a single-family residence, or a new structure, which is designed as and appears externally as a single-family residence, where short-term lodging rooms and meals (usually breakfast only) are provided to overnight guests. The use is an accessory use to the primary use as a single-family residence of the operator who shall live on the premises. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Residential Historic Preservation (RHP), General Use (GU), Open Space and Recreation (OR), Urban Mixed-Use (UMU), Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU), Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) and Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) zoning districts, bed and breakfast inns: 
a.  Shall be limited to the density limitation of the zoning classification. Where an existing single-family house is being utilized as a bed and breakfast or boardinghouse facility, the guest accommodations shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the principal residence. 
b.  Shall provide a minimum of one (1) on-site parking space per guestroom and an additional two (2) on-site parking spaces for the resident manager or innkeeper. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard in residential zoning classifications. All parking spaces shall adhere to the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations. Properties within the UMU zoning district shall be exempt from this requirement, but shall provide parking pursuant to Chapter 30 - Development Standards, Article III - Improvements, Division 9 - Parking/Loading/Storage. 
c.  In multiple-family and special district zoning classifications, only wall-mounted signs up to eight (8) square feet in size and a maximum of six (6) feet in height shall be permitted. 
d.  Shall have common kitchen and dining facilities, and individual rooms that are rented shall not contain cooking facilities. Meals shall be provided to overnight guests only. 
e.  Shall require an occupational license. 
f.  Shall not be located closer than five hundred (500) feet to any previously approved and established bed and breakfast inn in single-family zoning classifications. The Residential Historic Preservation (RHP) and Urban Mixed Use (UMU) zoning districts shall be exempt from the aforementioned distance regulation. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown, Uptown and Midtown sub-districts, zoning district, bed and breakfast inns: 
a.  Shall be no more than five (5) rooms used as guest rooms; 
b.  The owner/operator of the facility must physically reside on-site during all periods that the facility is open to the public and that guests are housed on-site; 
c.  Adjacent to residential homes must be separated by a visual screen consistent with the visual screen standards set forth in Section 30-340; 
d.  Shall maintain the residential character of the area by adopting a residential scale and style of construction and conform to the Urban Design Manual for the Downtown Mixed-Use District; 
e.  Shall require a conditional use permit in the Civic Waterfront sub-district. 
(3)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) zoning district, bed and breakfast inns shall be limited to existing licensed bed and breakfast establishments and expansion shall be limited to the existing licensed property as of August 16, 2012 (effective date of Ord. 25-2012). 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Civic Waterfront sub-district, zoning district, bed and breakfast inns shall meet the requirements of (c)(2) above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(2)  In the Regional Mixed-Use 200 and 300 sub-district (RMU-200, RMU-300) zoning district, bed and breakfast inns shall me the same requirements of (c)(1) above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 12, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 37-2017, § 8, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-101.1. - Bicycle sales/service. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Bicycle sales/service:" An establishment engaged in the retail sales and associated service of bicycles. May also include retail sales of bicycling accessories and apparel. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 9, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-102. - Billboard. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall only be permitted on a lot or parcel where said billboard is the only use of said lot or parcel. 
(2)  Billboards shall meet all applicable regulations within Chapter 32, Signs. 
Sec. 28-103. - Billiards/pool hall. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P L C P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, billiards/pool halls shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-104. - Boat sales. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, boat sales: 
a.  Shall have a maximum lot size of one (1) acre. 
b.  Shall be located with frontage on South Washington Avenue. 
Sec. 28-105. - Book store. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Book store": A retail establishment that, as its primary business, engages in the sale, rental, or other charge-for-use of books, magazines, newspapers, greeting cards, postcards, videotapes, or computer software. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-106. - Buildings over 60 feet in height, but not to exceed 100 feet. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  If fifty (50) percent or more of the development site is preserved in a natural state of open space consisting of native plant and animal habitat or will be returned to a natural state of open space consisting of native plant and animal species habitat, then the development structures will be allowed to exceed the sixty (60) feet height limitation, provided there is a retail component, to no more than one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  The applicant submits a shading study that demonstrates that the proposed building height over sixty (60) feet does not cause any additional overshadowing and consequent loss of light to surrounding properties than an allowed sixty-foot tall building. For the shading study, the period between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. is generally accepted as a measure of solar access even during the shortest daylight hours of winter. 
(3)  The proposed building height increase must be consistent with the adopted U.S. 1 Corridor Master Plan. 
Sec. 28-107. - Car rental agencies. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-108. - Car wash. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L C C L  
(b)  Definition. "Car wash:" A structure or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing automobiles. This activity may consist of using production line method with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices and may employ some hand labor. This activity may also include automated or semi-automated methods for washing, cleaning, polishing, or waxing of automobiles whether or not employing a chain conveyor, blower, steam-cleaning or similar mechanical devices. 
(1)  Self-service car wash: A car wash where equipment and/or facilities are provided for the self-service cleaning and/or washing of automobiles solely by the customer. 
(2)  Full service car wash: A car wash where equipment and/or facilities and employees are providing fully automated exterior and interior washing and cleaning service for automobiles. 
(3)  Automatic exterior drive thru car wash: A self-service car wash where only exterior cleaning and/or washing services are provided on a drive thru or roll over basis by the customer in which power driven or steam cleaning machinery is used to clean and/or wash automobiles. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Self-service car washes shall be limited to the following activities: 
a.  Self-service washing and drying of automobiles. 
b.  Self-service waxing, polishing and vacuuming of automobiles. 
c.  No equipment shall be permitted except as necessary to permit self-service car washes or drying directly and solely by the customer. 
(2)  Full service car wash facility shall be limited to the following activities: 
a.  Fully automated and/or manual washing, waxing, polishing, drying of automobiles by employees. 
b.  Fully automated or manual vacuuming and cleaning of the interior of automobiles by employees. 
(3)  Automatic exterior drive thru car wash shall be limited to the following activities: 
a.  Fully automated self-service exterior cleaning and/or washing services provided on a drive thru roll over basis solely by the customer in which power drive or steam cleaning machinery is used to clean and/or wash automobiles and other motor vehicles. 
b.  This use may be allowed as an accessory activity to a gas station, convenience store with gas pumps, or automotive dealership by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(4)  General design criteria: 
a.  In zoning districts that list this use as a permitted use, said facility shall be required to proceed through conditional use permit approval process if any portion of the site abuts any residential zoning district or use. The conditional use permit process may be waived subject to a twenty-five-foot wide landscape buffer being provided adjacent to the abutting residential zoning district or use. No development, circulation, parking or any car wash activity may be permitted in this buffer area. 
b.  Said facility shall be required to proceed through conditional use permit approval process if the site is not fronting and have all ingress/egress from a principal or minor arterial roadway. 
c.  In no case shall such a use be permitted or have ingress/egress on a roadway classification under major collector. 
d.  There shall be no outside storage or display of goods offered for sale. 
e.  All washing and waxing of automobiles shall be within a completely enclosed building, except for entrance and exit. Vacuuming and drying of automobiles may be outside the building but shall not encroach upon any setback and/or buffer areas. 
f.  The above-mentioned entrance and exit shall not face any abutting property zoned for residential uses. 
g.  All of the area of the site to be utilized by the washing, waxing, drying and vacuuming operation including all ingress and egress areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphalt concrete. 
h.  A six-foot high masonry screening wall shall be required where the site abuts a residential zoning district or use. 
(5)  Landscaping (the following landscaping regulation in addition to those required by Chapter 30 of these [Land Development] Regulations shall be required to be met): 
a.  Landscaping areas shall comprise not less than twenty (20) percent of the area of the entire site. 
b.  Any required buffer area from a residential zoning district shall not be used to meet the required twenty (20) percent landscape area. 
c.  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, the Urban Design Manual shall regulate landscaping. 
(6)  Access/circulation/parking: 
a.  Self-service car wash: A minimum off-street stacking space/area to accommodate two (2) waiting automobiles (minimum forty (40) linear feet of stacking space/area) shall be provided per wash bay. 
b.  Full service car wash facility: A minimum off-street stacking space/area to accommodate fifteen (15) waiting automobiles (minimum three hundred (300) linear feet of stacking space/area) shall be required per wash bay. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee on the largest shift. 
c.  Automatic exterior drive thru car wash: A minimum off-street stacking space/area to accommodate five (5) waiting automobiles (minimum 100 linear feet of stacking space/area) shall be required per wash bay. 
d.  The off-street stacking space/area shall not conflict with or interfere with on-site circulation patterns. 
e.  When the service is offered for on-site final manual drying separate from the wash bay, said area shall be capable of accommodating a number of vehicles equaling one-half (1/2) of the required stacking space/area. Said area shall not conflict with or interfere with on-site circulation patterns. 
(7)  Sewage/drainage effluent quality: 
a.  Only car wash facilities equipped with a self-contained water recycling system shall be approved. These facilities shall not back wash their filters but instead have their filter properly disposed (potentially as hazardous wastes). Disposal methods shall require approval by the City of Titusville Water Resources Department. 
b.  All car wash shall have a disposal facility including sludge and grit removal. Disposal equipment shall be subject to the approval of the City Water Resources Department. 
c.  Any wastewater discharge to the City of Titusville Sanitary Sewer System shall be required to meet all City of Titusville Sanitary Sewer Standards. 
Sec. 28-109. - Ceramic shop. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 10, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-110. - Childcare facility. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C C C L C C C L C  
(b)  Definition. "Childcare facility:" As defined by Section 402.302, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Office Professional (OP), and Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning districts, childcare facilities: 
a.  Shall be required to proceed through the conditional use permit process when located on a local street, or abutting property with a single-family zoning or use. 
b.  Shall not be issued a business tax receipt until a license has first been obtained from the Florida Agency for Healthcare Administration and any other permitting agency as required by law including the provisions of these regulations. 
c.  Shall provide a landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 31, Article III, Division 10 on non-street property lines. Properties in the DMU zoning district shall provide landscaping pursuant to Chapter 31, Article III, Division 10. 
d.  Shall set back all structures, playgrounds, and outdoor recreation areas a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use, except mixed residential-commercial uses. 
e.  Shall provide a passenger drop-off zone adjacent to the facility providing clear ingress and egress from parking and other areas. 
(2)  In the Indian River City-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, childcare facilities: 
a.  Shall not be issued a business tax receipt until a license has first been obtained from the Florida Agency for Healthcare Administration and any other permitting agency as required by law including the provisions of these regulations. 
b.  Shall provide a passenger drop-off zone adjacent to the facility providing clear ingress and egress from parking and other areas. 
c.  Shall set back all structures, playgrounds, and outdoor recreation areas a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use, except mixed residential-commercial uses. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density (R-2), Multifamily High Density (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2), Planned Industrial Development (PID), General Use (GU), Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-districts, Regional Mixed-Use 200 and 300 (RMU-200, RMU-300), and Urban Village (UV) zoning districts, childcare facilities may be approved by meeting the standards in (c)(1) above, and by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(2)  In addition to the requirements in (c)(1) above, childcare facilities in the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements in (c)(1) above, in the Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) zoning district, childcare facilities shall be on property adjacent to, and with access to, Knox McRae Drive and shall be on property that has a principal use of a church. 
Sec. 28-111. - Clothing and shoe stores. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 11, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-112. - Convenience store (without retail gasoline sales). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C C L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L C C L C L L C  
(b)  Definition. "Convenience stores:" As defined by Section 500.03, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Convenience stores, in any zoning district: 
a.  Shall be free of all obstructions of view from the adjacent street to the main store windows giving a clear and unobstructed view of the cashier's station including obstructions of landscaping and gasoline service islands. 
b.  Shall be subject to all special requirements for retail gasoline sales establishments if the proposed store is to include such use as set forth per Section 28-168 - Retail gasoline sales, of this Article. 
c.  Shall have appropriate security systems to include, but not be limited to, the following: convenience store shall be equipped with cameras with video retrieval capabilities. This requirement shall be exempted if the convenience store employs two (2) or more employees at the same time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or if the convenience store closes on a permanent basis by 11:00 p.m. 
d.  Shall not have as a part of its operation coin operational amusement devices. 
(2)  In addition to the regulations in (c)(1) above, in the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, convenience stores: 
a.  Shall not allow any outdoor display of merchandise. 
b.  Shall have all gasoline or other fuel pumps supported by a dedicated standby generator to ensure continuity of service after severe weather events, or acts of God, subject to approval by the City. 
(3)  In addition to the regulations in (c)(1) above, in the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, convenience stores: 
a.  Shall have hours of operation limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown and Civic Waterfront sub-districts, Regional Mixed-Use 200 sub-district (RMU-200), and Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning districts, Convenience Stores may be approved by meeting all applicable regulations in (c)(1), and where applicable in (c)(2), or (3) above by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 13, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 37-2017, § 12, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-113. - Copy center. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-114. - Crematory services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C C C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-115. - Delicatessens. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 14, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-116. - Docks. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-117. - Drinking establishments (bar, tavern, lounge). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P C L C P P L  
(b)  Definition. "Drinking establishment:" A drinking establishment is a business whose primary function is the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, which may include bars, taverns, and lounges. Some establishments may also serve food, or have entertainment, but their main purpose is to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, drinking establishments (bar, tavern, lounge) with any outdoor seating may only operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. and shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a residential property line. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed Use (UMU) zoning district, drinking establishments (bar, tavern, lounge): 
a.  Shall only allow on-site consumption within a completely enclosed structure. 
b.  Shall limit the hours of operation of any business with on-site consumption to the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Civic Waterfront sub-district, Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) and Regional Mixed-Use 300 sub-district (RMU-300) zoning districts, drinking establishments may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 14, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-118. - Dry cleaner. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L C P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Dry cleaner:" An establishment that cleans or renovates fabrics, textiles, or other material on the premises with solvents other than water. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) district, dry cleaners must be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-119. - Electronic gaming establishment. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Electronic gaming establishment:" A business operation, whether a principal use or accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines or devices, including, but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance and/or a game promotion pursuant to Section 849.094, Florida Statutes, including sweepstakes, and where cash, prizes, merchandise or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such redeemed or distributed items are determined by the electronic games played or by predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes cafés, cybercafés, sweepstakes cafes, or arcade amusement centers. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  The facility (electronic gaming establishment) shall be located no less than one hundred (100) feet, measured from the outer wall of the facility to the closest property line, of any residentially zoned land, as well as any land designated or utilized for park purposes. 
(2)  The facility shall be located no less than one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from the outer wall of the facility to the closest property line, of any school. Any school that is located in the future within the above restricted distance shall execute a waiver of the distance restriction. 
(3)  No two (2) facilities, operating pursuant to this subsection or subsection (g), shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from one another, measured from the closest outer wall of each facility. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prevent a business from operating under both subsection (g) and subsection (h) in the same facility without the need for additional approval, provided the machines and business operations are kept separate and apart from one another, preventing comingling of usage, and do not otherwise violate the provisions of Chapter 849, Florida Statutes, or any regulation of the state. 
(4)  If the facility is placed within a freestanding building the site must contain a parking ratio of one (1) parking space per two (2) game machines, regardless of whether the building is new or existing. 
(5)  If the facility is located in a shopping center, or other building with shared parking, it shall not utilize more than ten (10) percent of the overall parking, based upon the ratio above. 
(6)  The number of devices within the facility shall be governed by the Land Development Regulations of the City of Titusville as well as Florida Statutes and laws. 
(7)  The consumption, possession, dispensation, or sale of alcohol, shall be prohibited. 
(8)  Applicant shall prohibit minors (persons under the age of eighteen (18) within the facility. 
(9)  The business location shall operate under the following management plan: 
a.  The facility shall not have any reflective or other opaque material on the exterior windows which limits or restricts the visibility of the interior of the facility from the exterior of the facility under normal circumstances, however a portion of the exterior window may be covered with frosting or other materials when necessary to cut the sun glare in order to view operating machines and computer screens; 
b.  Upon initially opening and on June 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the business shall report to the Growth Management Director the number of machines being operated within the facility; and 
c.  The business shall not operate in violation of county, state or federal law. 
(10)  The business shall not operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays, Sunday night through Thursday night and 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on the weekend, Friday night and Saturday night. 
(11)  All patrons of the business shall be made aware that they are participating in a computer-based sweepstakes, including the rules of the sweepstakes, as required by state law or the regulation of any appropriate state agency. 
(12)  Each applicant for conditional use shall show proof of permit or license to operate a game promotion or sweepstakes from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and other applicable state and federal permits and that the electronic game promotion software: 
a.  Operates only games with a preconfigured finite pool of entries; 
b.  Provides an entrant with the ability to participate in the absence of a purchase; 
c.  Does not distinguish an entrant who has made a purchase from one who has not, with respect to all advertised prizes; and uses video displays that do not determine the result. 
(13)  Each applicant shall provide proof that it has established a trust account in accordance with Chapter [Section] 849.094, Florida Statutes. 
(14)  A conditional use shall not be construed to authorize any game or machine that may be construed as a gambling device under Florida law. 
(15)  In addition to the required materials for an application for a CUP, each applicant shall submit for the business: 
a.  Articles of incorporation/sole proprietorship documents; 
b.  Tax ID number; 
c.  License or permits from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; 
d.  Software compliance documents showing compliance with state regulations; 
e.  Rules and regulations governing the drawing by chance, sweepstakes or game promotion which includes the odds of winning and the prize table and rules showing that no purchase is required to enter sweepstakes; 
f.  Probability chart; 
g.  Lease or ownership of location information; 
h.  Product/service list; 
i.  Proposed security plan designed to protect employees, patrons and the general public; 
j.  Number of devices. 
Sec. 28-120. - Emergency clinics. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Emergency clinic:" A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors. The term "clinic" includes immediate care facilities, where emergency treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-121. - Farmers market/food stand. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L P  
(b)  Definition. "Farmers market:" Involves the sale of farm, horticultural, floricultural and grove products offered for sale by the farmers or growers of said produce, or offered for sale by dealers in said products. It is contemplated that each farmer, or dealer, will rent stalls in said market for the sale of the products within the confines of a central market area. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) district, farmer markets shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-122. - Financial institutions. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P C P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Financial institution:" A facility providing financial and banking services to consumers. Walk-in and/or drive-thru services are generally provided on-site. Typical uses include: banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and automated teller machines (ATMs). 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, financial institutions shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-123. - Fitness center. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C P P C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L C P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Fitness center:" A place or building where active exercise and related activities are performed utilizing weight control or muscle building equipment or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness. Also, a place or building that provides massage, exercise, and/or related activities with or without such equipment. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning districts, fitness centers shall have building and/or lease space/unit gross floor area be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 15, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-124. - Florist. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Florist:" Retail business whose principal activity is the selling of plants which are not grown on the site and conducting business within an enclosed building. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, florists shall only be permitted as part of a Master Development Plan that designates a "commerce component" and designates the associated area on the Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 16, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-125. - Funeral establishment (without crematory). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L P P  
(b)  Definition. "Funeral establishment (without crematory):" As defined in Section 497.005, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, funeral establishments shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-126. - Furniture store. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-127. - Gift shops. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 17, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-128. - Graphic printing and copying services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the River City Neighborhood - Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, graphic printing and copying services shall have a maximum building and/or lease space/unit gross floor areas of less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 14, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 28-129. - Grocery store. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L C P L P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Village (UV) zoning district, grocery stores: 
a.  Shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any side property lines. 
b.  Shall not have as a part of its operation, coin-operated amusement devices nor gas pumps. 
c.  Gas pumps and associated payment kiosk ONLY may be permitted as an accessory use to a retail food market or supermarket greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. 
1.  Gas pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands and canopies shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any side property lines. 
2.  Signage on the canopy facing offsite land uses shall be limited to one (1) face. Signage shall be limited to no more than thirty-two (32) square feet per side. Total signage on all four (4) sides of the canopy shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet. 
3.  All canopies and associated payment kiosk shall be architecturally consistent with the principal use. 
4.  Six (6) gas pumps (up to twelve (12) vehicle fueling stations) are permitted without additional landscaping. Additional gas pumps/fueling stations are permitted if required buffers adjacent to the gas pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands and canopies include vegetation that reduces the visual impact of the pumps and pump islands for offsite land uses. 
5.  Repairs, wreckers or storage of automobiles is prohibited. 
6.  Outdoor storage and display is prohibited. 
Sec. 28-130. - Hardware store. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P L P P L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning districts, hardware stores: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall screen all outside storage from view from adjoining properties with fencing and landscaping to provide an opaque visual barrier. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, hardware stores: 
a.  Shall screen all outside storage from view from adjoining properties with fencing and landscaping to provide an opaque visual barrier. 
(3)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, hardware stores shall only be permitted as part of a Master Development Plan that designates a "commerce component" and designates the associated area on the Master Plan. 
Sec. 28-131. - Hospitals. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-132. - Hotel/motel. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P C P P  
(b)  Definition. "Hotel/motel:" A facility offering short-term lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Any hotel or other tourist accommodation containing fifty (50) rental units or more shall be permitted to establish accessory uses within the principal building designed to primarily serve the guests of the facility, such as: drug and sundry shops, florists, gift and souvenir shops, confectionery stores, newsstands, personal services, etc. 
Sec. 28-133. - Ice cream parlor. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 18, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-134. - Ice vending building. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Ice vending building:" An unmanned retail vending building, larger than fifty (50) square feet in size, that automatically dispenses ice to customers at any time. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district, ice vending buildings: 
a.  Shall not be placed less than one hundred (100) feet from the closest residential structure. 
b.  Shall provide parking for the ice vending building in accordance with the City's Transportation Technical Manual of the Land Development Regulations. 
c.  Shall have all loading, unloading, or servicing of said ice vending building occur on private premises. 
d.  Shall not use blinking, unshaded or colored lights to illuminate or advertise the ice vending building. 
e.  Shall drain condensate water in accordance with the Florida Building Code. 
Sec. 28-135. - Insurance office. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 19, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-136. - Jewelers. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 20, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-137. - Laboratory (medical). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C C C  
(b)  Definition. "Laboratory (medical):" A laboratory where examinations are performed on materials or specimens taken from the human body to provide information or materials for use in the diagnosis, prevention or treatment of a disease or the assessment of a medical condition. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-138. - Laundromat. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P L L C P P  
(b)  Definition. "Laundromat:" An establishment providing washing and drying machines for clothing on the premises for rental use to the general public. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Civic Waterfront sub-district zoning district, laundromats may only be permitted in conjunction with a marina. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, laundromats must be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-139. - Legal office. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 21, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-140. - Liquor store. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zoning district, only the sale of non-distilled alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption may be granted by conditional use. The sales of distilled alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption are prohibited. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, liquor stores: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall only allow on-site consumption within a completely enclosed structure. 
c.  Shall limit the hours of operation of any business with on-site consumption to the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
Sec. 28-141. - Lumber and building supplies sales. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Definition. "Lumber and building supplies:" Retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures, nursery stock, and lawn and garden supplies. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district, lumber and building supplies: 
a.  Shall screen all open air outdoor storage/display areas from view. 
b.  Shall require outdoor storage/display areas facing any road right-of-way shall to be architecturally compatible with the principal building so as to retain a continuous architectural appearance. 
c.  Shall prohibit items within the open air outdoor storage area to be visible from surrounding properties. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Regional Mixed-Use 400 sub-district (RMU-400) zoning district, lumber and building supplies, shall meet the criteria in (c)(1) above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-142. - Lumber yard. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Lumber yard:" Manufacturing, processing, and sales uses involving the milling of forest products to produce rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other manufacturing, craft, or construction processes. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Industrial (M-2) and Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) zoning districts, lumber yards: 
a.  Shall shield all open-air outdoor storage/display areas from view. 
b.  Shall require outdoor storage/display areas facing any road right-of-way to be architecturally compatible with the principal building so as to retain a continuous architectural appearance. 
c.  Shall not allow items within the open-air outdoor storage area to be visible from surrounding properties. 
Sec. 28-143. - Marina and yacht basin. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P C C C  
(b)  Definition. "Marina:" A water-oriented commercial facility that provides facilities for berthing, supplying, and servicing all types of recreational and/or commercial watercraft. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) zoning district, any overhaul or repair requiring boats to be lifted out of the water is prohibited. 
Sec. 28-144. - Medical equipment and supplies sales. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-144.7. - Medical marijuana dispensing facility. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L C L L L  
(b)  Definition. 
"Medical marijuana dispensing facility:" A facility licensed by the State of Florida Department of Health to dispense medical marijuana and medical marijuana delivery devices, as defined by F.S. § 381.986. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Except as provided in this article, medical marijuana dispensing facilities shall be subject to all regulations, restrictions and permitting applicable to pharmacies under the Code of Ordinances and the City's Land Development Regulations. 
(2)  A medical marijuana dispensing facility may not be located within five hundred (500) feet of the real property that comprises a public or private elementary school, middle school or secondary school unless the City Council approves the location at a public hearing at which the City Council determines that the location promotes the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
(3)  To the extent not otherwise regulated by the Florida law, all such dispensaries may only dispense medical marijuana or medical marijuana delivery devices between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(d)  No city liability; indemnification; no defense. 
(1)  By accepting any development permit or order to operate a medical marijuana treatment center or medical marijuana dispensing facility, any person owning, operating or engaging in the business of any such center or facility, waives any claim concerning, and releases the City, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, attorneys, representatives, volunteers and independent contractors, both in their official and individual/personal capacities, and their respective sureties, insurers, successors, assigns and legal representatives from, any liability or injuries or damages of any kind that result from any arrests or prosecutions of principals, officers, directors, owners, managers of any kind, members, employees, operators, or similar persons, or any clients or customers of the center or facility for any violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations. 
(2)  By accepting any development permit or development order to operate a medical marijuana dispensing facility, such facility shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, attorneys, representatives, volunteers and independent contractors, both in their official and individual/personal capacities, and their respective sureties, insurers, successors, assigns and legal representatives, from and against any and all claims, actions, liabilities, causes of action, demands, penalties, fines, fees, judgments, damages, losses, and expenses, including any regulatory actions (whether or not a lawsuit or administrative proceeding is filed), including, but not limited to, costs, expenses, attorneys' and paralegals' fees, expert witness fees, and any other court, regulatory and witness fees (whether in litigation, regulatory proceeding or appeal or as a part of settlement negotiations), on account of any injury, loss or damages, including without limitation claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever, arising out of, in any manner connected with or resulting from the operation of such center or facility that is subject to any development permit or development order. 
(3)  The issuance of a development permit or development order pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense, or immunity for any person related to any potential or actual criminal liability any person may have under state or federal law for the acquisition, cultivation, possession, processing, transferring, transportation, sale, distribution, dispensing or administration of marijuana, medical marijuana or products containing marijuana, as such items remain Schedule 1 drugs under state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 5-2018, § 2, 2-13-18) 
Sec. 28-145. - Medical office/clinic. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Medical office/clinic:" A facility operated by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, medical office/clinics are permitted only in connection with permitted industrial activity. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, medical office/clinics shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-146. - Mobile vendor. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Definition. "Mobile vendor:" A person, corporation, company or business that sells or offers for sale goods, wares, merchandise, beverages or foodstuffs of any kind or nature whatsoever from a vehicle capable of movement. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Mobile vendors shall meet all requirements in Section 11-332 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 28-147. - Movie theater. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-148. - Newsstand. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-149. - Off-street parking lots. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P C C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P C C C L P  
(b)  Definition. "Off-street parking lots:" Any area excepting public rights-of-way used for the purpose of parking, storing or display of vehicles, boats, trailers and mobile homes, including car lots, but not including parking structure or garages. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Village (UV) zoning district, off-street parking lots are permitted only in association with other permitted uses and conditional uses in the district. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses these uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Urban Mixed Use (UMU), Regional Mixed Use (RMU) 300 and 400 zoning districts, off-street parking lots: 
a.  Shall direct all sources of illumination for off-street parking lots away from residential uses or zoning districts adjacent to the off-street parking lot. 
b.  Shall not allow movement of vehicles on such lots between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and greater limitation may be imposed by City Council where so required. Greater flexibility may be approved by City Council for shared use parking lots. 
c.  Shall not allow sales, sales display, outdoor storage or service activity of any kind on the off-street parking lot. 
d.  Shall not allow parking of automobiles to exceed a period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
e.  A traffic study may be required as part of the application for a conditional use permit, as determined by the City Manager, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 3-2019, § 2, 2-26-19) 
Sec. 28-150. - Open-air market. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L C L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Open-air market:" A business including the sales or display of retail merchandise or services outside of a permanent structure. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, open air markets: 
a.  Shall require any special conditions, restrictions, and requirements for any uses listed in this section that will be within the open-air market to comply with those regulations specific to that use. 
b.  Shall provide on-site permanent restroom facilities to serve the patrons of the market. 
c.  Shall provide a seating area to accommodate any food service and restaurant uses. 
d.  Shall meet the requirements of outdoor display established in Section 28-363. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, open-air markets: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall require any special conditions, restrictions, and requirements for any uses listed in this section that will be within the open-air market to comply with those regulations specific to that use. 
c.  Shall provide on-site permanent restroom facilities to serve the patrons of the market. 
d.  Shall provide a seating area to accommodate any food service and restaurant uses. 
(3)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, open-air markets: 
a.  Shall require any use within the open-air market that requires special conditions, restrictions, and requirements listed in this section to comply with those regulations specific to that use. 
b.  Shall provide on-site permanent restroom facilities to serve the patrons of the market. 
c.  Shall provide a seating area to accommodate any food service and restaurant uses. 
Sec. 28-151. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Definition. "Outdoor storage:" The exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of materials, products, merchandise, vehicles, trailers, and the like on commercial or industrial properties. Outdoor storage may be enclosed by a structure that includes a roof, but no sidewalls, in which case the structure shall be deemed outdoor storage; outdoor storage may involve fencing or screening without a roof in which case fencing or screening shall be deemed outdoor storage. Parking lots do not qualify for outdoor storage. Outdoor storage does not involve any product representation or signage except for those emergency or safety-related signs specifically approved by the city. Automatic vending or transaction machines accessory to allowable uses do not constitute outdoor storage. The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours does not constitute outdoor storage. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Industrial (M-2) zoning district, outdoor storage: 
a.  Shall be screened along the front building line, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 30 - Development Standards, Article III - Improvements, Division 10 - Landscaping. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, outdoor storage: 
a.  Shall not allow junkyards, concrete plants, automobile wrecking yards and gasoline or oil storage depots in any DMU sub-district. 
b.  Shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any residential zoning district. 
c.  Shall not allow the storage of flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases in bulk above ground, except at duly licensed sales or service locations of such products. 
d.  Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with a heating device or appliance located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision. 
e.  Shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall eight (8) feet in height to conceal such facilities and the contents thereof from adjacent properties. Such fences or walls shall be setback ten (10) feet from a side or rear property line. 
f.  Shall not be permitted in any required front or side yards. 
g.  Shall have no materials or wastes be placed or deposited on any premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred or carried off such premises by natural causes or forces. 
h.  Shall require all materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects be stored outdoors only in closed containers. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 15, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-152. - Package and parcel delivery services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-153. - Pain management clinic/cash-only pharmacies. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district, pain management clinics/cash-only pharmacies: 
a.  A pain management clinic and/or a cash-only pharmacy as defined in Section 11-651 of the Code of Ordinances may be permitted as a conditional use. 
b.  Shall be required to furnish the information required in Sections 11-653, 11-654, and 11-655 of the Code of Ordinances relating to said uses. 
c.  Shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school, a public playground or park. 
d.  Shall provide a security plan to include unobstructed windows and lighting and information reflecting the management of patients or clients to said facilities to ensure the public safety of individuals residing adjacent to said parcel. 
e.  Each pain management clinic or cash-only pharmacy shall provide appropriate buffers between said facilities, its parking lot and adjacent uses. Such buffering shall consist of either a screen or an opaque fence, concrete wall or vegetative buffer at least fifty (50) feet in width. 
Sec. 28-154. - Parking structures. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L P  
(b)  Definition. "Parking structures:" A stand-alone structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking garages. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, parking structures: 
a.  On main thoroughfares shall have liner buildings lining the first and second stories. All parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be located behind liner shops on the ground floor, or in a separate parking structure. 
b.  Shall not have vehicular entrances to parking lots, garages, and parking structures wider than twenty-four (24) feet at the frontage. 
Sec. 28-155. - Passive commercial uses. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) zoning district, passive commercial uses: 
a.  Shall consist only of stormwater retention areas and landscape buffer areas. 
b.  Shall require that all minimum lot area, lot width, lot coverage, and setback requirement be met on the commercially zoned properties. The properties in the residential sub-district shall not be used to meet any of these requirements of the commercial development. 
c.  Shall not allow re-platting or further subdivision of an existing platted lot in the residential sub-district shall be permitted to provide for passive commercial uses. 
d.  Shall be the only use of this site, no other permitted or conditional uses of the IRCN zoning district shall be allowed. 
e.  Shall require all of the property, commercially zoned and IRCN zoned, to be combined under a unity of title. This document (unity of title) shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Brevard County. The Unit of Title shall stipulate that all of the property shall be held under single ownership, shall not be eligible for further subdivision, and shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold or divided, in any unit other than in its entirety. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) and Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) zoning districts, passive commercial uses: 
a.  Shall consist of only stormwater retention areas and landscape buffer areas. 
b.  Shall have no building area, driveway circulation area, loading area, parking area, signage or any other activity of the commercial uses. 
c.  Shall require all minimum site area, minimum lot size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage, and setback requirements to be met on the commercial zoned sites. The residential area shall not be used to meet any of these requirements of the commercial development. 
d.  Shall require a minimum width of the passive commercial use of one hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Shall be the only use of this site, no other permitted or conditional uses of the zoning district shall be allowed. 
f.  Shall require all of the property, commercial zoned and residential zoned property, to be combined under a unity of title. This document (unity of title) shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Brevard County. The unity of title shall stipulate that all of the property (commercial zoned and residential zoned property) shall be held under single ownership, shall not be eligible for further subdivision, and shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold or divided, in any unit other than in its entirety. 
Sec. 28-156. - Personal services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P C P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Personal services:" A commercial activity providing services involving the care of a person or his apparel. Such services may include, but are not be limited to: Spas, salons, beauty or barber shops, tattoo parlors, or any similar use and which may involve the sale of associated retail products as an accessory use. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-157. - Pet grooming services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P C P L P P P L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, pet grooming services: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall conduct all activities within a completely enclosed structure and screened from view from adjoining properties. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, pet grooming services: 
a.  Shall conduct all activities within a completely enclosed structure and screened from view from adjoining properties. 
b.  Shall only allow boarding as an accessory use. 
Sec. 28-158. - Pet stores. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-159. - Pharmacies. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P L P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P L C P P L  
(b)  Definition. "Pharmacies:" A business substantially devoted only to the sale of pharmaceutical items, supplies, and equipment such as prescription drugs. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Office Professional (OP) zoning district, pharmacies products are sold only at retail and accessory retail products are less than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, pharmacies: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall have buildings and/or lease space/unit gross floor area be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(3)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, pharmacies shall have buildings and/or lease space/unit gross floor area be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
Sec. 28-160. - Photographic shops. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 22, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-161. - Postal and mailing services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 22, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-162. - Printing and copying stores. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P L P P P P L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, printing and copying stores shall be limited to a maximum building and/or lease space/unit gross floor area of three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, printing and copying stores shall be limited to a maximum building and/or lease space/unit gross floor area of three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 23, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-163. - Private club. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C C C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C L L C C C  
(b)  Definition. "Private club:" A building or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, fraternal, civic, religious or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown and Civic Waterfront sub-district zoning district, private clubs: 
a.  Shall require all buildings be set back fifty (50) feet from all lot lines. 
b.  Shall require direct access to a collector road. 
c.  Shall require one (1) parking space be provided on site for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Shall not be located on the ground floor in the Downtown sub-district of the Community Redevelopment Area. 
e.  Shall adhere to the City's alcoholic beverage and hours of operation requirements. 
f.  Should there be three (3) or more valid complaints requiring public safety personnel intervention within a two-month period, the City Council shall reserve the right to review the use for action, which may include suspension or termination of a business tax receipt. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  Private clubs shall be operated for the benefit of members only and not as a business entity. 
(2)  Private clubs shall prohibit sleeping facilities. 
(3)  In the Residential Estate (RE) and Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) zoning districts, private clubs: 
a.  Shall require all buildings be set back fifty (50) feet from any street and one hundred (100) feet from all other lot lines. 
(4)  In the Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2), and Regional Mixed-Use (RMU) zoning districts, private clubs: 
a.  Shall require all buildings be set back fifty (50) feet from all lot lines. 
(5)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown sub-district zoning district, private clubs shall meet the conditions in (c)(1) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-164. - Professional offices. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Professional offices:" A commercial activity involving the conduct of business in any of the following related categories: architecture, engineering, law, medicine, excluding pain management clinics and cash-only pharmacies, music, art, interior design, dentistry, accounting, insurance, real estate, finance and securities investment and any similar profession. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Master planned office developments on parcels five (5) acres or larger shall adhere to the standards for a planned office park specified in Chapter 33, Article III. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 24, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-165. - Radio and television sales. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P C P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-166. - Repair and service for small equipment items. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P C P  
(b)  Definition. "Repair and service for small equipment items:" An establishment whose primary activity is the repair and service of household appliances, lawn maintenance equipment and other similar items. This use does not include the repair and service of automobiles or other vehicles including heavy equipment. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-167. - Restaurants/caterers. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P L P P L L L/C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P C L P P P P P L  
(b)  Definitions. 
"Restaurant:" An establishment where food and beverages are ordered, prepared and served. 
"Caterer:" Food or drink is prepared in a licensed kitchen and served at another location. 
"Take-out/non-seating restaurant:" An establishment that offers take-out or delivery of food or beverages but does not permit customers to dine in. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Outdoor areas of seating is an accessory use as set forth in Article VII, Accessory use table, and Article VIII, Accessory use standards, Section 28-361, Outdoor area of seating. 
(2)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zoning district, the sale of distilled spirits shall be prohibited within restaurants. 
(3)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district, restaurants and bars or brewpubs is an accessory use with a craft brewery or craft distillery manufacturing use. Caterers and take-out restaurants (as defined herein) are permitted without the need to be accessory to a craft-brewery or craft distillery manufacturing use. 
(4)  In the Industrial (M-2) zoning district, restaurants and bars or brewpubs is an accessory use with a craft brewery or craft distillery manufacturing use. Caterers and take-out restaurants are not permitted. 
(5)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, restaurants must be accessory to permitted uses within the district, except as described in (d), standards for conditional uses as provided below. 
(6)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, restaurants: 
a.  Shall only allow any outdoor seating to operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Outdoor areas of seating shall also meet the standards established in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article VIII, Accessory use standards, Section 28-361, Outdoor areas of seating. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, caterers and take-out restaurants (as defined herein) may be approved as a primary use by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-2017, § 1, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 31-2017, § 16, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 37-2017, § 25, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 17-2018, § 2, 3-13-18) 
Sec. 28-168. - Retail gasoline sales. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L C C C L L C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown and Uptown sub-districts, and Regional Mixed-Use 300 and 400 sub-districts (RMU-300, RMU-400) zoning districts, retail gasoline sales: 
a.  Shall require all gasoline pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands, and pump island canopies to conform to setback requirements for the district except that no such pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands or pump island canopies shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any side property line. 
b.  Shall prohibit all outdoor display of merchandise. 
c.  Shall require off-street loading spaces which are provided for the delivery of materials, merchandise, fuel oils or any similar accessory or product to be located in such a manner on the site in order to completely separate these off-street loading areas from customer parking areas and access lanes and aisles thereto. 
(2)  In addition to the standards in (c)(1) above, retail gasoline sales in the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district shall have all fuel pumps supported by a dedicated standby generator to ensure continuity of service after sever weather events, or acts of God, subject to approval by the City. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Regional Mixed-Use 200 sub-district (RMU-200) and Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning districts, Retail Gasoline Sales shall be required to meet the standards in (c)(1) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown and Civic Waterfront sub-districts, retail gasoline sales shall be required to meet the standards in (c)(1) and (c)(2) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-169. - Retail sales and service. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P C P P  
(b)  Definition. "Retail sales and service:" Those business activities that customarily provide retail convenience goods. Such uses may include: department stores, variety stores, including retail pharmacies, however, excluding cash-only pharmacies, restaurants, delicatessens, cafeteria, grocery and markets, gift shops, wearing apparel, home and auto supply, furniture and appliances, hardware, package stores, cocktail lounges, taverns, newsstands, book and stationery stores, shoe repair shops, luggage shops, bakeries and candy shops (provided that products made on the premises are sold on the premises), camera and photo supply shops, radio and television sales and services, floor coverings, sporting goods, florists, jewelers, music and piano sales and services, art shops, pawnshops, electrical and lighting, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, coin-operated or self-service laundry, farm and garden supplies excluding farm machinery and equipment, pet shops, and similar uses. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-170. - Screen printing shops. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P L P P P P L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, screen printing shops: 
a.  Shall have buildings and/or lease space/unit gross floor area be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, screen printing shops shall have buildings and/or lease space/unit gross floor area less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 26, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-171. - Shoe repair. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-172. - Spa. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C P P C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P C P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 27, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-173. - Sporting goods store. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-174. - Tailor services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 28, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-175. - Temporary labor agency. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district, temporary labor agencies: 
a.  Shall provide a lighted gathering area, screened from public view to the greatest extent possible without limiting police visibility into the area. This area shall only be occupied between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
b.  Shall provide sanitary facilities available to the gathering area (one (1) unisex bathroom) in addition to the minimum sanitary facilities required by the plumbing code for the occupancy. Portable toilet facilities are prohibited. 
c.  Shall provide garbage and cigarette disposal receptacles in the gathering area. 
d.  Shall provide secured bicycle parking per City Code. 
e.  Shall provide a pick-up area on the site, which does not impede traffic on public streets. 
f.  Shall prohibit laborers loitering around the area by providing transportation away from the agency location for those not receiving employment for that day as well as for those returning to the agency at the end of the day following employment. 
g.  Shall require payphone facilities to be within the office, and/or enclosed building. No payphones shall be available in the gathering area. 
h.  Shall maintain all gathering areas in a clean and orderly manner at all times. 
i.  Shall require a full site inspection prior to the opening and operation of the facility. 
(2)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, temporary labor agencies shall only be permitted as part of a Master Development Plan that designates a "commerce component" and designates the associated area on the Master Plan. 
Sec. 28-176. - Transient accommodations. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C  
(b)  Definition. "Transient accommodations:" A dwelling unit or other accommodation used as a dwelling unit or other place of human habitation with sleeping accommodation which is rented, leased or subleased for less than monthly periods or which is subject to time-sharing pursuant to applicable law for less than monthly time share periods. Transient accommodations shall include hotels, motels and similar uses if used as dwelling units and/or residence for more than one (1) month. A transient accommodation shall be considered a residential use. An accommodation is not a transient accommodation if it is rented, leased or subleased for periods longer than one (1) month. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-177. - Travel agencies. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, travel agencies shall only be permitted as part of a Master Development Plan that designates a "commerce component" and designates the associated area on the Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 29, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-178. - Travel trailer park. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Travel trailer park:" A place in which sites are rented for the placement of travel trailers, camper trailers, or other recreation vehicles (including tents) for use as temporary living quarters. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) and Tourist (T) zoning districts, travel trailer parks: 
a.  Shall have a minimum size of five (5) acres. 
b.  Shall have a maximum density of twelve (12) travel trailer spaces per acre. 
c.  Shall have a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each individual travel trailer space. 
d.  Shall set aside a minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross site area of the travel trailer park for common use area, recreation and open space. 
e.  Shall provide parking at a rate of one (1) parking space per travel trailer plus one (1) additional space for every two (2) travel trailers. 
f.  In the Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) zoning district, park offices, clubhouse facilities and the like shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any public street and one hundred (100) feet from all other lot lines. 
Sec. 28-179. - Truck stop plaza. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Truck stop plaza:" A site oriented to the service of trucks, including the sale of fuel to truck drivers, and provision for support facilities for truck drivers. They may also be utilized by non-truck traffic and the interstate traveler. Business activities which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the truck stop or travel plaza, may include, but not be limited to: Scales, truck wash, tire repair and sales, barber shop, restaurant with or without alcohol service, shower facility, convenience store, truckers lounge (for services such as television, exercise, internet access, et cetra), laundry, and vehicle fuel. The facility may allow for overnight parking (excluding for the loading and unloading of cargo) of commercial motor vehicles which are en-route to or from a destination along an interstate freeway system, for free or a fee that may be independent of any other use on the premises. The term "truck" shall mean a commercial vehicle driven by an operator who is required to have a Class "A" CDL (Commercial Driver's License) or equivalent. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Tourist (T) and Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district, truck stop plazas: 
a.  Shall be located on a minimum ten-acre parcel. 
b.  Shall have adequate access as determined by the City in coordination with the Florida Department of Transportation. 
c.  Shall require the parcel on which the truck stop plaza is located to be within two thousand (2,000) feet of the centerline of the nearest interstate highway exit/entry ramp. 
d.  Shall be limited to one (1) truck stop plaza having primary access from any interstate highway interchange. 
e.  Shall require the separation of fueling areas for automobiles and fueling areas for trucks with appropriate signage provided. 
f.  Shall meet all criteria for a convenience store and retail gasoline sales. 
g.  Shall provide mitigation measures to ensure that noise levels at the boundary of the property do not exceed levels specified in Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
h.  Shall require the installation of electrified parking space (EPS), also known as truck stop electrification, for each space to accommodate overnight parking to power necessary systems, such as heating, air conditioning, or appliances, without idling the engine. 
i.  Shall require a minimum twenty-foot perimeter landscape buffer consistent with the landscape standards of Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10. 
Sec. 28-180. - Upholstery shops. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, upholstery shops shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
Sec. 28-181. - Veterinarian. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P C C L L L P L  
(b)  Definition. "Veterinarian:" As defined in Section 474.303, Florida Statute, as may be amended. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Office Professional (OP), Urban Mixed-Use (UMU), Regional Mixed-Use 400 sub-district (RMU-400), and Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning districts, all activities shall be contained within an enclosed, air-conditioned building. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, veterinarians shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
(3)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) and Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning districts, veterinarians must be screened from view from adjoining properties 
(4)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, boarding allowed as accessory use only. 
(5)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district zoning district, veterinarians: 
a.  Shall keep no animals on the premises overnight except in the case of continuing treatment or an emergency. The primary purpose of a veterinary clinic is for the care and treatment of domestic animals and not for keeping or boarding animals (may include dog grooming). 
b.  Shall keep all animals in an enclosed building at all times. There shall be no outdoor runs or pens, except on property that is a minimum of one-quarter acre. 
c.  Shall dispose of dead animals by means approved by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. No facilities for cremation of animal remains shall be permitted on the site. 
(d)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown and Uptown sub-districts, veterinarians must meet the standards in (c)(5) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-182. - Videogame arcades. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P C P C P  
(b)  Definition. "Videogame arcades:" Any electric or electronic machine (e.g. pinball, videogames) which provides amusement, enjoyment, or entertainment and which may be operated upon the insertion of a coin or token. This shall not include arcade amusement centers or electronic gaming establishments. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 30, 11-14-17) 
Secs. 28-183-28-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL 

Sec. 28-201. - Bakeries and confectioneries. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, bakeries and confectioneries must be on property with an approved bakery or confectionery use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-202. - Bottling plants. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, bottling plants must be on property with an approved bottling plant use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-203. - Building trades services. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L P  
(b)  Definition. "Building trades services:" Building trades services include: construction, plumbing, electrical heating and air-conditioning, landscaping, well drilling, and similar services. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district, building trades services include offices, flexible-use space, or buildings devoted to contractors, paint, tile, flooring, or the like and showrooms. No outside storage of materials, fabricating or manufacturing is allowed. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, building trades services must be on property with an approved building trade service use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-204. - Craft brewery/craft distillery. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L P  
(b)  Definitions. 
"Craft brewery:" A small brewery in which less than twenty-five (25) percent of the brewery is owned or controlled (or equivalent economic interest) by an alcoholic beverage industry member that is not itself a craft brewer. Craft brewers have a majority of its total beverage alcohol volume in beers whose flavor derives from traditional or innovative brewing ingredients and their fermentation. Craft breweries may operate a tasting room which allows for the sales of beer and wine as defined in Florida Statutes. 
"Craft distillery:" A licensed distillery as defined by Section 565.03, Florida Statues. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, craft breweries/craft distilleries must be on property with an approved craft brewery/craft distillery use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-205. - Dry-cleaning plants. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L P  
(b)  Definition. "Dry-cleaning plants:" A building, portion of a building, or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only, in volatile solvents including, solvents of the petroleum distillate type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental thereto. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, dry-cleaning plants must be on property with an approved dry cleaning plant use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-206. - Freight distribution. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, freight distribution must be on property with an approved freight distribution use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-207. - Heavy industrial use. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Heavy industrial use:" Uses not enumerated elsewhere in the Land Development Regulations that use unique materials, processes, or equipment for specialized materials. These uses may be newly created processes that have not been incorporated into the Land Development Regulations. 
(c)  Standards for Conditional Uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  It is recognized that the rapid development of new and different industrial uses and operations makes it impossible and impractical to accurately enumerate those uses that would be beneficial or detrimental to the welfare of the community. Therefore, the intent and purpose of this conditional use permit is to allow the consideration of heavy industrial uses that are not otherwise listed as permitted, conditional or prohibited uses except as specifically exempted in this section. 
(2)  Uses that shall not be considered for approval as heavy industrial uses are those uses that are prohibited in the industrial (M-2) zoning district. 
(3)  Due to the nature of the heavy industrial use CUP, courtesy notices described in Section 34-41 of this Code shall be sent to property owners within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet (quarter mile) of the subject property. 
(4)  Heavy industrial use may be considered only for properties with a minimum lot size of twenty (20) acres and located south of SR 405/Columbia Boulevard. 
(5)  It is intended that the heavy industrial use should not be used indiscriminately, so as to permit any industrial use that might be a nuisance or otherwise detrimental to the general welfare of the community. All uses shall be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances regarding noise; vibrations; smoke and particulate matter; radiation hazards; glare and heat; electromagnetic interference; industrial sewerage and waste; and fire and explosive hazards. 
(6)  Hours of operation of the proposed use shall be consistent with the use and enjoyment of the properties in the surrounding residential community, if any, so as not to adversely affect the use and enjoyment of the residential character of the area. 
(7)  The height of the proposed use shall be compatible with the character of the area, and the maximum height of any habitable structure shall be not more than thirty-five (35) feet higher than the highest residence within five hundred (500) feet of the use, unless specifically exempted from this requirement by Council as part of the conditional use permit approval. 
(8)  In addition to the requirements of Section 34-74, the scaled conceptual site plan shall include the location of proposed uses; height of any structures over fifty (50) feet; areas designated for outdoor storage; and other site specific information necessary to adequately determine the impacts of the proposed use on the area. 
(9)  Minimum setbacks for heavy industrial uses shall be one hundred (100) feet from any arterial or collector roadway. Council may require additional setbacks to mitigate potential adverse impacts and ensure compatibility with the surrounding land uses. 
(10)  Minimum vegetative buffers for heavy industrial uses shall be twenty-five (25) feet in width and a minimum of six (6) feet in height. Council may require additional buffers to mitigate potential adverse impacts and ensure compatibility with the surrounding land uses. 
(11)  Council may also require other means to mitigate potential adverse impacts and ensure compatibility with the surrounding land uses according to the general standards of review in Section 34-76 and the maintenance of adopted levels of service for transportation, water, sewer, or stormwater and the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 28-208. - Heavy manufacturing. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Heavy manufacturing:" The fabrication of products from raw materials; for example: pharmaceuticals, vehicle parts, and musical instruments. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-209. - Laboratory (research and testing). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C P C P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Laboratory (research and testing):" A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigations, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-210. - Light manufacturing. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C L L L P  
(b)  Definition. "Light manufacturing:" Establishments engaged in the design, assembly, finishing, processing, and packaging of products without the processing of raw materials; for example: bottling plants, welding shops, and vehicle assembly establishments. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district, manufacturing: 
a.  A conditional use permit shall be required when the future land use designation is not industrial. 
b.  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre. 
c.  Manufacturing, assembly and fabrication activities shall be located no closer than seventy-five (75) feet from the property lines of the residentially zoned properties. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, light manufacturing: 
a.  Shall be processed as a conditional use permit for any use which the Administrator or designee believes may have a greater impact on the surrounding area or may not be compatible with the proposed site or surrounding community. 
b.  Shall not allow any accessory office, accessory commercial outlet and/or accessory restaurant to exceed more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the principle building, or if no building is on-site, such supporting uses shall be no larger than three thousand (3,000) square feet except by conditional use. 
c.  Supporting commercial and/or restaurant uses shall be located within the front area of the facility along the primary roadway. 
d.  Shall require additional buffering between industrial uses and residentially used or designated lands at the discretion of the Administrator. 
e.  Shall not allow demolition debris sites. 
f.  Shall not allow junkyards and salvage yards or sites. 
(3)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, light manufacturing must be on property with an approved light manufacturing use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown and Uptown sub-districts, Light Manufacturing shall meet the standards in (c)(2) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-211. - Machine shop. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L P  
(b)  Definition. "Machine shop:" Shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other wood- and metal-working machines are used such as blacksmith, tin-smith, welding, and sheet metal shops, wood-working, and overhaul shops. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, machine shops must be on property with an approved machine shop use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-212. - Mechanical service and repair. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L P  
(b)  Definition. "Mechanical service and repair:" Any building, premises and land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, mechanical service and repair must be on property with an approved mechanical service and repair use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-213. - Microbrewery. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, an on-site retail component shall be required. 
Sec. 28-214. - Mini-warehouse. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L C C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C C  
(b)  Definition. "Mini-warehouse:" An enclosed building or buildings having individual compartmentalized units, stalls or lockers, not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet which are to be rented for storage use. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district, mini-warehouses: 
a.  Access to each storage unit shall be from within an enclosed, air-conditioned building. 
b.  The use shall be limited to dead storage for the general public and no activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales shall be conducted on the premises. The servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mower and other similar equipment shall not be conducted on the premises. 
c.  The use shall be limited to one (1) on-site office, a maximum one thousand (1,000) square feet. The on-site office shall be an accessory use and may include mailboxes and mailing services. 
d.  Mini-warehouses shall be located within a Regional Commercial zoning district with a minimum property size of two (2) acres. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Light Industrial Services (M-1), Industrial (M-2), Highway Industrial Infill (M-3), Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district, and Regional Mixed-Use 500 sub-district (RMU-500) zoning districts, mini-warehouses: 
a.  Shall have a minimum property size of two (2) acres. 
b.  Shall allow City Council the ability to require accommodations for a live-in manager for a mini-warehouse facility. 
c.  Shall keep all storage on the property within enclosed or otherwise secured storage cubicles. 
d.  Shall require the operator of the mini-warehouse facility to provide locks for all units and maintain a master key to all locks. 
e.  Shall be limited to dead storage use for the general public and no activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales shall be conducted on the premises. The servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers and other similar equipment shall not be conducted on the premises. 
f.  Shall not allow unit size to exceed five hundred (500) square feet. 
g.  Shall provide parking at a rate of one (1) space for each twenty-five (25) storage cubicles and two (2) spaces for the manager's quarters. 
h.  Shall require a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet provided between warehouse buildings for driveway, parking and fire line [lane] purposes. 
i.  Shall require buffers be installed around the perimeter of the project in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10 of these regulations. 
Sec. 28-215. - Plant nursery. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, plant nurseries must be on property with an approved plant nursery use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
(d)  Plant Nursery Pilot Program. 
(1)  Plant nurseries may be permitted in the Community Commercial (CC) zoning district as a Pilot Program, as provided for below. 
a.  A Notarized Owner Authorization form shall be required prior to approval of the plant nursery. 
b.  Prior to issuance of a Business Tax Receipt, the applicant must secure the appropriate license from the Florida Department of Agriculture. 
c.  A permanent building is not required. Temporary structures, such as tents, may be utilized consistent with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
d.  All provisions of the Florida Building Code shall be met. 
e.  Outdoor storage of bulk materials, such as mulch, dirt, rock, etc. is not permitted. 
f.  Outdoor storage of packaged materials, excluding plants, shall be covered and be limited to a footprint of no more than twenty-five (25) square feet with a height of no more than four (4) feet. 
g.  Stabilized parking is not required provided that a written parking use agreement with an adjacent landowner is in place. Should the agreement be terminated, approval of the plant nursery shall become null and void; all nursery related activities on site shall cease immediately and all materials removed from the site within ten (10) days. Stormwater management is required for all impervious areas which, in total, are equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
h.  A dimensional sketch is required to depict display areas, parking areas, ingress, egress and any temporary structures on site. If impervious areas, in total, are equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet, a site plan will be required consistent with the requirements of Chapter 34, Article IV, Site Plans of this Code. 
i.  If lighting is not provided on site, the hours of operation shall be from dawn to dusk. 
j.  The site shall meet all Federal ADA requirements, except that provision of sanitary facilities shall not be required. In lieu of the provision of sanitary facilities being provided on site, off-site sanitary facilities shall be available on an adjacent property during hours of operation, as provided for in a written agreement. Should the agreement be terminated, approval of the plant nursery shall become null and void; all nursery related activities on site shall cease immediately and all materials removed from the site within ten (10) days. 
k.  In case of a finding of a health violation by the Health Department or a finding by the Titusville Code Board that a code violation exists and is not corrected in a timely manner as directed by the Health Department or Titusville Code Board, the pilot program can be terminated on the site found in violation by decision of the City Council at a public hearing. In the event, the pilot program is terminated, all materials related to the plant nursery shall be removed from the subject property within ten (10) days. 
l.  During the pilot program, no more than one (1) sign with a maximum size of thirty-two (32) square feet shall be permitted in to addition to any existing sign on the subject property. This sign shall be removed in the event the plant nursery business is no long operating. The erection of a permanent sign shall not be permitted during the pilot program. 
m.  The pilot program shall be effective for twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance and may be extended by decision of the City Council. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire at such time as the program expires, unless sooner revoked. 
(Ord. No. 37-2018, § 2, 8-28-18) 
Sec. 28-216. - Production print shops, printing, engraving. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-217. - Recycling and mulching/composting facility. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Recycling and mulching/composting facility:" Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper, rags, tires, bottles, and other such materials. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Industrial (M-2) zoning district, recycling and mulching/composting facilities: 
a.  Shall require the applicant to submit the specific type and estimated quantity of materials to be allowed and considered with the conditional use. 
b.  Shall locate no part of a recycling facility's access roads or ramps within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. 
c.  Shall prohibit any part of a recycling facility's structures, processing areas, storage areas, or other associated uses, to occur within one hundred (100) feet of any residentially zoned property or within fifty (50) feet of any commercial property. Storage areas must be located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any street right-of-way lines. 
d.  Shall be required to submit plans for and install a twenty-five-foot landscape buffer and for consideration with the conditional use. 
e.  Shall have all open areas for storage enclosed by a visual barrier when viewed from the public road right-of-way or adjacent lots not industrially zoned. The enclosure shall be a masonry wall, opaque fence, landscaped berm or other materials adequate to create a permanent opaque barrier. Such enclosure shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height, and in no case shall materials be stacked or stored so as to exceed the height of the enclosure. 
f.  Shall have all loading and vehicular use areas consist of a durable asphalt or concrete surface which includes adequate onsite area for the stacking of trucks and trailers waiting to be loaded and unloaded. Stormwater runoff from such pads shall be approved by the City of Titusville and all other appropriate agencies. 
g.  Shall not allow any recycling facility or any land area included with a recycling or mulching facility within the "area of critical concern" unless all operations are within enclosed structures. 
h.  Shall not allow the storage and/or processing of hazardous waste on site. A separate area shall be required for the containment of hazardous waste found within materials transported onto the site and for materials, which are unable and unauthorized to be processed by the facility. 
i.  Shall require dust and particulate matter to meet the standard of no significant deposition off-site to adjoining lots or roads. Significant deposition is where deposition from the site can be seen as a regular pattern of deposition leading from the site by wind or vehicular deposition as a result of the operation of a particular site. The deposition shall be sufficient to be collected from vegetation or hard surfaces. 
j.  Shall have all on site activities be controlled to prevent the emission of odorous gases or other matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable or to produce a public nuisance or hazard at any point as measured along the lot lines. 
k.  Shall require copies of any denial of required federal or state permit issued by final agency action be submitted, consistent with Chapter [Section] 166.033, Florida Statutes, as part of the conditional use. 
l.  Shall have the entire site be maintained at all times in a clean, litter-free condition and shall be cleared of loose debris on a daily basis. 
Sec. 28-218. - Retail or wholesale of products manufactured on-site. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1), Industrial (M-2), Highway Industrial Infill (M-3), and Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning districts, retail or wholesale of products manufactured on-site shall only be allowed in conjunction with permitted and conditional uses in the district. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, retail or wholesale of products manufactured on-site must be on property with an approved retail or wholesale of products manufactured on-site use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-219. - Transportation facilities. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-220. - Transmission tower. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Regulations for nonconforming transmission towers are established in Section 34-349. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Industrial (M-2), Highway Industrial Infill (M-3), and Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning districts, transmission towers: 
a.  Shall be located on the site so as to provide a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower from all property lines unless the applicant is able to produce a certified fall zone letter by the tower manufacturer. This letter shall define the exact breakpoint, which shall be equal to the setback distance from the closest property line. Stand-alone towers (monopoles) should be encouraged wherever possible to ensure an esthetic appeal to the community. 
b.  Shall be reviewed to determine the aesthetic effects of the proposed tower on surrounding areas as well as mitigating factors concerning aesthetics. 
c.  The Council may disapprove an application on the grounds that the proposed tower's aesthetic effects are incompatible, or may condition approval on changes in tower height, design, style, buffers, or other features of the wireless communications facility or its surrounding area. Such changes in non-broadcast installations need not result in performance identical to that of the original application. 
d.  Factors relevant to aesthetic effects include: the protection of the view in sensitive or scenic areas and areas specially designated in adopted plans such as unique natural features, scenic roadways and historic sites; the concentration of towers in the proposed area; and whether the height, design, placement or other characteristics of the proposed tower could be modified to have a less intrusive visual impact. 
e.  If Council determines that the proposed additional service of non-broadcast facilities, coverage, or capacity to be achieved by the location of the proposed facility can be achieved by use of one (1) or more alternative existing wireless communications facilities it may deny the proposed antenna support facility application. 
f.  Prior to effecting the removal of any tower, the City shall provide notice and an opportunity to be heard to both the landowner and the CUP holder who shall show cause why the tower should not be removed in accordance with the provisions and requirements of the ordinance. A notice describing the reason for removal and the date of a hearing before the City Council shall be served by certified mail, fax, actual delivery, or U.S. mail (if otherwise undeliverable) at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the hearing. The time for effecting removal shall be tolled. 
Sec. 28-221. - Vehicle-for-hire establishments. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C L P  
(b)  Definition. "Vehicle-for-hire establishments:" An establishment where vehicles-for-hire are stored and maintained. These establishments may include administrative and dispatch offices and areas for vehicle repair and maintenance. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, vehicle-for-hire establishments must be on property with an approved vehicle-for-hire establishment use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Sec. 28-222. - Warehousing/wholesale. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L P C P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P L  
(b)  Definition. "Warehousing/wholesale:" The display, storage, and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment, including truck terminal or bus servicing facilities, motor freight transportation, moving and storage facilities, warehousing, and storage activities. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district, warehousing/wholesale: 
a.  Shall be required to receive a conditional use permit when the Comprehensive Plan future land use designation is not industrial. 
b.  Shall not contain bulk storage or flammable liquids. 
c.  Shall not allow any outdoor display. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, warehousing/wholesale shall meet the criteria in (c)(1)a. and b. above and must be on property with an approved warehousing/wholesale use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) zoning district, warehousing/wholesale: 
a.  Shall not contain bulk storage or flammable liquids. 
b.  Shall not allow any outdoor display or storage. 
Sec. 28-223. - Welding, metal working, fabrication. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, mechanical service and repair must be on property with an approved mechanical service and repair use existing prior to December 8, 2009. Expansions must be on property owned by the owner of the approved industrial business on or before December 8, 2009. 
Secs. 28-224-28-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CIVIC, PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL 

Sec. 28-231. - Airpark. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Definition. "Airpark:" A tract of leveled land where aircraft can take off and land, usually equipped with hard surfaced landing strips, hangars, aircraft maintenance and refueling facilities, which are predominantly used for recreational purposes. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In all zoning districts where an airpark is a conditional use: 
a.  All structures shall be set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
b.  A landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10 shall be required on non-street property lines. 
Sec. 28-232. - Airport. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Definition. "Airport:" A tract of leveled land where aircraft can take off and land, usually equipped with hard-surfaced landing strips, a control tower, hangars, aircraft maintenance and refueling facilities, and accommodations for passengers and cargo. The Space Coast Regional Airport is the airport in the city limits. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In all zoning districts where an airport is a conditional use: 
a.  All structures shall be set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
b.  A landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10 shall be required on non-street property lines. 
Sec. 28-233. - Ambulance service. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-234. - Art centers. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-235. - Cemetery. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Definition. "Cemetery:" Any one (1) (or a combination) of the following places designated for disposition of human or pet remains: 
(1)  Burial park for earth interment. 
(2)  A mausoleum: A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the entombment of remains of a deceased person(s). 
(3)  A columbarium: A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the inurnment of the cremated remains of a deceased person(s). 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-236. - Church. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C P P L C C L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Church:" A building or groups of building that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Hospital Medical (HM), Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (CC), and Office Professional (OP) zoning districts, churches: 
a.  Shall be required to proceed through the conditional use process if the proposed maximum occupant capacity is greater than four hundred (400) persons. 
b.  Shall meet the minimum standards required by Section 28-110 - Childcare Facilities, if a childcare facility is proposed in association with the church. 
c.  Shall limit offices associated with the activities or business of the church to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the buildings associated with the church. 
d.  Shall provide a "B" type buffer specified in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10, along all property lines abutting a residential zoning classification, unless located in a commercial strip center. 
e.  Shall not allow vehicular access from a local street, unless approved by the Administrator through the site plan process. 
f.  Shall provide on-site parking pursuant to the City's Transportation Technical Manual. 
(2)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, churches: 
a.  Shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
b.  Shall require all new and existing lease spaces and structures to meet current parking requirements. 
(3)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, churches shall be located on property that has frontage on either a collector or arterial roadway, as classified on the Road Classification Map. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2), and General Use (GU) zoning districts: 
a.  Shall meet the minimum standards required by Section 28-110 - Childcare Facilities, if a childcare facility is proposed in association with the church. 
b.  Shall limit offices associated with the activities or business of the church to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the buildings associated with the church. 
c.  Shall provide a "B" type buffer specified in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10, along all property lines abutting a residential zoning classification, unless located in a commercial strip center. 
d.  Shall not allow vehicular access from a local street for a church with a maximum proposed occupant capacity of four hundred (400) persons. 
e.  Shall provide on-site parking pursuant to the City's Transportation Technical Manual. 
(2)  In the Hospital Medical (HM), Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), and Office Professional (OP) zoning districts, churches with a maximum occupancy capacity in excess of four hundred (400) persons shall meet the limitations established in (c)(1) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 17, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 23-2018, § 2, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 28-237. - College/university. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P  
(b)  Definition. An institution other than a vocational (trade) school that provides full-time or part-time education beyond high school. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-238. - Community centers. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P L L L C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P C L L L P P  
(b)  Definition. "Community center:" A building, generally owned and/or operated by a governmental, public or nonprofit organization, where members of a community may gather for social, educational or cultural activities. Community center does not include event centers, civic centers or other buildings predominately utilized by non-community members or for commercial events. Accessory uses include recreation facilities, meeting rooms, and offices and storage facilities used by staff. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Regional Mixed-Use 200, 300 and 400 sub-districts (RMU-200, RMU-300, RMU-400) zoning districts, community centers: 
a.  Shall have all community center structures be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
b.  Shall require a landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10. 
(2)  In the Community Commercial (CC) zoning district, no community center structure shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any residentially zoned property or residential use. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) and Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) zoning districts, community centers shall meet the standards in (c)(2) above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 24-2018, § 2, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 28-239. - Community service. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P L L L C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P C L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Community service:" Uses of public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing ongoing education, training counseling to the general public on a regular basis, without a residential component. Facilities used for recreational, social, education, library, meetings and cultural activities, open to the public. Activities which include, but are not limited to, museums, gallery exhibitions or works of art, or library collections of books, manuscripts, etc., for preservation, study and reading. Community service activities do not include commercial galleries. Accessory uses include recreation facilities, meeting rooms, and offices and storage facilities used by staff. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Regional Mixed-Use 200, 300 and 400 sub-districts (RMU-200, RMU-300, RMU-400) zoning districts, community services: 
a.  Shall have all structures be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
b.  Shall require a landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10. 
(2)  In the Community Commercial (CC) zoning district, no structure shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any residentially zoned property or residential use. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) and Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) zoning districts, community services shall meet the standards in (3)(a) [(c)(1)] above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-240. - Convention center. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Uptown sub-district, convention centers: 
a.  Shall have no building located closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot line which abuts a residentially designated property; 
b.  Shall have no off-street parking or loading space located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line abutting a residentially designated property; 
c.  Any accessory restaurant or ticket sales activities to be included as part of the cultural or civic facility shall be conducted entirely within the building; 
d.  The facility must have thoroughfare road frontage; 
e.  A buffer shall be provided between the facility and adjacent properties that are residentially designated. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown sub-district, convention centers shall meet the standards in (c)(1) above, and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-241. - Domestic violence shelter. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district, domestic violence shelters: 
a.  Shall be located in a structure that is detached from any other building or use. 
b.  Shall provide twenty-four-hour staff person coverage on-site. 
c.  Shall be limited to a maximum occupancy of any facility to one (1) person (adult or child) per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of living area. This total shall include any live-in staff person(s). 
d.  Shall conform, to the maximum extent practicable, to the type of outward appearance of structures in the general area in which it is located. 
e.  Shall provide a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of usable open space adjacent to the facility. 
f.  Shall meet all certification requirements of the State of Florida, Department of Children and Family Services. 
Sec. 28-242. - Family day care homes. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Family day care homes:" An occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for children and which receives a payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. A "family day care home" shall be allowed to provide care for one (1) of the following groups of children: 
(1)  A family day care home may care for a maximum of five (5) preschool children from more than one (1) unrelated family and a maximum of five (5) elementary school siblings of the preschool children in care after school hours. The maximum number of five (5) preschool children includes preschool children in the home and preschool children received for day care who are not related to the resident care giver. The total number of children in the home may not exceed ten (10). 
(2)  When the home is licensed and provisions are made for substitute care, a family day care home may care for a maximum of five (5) preschool children from more than one (1) unrelated family, a maximum of three (3) elementary school siblings of the preschool children in care after school hours, and a maximum of two (2) elementary school children unrelated to the preschool children in care after school hours. The maximum number of five (5) preschool children includes preschool children in the home and preschool children received for day care who are not related to the resident care giver. The total number of children in the home may not exceed ten (10). 
(3)  When the home is licensed and provisions are made for substitute care, a family day [care] home may care for a maximum number of seven (7) elementary school children from more than one (1) unrelated family in care after school hours. Preschool children shall not be in care in the home. The total number of elementary school children in the home may not exceed seven (7). 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, family day care homes: 
a.  Shall be allowed per Section 402.302, Florida Statutes: a family day care home shall be allowed to provide care for one (1) of the following groups of children, which shall include these children under thirteen (13) years of age who are related to the caregiver. 
b.  Shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) children from birth to twelve (12) months of age. 
c.  Shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) children from birth to twelve (12) months of age, and other children, for a maximum total of six (6) children. 
d.  Shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) preschool children if all are older than twelve (12) months of age. 
e.  Shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) children if no more than five (5) are preschool age and, of those five (5), no more than two (2) are under twelve (12) months of age. 
Sec. 28-243. - Government facilities. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P L L L L P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2), and Regional Mixed-Use (RMU-100, RMU-200, RMU-300, RMU-400) zoning districts, government facilities: 
a.  Shall not allow storage yards or conditional uses as noted in the public use zoning district. 
b.  Shall provide a landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10 on non-street property lines. 
c.  Shall have all structures set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 31, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-244. - Heliports or landing pads. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-245. - Incinerators. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-246. - Landfill. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-247. - Library. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P C C C C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) zoning district, libraries shall be located on property that is adjoining to an intersection of Deleon Avenue or Park Avenue. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1), and Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) zoning districts, libraries: 
a.  Shall require a landscape buffer in accordance with Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10 on non-street property lines. 
b.  Shall have all structures set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
Sec. 28-248. - Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and extended care facilities. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C L  
(b)  Definition. "Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and extended care facilities:" An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advance age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Regional Mixed-Use 400 sub-district (RMU-400) zoning district, nursing homes, convalescent homes, and extended care facilities: 
a.  Shall meet the standards contained in Section 28-72 (assisted living facility). 
b.  Shall not allow a room/living unit that is shared by two (2) non-related persons have a room area less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
c.  Shall have all storage and preparation of food accomplished at a central kitchen. Each separate room or group of rooms shall not be designed, altered, maintained or used for this purpose. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), and Regional Mixed-Use 300 sub-district (RMU-300) zoning districts, nursing homes, convalescent homes, and extended care facilities shall meet the standards in (c)(1) above and may be approved by obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 28-249. - Passenger terminal facilities. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P C L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-250. - Performing arts theater. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-251. - Post office. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-252. - Prison, detention facilities and work camps. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-253. - Public utility. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C P C C C C  
(b)  Definition. "Public utility:" A privately owned, municipally owned or county owned system providing water or wastewater service to the public, which has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-254. - Recovery/halfway house. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Definition. "Recovery/halfway house:" A place where persons are aided in readjusting to society following a period of imprisonment, hospitalization, or institutionalized treatment. 
(c)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Midtown sub-district, recovery/halfway houses: 
a.  Shall require the operation and location of the facility as proposed to be consistent with the comprehensive plan and applicable land development regulations; 
b.  Shall not create or cause a private or public nuisance to adjacent properties by creating noise, odor, health hazard, glare, unlawful activities, harassment of residents or business occupants in the vicinity, or other adverse condition; 
c.  Shall implement adequate security and supervision measures to address the needs of the facility's residents as well as residents of adjacent lands and their property. Prior to approval of the conditional use, the owner/developer of the facility shall provide to the City a security plan in form and substance acceptable to the City addressing the needs of the facility's clients, including, but not limited to, a statement describing special supervision to be provided for clients, as well as protection from decrease in property values, harassment, theft, arson or fire, crime, or other adverse condition to be provided to persons in the surrounding community; 
d.  Shall be of adequate size and design to reasonably accommodate its projected capacity; 
e.  Shall have its features designed to be compatible with the general architectural theme, appearance, and representative building types of adjacent properties and uses; and 
f.  Shall not be allowed within two thousand four hundred (2,400) linear feet of another group home, community residential home, soup kitchen, homeless shelter or other recovery home/halfway houses; 
g.  Shall not adversely impact upon existing uses or change the character of the area in which it is located. Intensity of use of the proposed facility shall be determined based upon the size of the facility, the number of residents to be accommodated, and the type of accessory services to be provided. Adverse impact shall be evaluated particularly with respect to existing residential uses and districts within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the site. 
Sec. 28-255. - Schools (public or private). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP C C C C C C C C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C L L L L C C C C C  
(b)  Definition. "Schools (public or private):" Any building or group of buildings or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for educational or instruction of any branch of knowledge. 
(1)  School, college/university: An educational institution authorized by the State of Florida, to award baccalaureate or higher degrees. 
(2)  School, elementary: Any school licensed by the State of Florida and which meets the State of Florida requirements for elementary education. Elementary school shall be from kindergarten to sixth grade. 
(3)  School, high school and/or secondary: Any school licensed by the State of Florida, which is authorized to award diplomas for high school and/or secondary education. High school and/or secondary school shall be from ninth to 12th grades. 
(4)  School, parochial: A private school supported and controlled by a church or religious organization. 
(5)  School, private: Any building or group of buildings the use of which meets State of Florida requirements for elementary, Jr. High and/or middle, High/secondary school or higher education and which does not secure the major part of its funding from any government agency. 
(6)  School, vocational, trade and business: A higher educational facility above secondary school, teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the State of Florida requirements as a vocational facility. Such schools shall also include adult educational schools, business schools or professional schools. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Public (P) zoning district, schools: 
a.  Shall be limited to public schools. 
b.  Shall require exterior lighting to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
c.  Shall require the applicant to clearly demonstrate the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking and appearance. 
d.  May have additional landscaping and buffering to further screen and buffer activity from abutting residential areas imposed by City Council. 
e.  Shall have entrances to the site minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhoods. 
f.  Shall provide a passenger drop-off zone adjacent to the facility providing clear ingress and egress from parking and other areas. 
g.  Shall require all student drop off/pick up areas and their associated stacking areas to be totally on-site. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-districts zoning district, schools: 
a.  Shall meet the criteria in (c)(1) above. 
b.  Shall have all playgrounds and outdoor recreational areas shall be set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
c.  Shall be required to have frontage and all access from a collector or higher roadway, unless the Community Redevelopment Agency approves access from a lower roadway classification. 
d.  In the event a school is proposed to be in a commercial plaza with other commercial uses, a dedicated area for school parking and drop-off and pick-up shall be required to be separate from other on-site commercial traffic. 
(d)  Standards for conditional uses. These uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3), and Residential Historic Preservation (RHP) zoning districts, schools: 
a.  Shall meet the standards in (c)(1) above. 
b.  Shall have all structures, buildings, playgrounds and outdoor recreational areas set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
c.  Shall be required to have frontage and all access from a collector or higher roadways if school has over twenty-five (25) students. 
d.  Shall require a minimum lot size-One (1) acre for the first thirty-five (35) students. Each additional student shall require an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet, but no school site will be required to exceed five (5) acres. 
e.  Shall locate all parking behind the setback line of the zoning district. 
f.  Shall not allow special education classes for juvenile delinquents, correctional facilities, drug or alcohol dependency/abuse or similar type programs in any residential zoning and land use designations. 
(2)  In the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Office Professional (OP), General Use (GU), Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-districts, Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU), and Regional Mixed-Use 100, 200, 300, and 400 sub-districts (RMU-100, RMU-200, RMU-300, RMU-400) zoning districts, schools: 
a.  Shall meet the standards in (c)(1) above. 
b.  Shall have all playgrounds and outdoor recreational areas set back a minimum fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential zoning district or residential use. 
c.  Shall be required to have frontage and all access from a collector or higher roadway, unless City Council approves access from a lower roadway classification. 
d.  In the event a school is proposed to be in a commercial plaza with other commercial uses, a dedicated area for school parking and drop off and pick up shall be required to be separate from other on-site commercial traffic. 
Sec. 28-256. - Vocational school. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Vocational school:" A school established to provide for the teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial, or artistic skills. This definition applies to schools that are owned and operated privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Hospital Medical (HM), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Office Professional (OP), Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU), and Regional Mixed-Use 200, 300, and 400 sub-districts (RMU-200, RMU-300, RMU-400) zoning districts, all activities shall be within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  In the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district, only medically related vocational schools may be permitted. 
(3)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1), Industrial (M-2), Highway Industrial Infill (M-3), and Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning districts, only industrial related vocational schools may be permitted. 
(4)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Downtown, Uptown, and Midtown sub-districts zoning district vocational schools shall meet the criteria for schools in the DMU zoning district established in Section 28-255. 
Secs. 28-257-28-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RECREATION 

Sec. 28-271. - Community gardens. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Community gardens:" any portion of a lot or parcel managed and maintained by a group of people to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops for personal or group use, consumption or donation. Community gardens do not include portions of lots or parcels utilized to grow food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops for the purpose of commercial wholesaling. 
(c)  Standards for permitted uses with limitations. 
(1)  Size limitation. 
a.  A community garden shall not be greater than two (2) acres in size and may be further limited as determined by the Administrator to address any environmental constraints and in order to limit any adverse impacts to any other established use of the property. A community garden may not be subdivided into separate tracts for sale. 
b.  The cultivated area and accessory structures shall meet setbacks for principal structures of the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  Environmental compliance. 
a.  The community garden shall comply with all federal, state, and local regulations pertaining to agricultural production and soil suitability. Water conservation and stormwater runoff prevention practices shall be employed in accordance with applicable regulations adopted by the SJRWMD and the City. The Administrator may limit or restrict the establishment of a community garden due to the existence of environmentally sensitive areas on the property, including watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, natural habitat of threatened or endangered species, and major trees or major groups of trees. 
(3)  Noise limitations. 
a.  No gardening activities may take place before sunrise or after sunset. The use of hand tools, and domestic gardening tools and equipment is encouraged; the use of power equipment, is also allowed; however, such use shall be in compliance with the City's Noise Ordinance, Chapter 13, Article IV, Noise, Titusville Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Maintenance responsibilities. 
a.  The owner of the property(-ies) on which the community garden is located shall ultimately be responsible for maintaining the property, and supporting infrastructure so that it does not become a nuisance. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, ensuring the property is not overgrown with weeds; infested by invasive exotic plants or vermin; or, a source of erosion or stormwater runoff; or pollution by fertilizer or pesticide, insecticide, herbicide or other agricultural-use chemicals. The garden shall be maintained in an orderly and neat condition consistent with the City property maintenance standards. 
b.  Outdoor storage is prohibited, except as may be permitted under the applicable zoning regulations. 
c.  No trash or debris shall be stored or allowed to remain on the property outside of approved garbage containers. 
d.  Vegetative material (e.g. compost), additional dirt for distribution and other bulk supplies shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion and shall not create a visual blight or offensive odors. All materials shall be stored in an enclosed structure so as to eliminate dispersion by water or wind. 
e.  Large power tools (e.g. mowers, tillers) shall be stored at the rear of the property in an enclosed structure or shall be screened as described in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 10. 
f.  The community garden shall be designed and maintained to prevent any chemical pesticide, fertilizer or other garden waste from draining off of the property. Pesticides and fertilizers may only be stored on the property in a locked building or shed and must comply with any other applicable requirements for hazardous materials. 
g.  The owner of any community garden and any group managing a community garden shall ensure that the garden complies with applicable environmental management standards set out in these regulations. 
(5)  Agricultural chemical application. 
a.  Organic gardening is strongly encouraged. Application of fertilizer, pesticide, insecticide, herbicide and/or agricultural-use chemicals shall be consistent with label instructions and Section 12-27, Fertilizer use requirements, Titusville Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  Accessory structures (only the following will be permitted in a community garden): 
a.  Greenhouses, hoophouses, storage sheds, and shade pavilions. 
1.  Buildings/structures must be set back from property lines consistent with the minimum principal building setback of the underlying zoning district. 
2.  No building or other structure may be greater than fifteen (15) feet in height. 
3.  The combined area of all accessory structures may not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet or ten (10) percent of the square footage of the cultivated area, whichever is less. However in no event shall all structures on the property exceed the maximum lot coverage of the applicable zoning district. 
4.  Accessory structures are not required to be constructed with pervious floors, if consistent with the building code and methods to control agricultural runoff are employed. 
b.  Fences shall be subject to the regulations in the applicable zoning district. 
c.  Benches, picnic tables and garden art. 
d.  Planting beds raised three (3) feet or more above grade, compost bins and rain barrel systems must be set back from property lines consistent with the minimum principal building setback of the underlying zoning district. 
e.  All structures shall be subject to the Florida Building Code. 
(7)  Off-street parking is not required for gardens on property less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in lot area. 
(8)  Community gardens shall not be considered as principal agricultural uses and shall not be construed so as to qualify for agricultural tax exemptions afforded by the local, state, or federal government. 
(9)  Signage providing identification of the community garden shall comply with the provisions noted in Chapter 32, Signs of the Land Development Regulations. The hours of operation of the garden shall be posted on site. 
(10)  An application for administrative approval must be submitted to the City along with the following required documentation: 
a.  Notarized letter signed by the property owner giving permission for use of property. 
b.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the property size with dimensions. 
c.  The site plan must show the location of all existing structures on the property as well as on properties within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter boundary of the site. 
d.  The site plan must reflect existing streets, easements, or land reservations within the site. 
e.  The site plan must include proposed fencing and screening, if any. 
f.  The site plan must identify the source of water that will be used for irrigation purposes. 
g.  An application fee, as established by Council Resolution shall be assessed for review of the application. 
(11)  The food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops grown in a community garden located within a nonresidential zoning district, including special districts, may be sold on site. Proof of sanitary facilities may be required. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 18, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 28-272. - Golf course. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P C  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-273. - Park (private). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Park (private):" A tract of land presently owned or controlled and used by private or semi-public persons, entities, groups, etc. for active and/or passive recreation. These include commercial recreation premises consisting of woodlands, watercourses, and fields used for active recreational activities that do not require modifying the existing setting, including paintball, lasertag, and orienteering. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-274. - Park (public or non-profit). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P C HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Park:" A tract of land, designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-275. - Recreation and commercial amusement (indoor). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Definition. "Recreation and commercial amusement (indoor):" A recreational land use conducted entirely within a building, except where accessory outdoor uses are allowed by the Land Development Regulations, including areas, art galleries, arts center, assembly hall, auditorium, bowling alley, club or lounge, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, movie theater, museum, performance theater, skating rink, swimming pool, and tennis courts. 
(c)  Standards for Conditional Uses - these uses require public hearings. 
(1)  In the General Use (GU) zoning district, Recreation and Commercial Amusement (indoor): 
a.  Shall be limited to assembly hall/auditorium uses on a minimum ten (10) acre lot. 
b.  Shall limit offices associated with the assembly hall/auditorium use to no more than ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the building. 
c.  Shall provide a "B" type buffer specified in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 10, Landscaping, along all property lines abutting a residential zoning classification. 
d.  Shall not allow vehicular access from a local street unless the maximum occupant capacity of the facility is no more than four hundred (400) persons. 
e.  Shall provide on the conceptual site plan the proposed location of any outdoor activity or gathering areas. The use of amplified sound devices in these outdoor areas shall be considered as part of the Conditional Use Permit, and conditions may be applied by the Council to mitigate the impacts associated with these devices. 
f.  Additional conditions may be adopted by the City Council to mitigate the impacts of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 23-2018, § 3, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 28-276. - Recreation and commercial amusement (outdoor). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID C C GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 C  
(b)  Definition. "Recreation and commercial amusement (outdoor):" A recreational land use conducted outside of a building, characterized by potentially moderate impacts on traffic, the natural environment, and the surrounding neighborhood, including athletic fields, miniature golf, skateboard park, swimming, batch, wading and other therapeutic facilities, tennis handball, basketball courts, batting cages and trampoline facilities. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-277. - Tennis clubs. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Secs. 28-278-28-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-301. - Residential Estate (RE). 
Residential Estate (RE) (a) Purpose. The Residential Estate (RE) district is intended to provide for low-density large lot estate type development of one (1) acre or larger in size. Certain structures and uses that will serve governmental, religious, and other immediate needs of such areas are permissible as permitted or conditional uses subject to all restrictions necessary to preserve and protect the low density character of the district. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 43,560 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 125 Density, maximum (du/ac) 1 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 2,000 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 30 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 35 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 35 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 30 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 - Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
  
Sec. 28-302. - Residential (RR). 
Rural Residential (RR) (a) Purpose The Rural Residential district (RR) is intended to provide for low-density large lot development of one-half (0.5) acre or larger in size. Certain structures and uses that will serve governmental, religious, recreational, and other immediate needs of such areas are permissible as permitted or conditional uses subject to all restrictions necessary to preserve and protect the low density character of this district. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 21,780 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 125 Density, maximum (du/ac) 2 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 1,200 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 30 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 30 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 30 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-303. - Single-Family Low Density (R-1A). 
Single-Family Low Density (R-1A) (a) Purpose The Single-Family Low Density (R-1A) district is established as a designation for the principal use of low-density single-family dwellings of spacious character together with certain structures and uses that are compatible with property in the district. It is further intended that governmental religious, recreational and other immediate needs of this district are served while the existing development of this character is protected. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 10,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 100 Density, maximum (du/ac) 4.3 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 1,200 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 35 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 30 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-304. - Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B). 
Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B) (a) Purpose The Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B) district is designed as a district for the principal use of medium-density single-family dwellings. The purpose of the district is to promote orderly and proper development of single-family residential units together with certain structures and uses that are compatible with property in the district. It is further intended that governmental, religious, recreation and other immediate needs of this district are served while a quality environment is provided for the residents of this designation and City. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 7,500 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 75 Density, maximum (du/ac) 5.8 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 1,200 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 35 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-305. - Single-Family High Density (R-1C). 
Single-Family High Density (R-1C) (a) Purpose The Single-Family High Density (R-1C) district is established as a designation for the principal use of high-density single-family dwellings. The purpose of this district is to promote stable quality residential development at slightly increased densities together with certain structures and uses that are compatible with property in the district. It is further intended that governmental, religious, recreational and other immediate needs of this district are served while a quality environment is provided for the residents of the designation and City. This district provides the transition between single-family densities and higher density development. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 6,500 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 65 Density, maximum (du/ac) 6.7 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 900 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 35 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 1 Front setback with rear garage reduced to 20 feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-306. - Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2). 
Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) (a) Purpose The Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2) district is intended to allow the erection of a variety of housing types at a maximum density of nine (9) units per acre. This district is designed to allow development adjacent to arterial or collector streets and is well served by public services and facilities. When adjacent to R-1 zoning districts, the development within this district shall be designed carefully to provide maximum compatibility with adjacent development by proper architectural design, landscaping, screening and parking. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) Townhomes: 3,000 
Multifamily: 4,000 per DU Lot width, minimum (ft.) Townhomes: 24 
Multifamily: None Density, maximum (du/ac) 9 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq ft) Townhomes: 800 
Multifamily: Efficiency - 600 
1 Bedroom - 700 
2 Bedroom - 800 
3 Bedroom 900 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 50 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
- Townhome and Multifamily developments shall have a minimum distance between structures of 20 feet. 
- A maximum of six (6) dwelling units shall be allowed in a building group of townhouse units. 
- Staggered setbacks are encourage to lessen the straight row effect. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-307. - Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3). 
Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) (a) Purpose The Multifamily High Density Residential (R-3) district is intended to allow the development of a variety of housing types at a maximum density of fifteen (15) units per acre. This district is further intended to satisfy the need for a high concentration of population, is located adjacent to arterial or collector streets and is well served by public services and facilities. When adjacent to R-1 zoning districts, the development within the district shall be designed carefully to provide maximum compatibility with adjacent development by proper architectural design, landscaping, screening, and parking. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) Townhomes: 2,000 
Multifamily: 2,500 per DU Lot width, minimum (ft.) Townhomes: 20 
Multifamily: None Density, maximum (du/ac) 15 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) Townhomes: 800 
Multifamily: Efficiency - 600 
1 Bedroom - 700 
2 Bedroom - 800 
3 Bedroom - 900 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 50 Lot Coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1, 2 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 2 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 2 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1, 2 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
- Townhouse and Multifamily developments shall have a minimum distance between structures of 20 feet. 
- A maximum of six (6) dwelling units shall be allowed in a building group of townhouse units. 
- Staggered setbacks are encourage to lessen the straight row effect. 
- Multifamily units shall contain a private storage area of thirty-two (32) square feet per unit. 
2 For townhome developments, see Section 30-151, Projections. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
(Ord. No. 53-2018, § 1, 11-13-17) 
Sec. 28-308. - Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1). 
Residential Housing (RMH-1) (a) Purpose The Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1) district is established to allow for the suitable development of mobile homes and manufactured housing subdivisions platted in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the Land Development Regulations. Manufactured housing subdivisions shall be developed at a maximum density of six (6) units per acre and shall be located, designed and improved to provide a desirable residential living environment, protection from potentially adverse neighboring influences, protection for adjacent residential properties and access for vehicular traffic without traversing minor streets in adjoining residential neighborhoods. It is the further intent to declare that the mixing of manufacturing housing and conventional dwellings in the same development may potentially produce mutual incompatibility for both types of dwellings. To that end, manufactured housing shall be developed in residential manufactured housing subdivisions. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 5,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 50 Density, maximum (du/ac) 6 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 40 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 25 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 7.5 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 7.5 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-309. - Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2). 
Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) (a) Purpose The Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) district is created to provide for the suitable development of mobile homes and manufactured housing in a parklike setting. Such manufactured housing communities shall be developed at a maximum density of eight (8) units per acre and shall be located, designed and improved to provide a desirable residential living environment, protection from substantially adverse neighboring influences, protection for adjacent residential properties and access for vehicular traffic without traversing minor streets in adjoining residential neighborhoods. It is the further intent to declare that the mixing of manufacturing [manufactured] housing and conventional dwellings in the same development may potentially provide mutual incompatibility for both types of dwellings. Therefore, manufactured housing shall be developed in a parklike setting. Accommodation for travel trailer parks as a conditional use shall be provided within this designation. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 4,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) None Density, maximum (du/ac) 8 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 40 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 25 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 2 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 2 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 2 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII, Section 28-8(c)8, Porches, cabanas, awnings and accessory structures NOTES: 
  1 When abutting a public Right-of-Way. 
  2 Minimum distance between structures. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only) (d)  Additional Standards  (1) Minimum open space - See Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article II, Improvements, Division 3, Open Space  
(Ord. No. 34-2018, § 2, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 28-310. - Residential Historic Preservation (RHP). 
Residential Historic Preservation (RHP) (a) Purpose The Residential Historic Preservation (RHP) district is established as a special district to protect the substantial public interest of the unique downtown residential area along the Indian River that is of great historical and aesthetic importance and should be preserved for future generations. The intent of this district is to preserve the character and harmony of the district. It is further intended that the district be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 7,500 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 75 Density, maximum (du/ac) 5.8 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 1,300 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 35 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-311. - Hospital Medical (HM). 
Hospital Medical (HM) (a) Purpose The Hospital Medical (HM) district is created to provide a protective area for the harmonious development of health care facilities and accessory services convenient to arterial streets. The district is intended to be protected from encroachment by land uses that are incompatible to the location, operation and expansion of medical facilities development. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 21,780 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 100 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 50 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 2 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 2 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 2 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Plus one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
  2 Plus one (1) foot for every two (2) feet of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-312. - Tourist (T). 
Tourist (T) (a) Purpose The Tourist (T) district is intended to provide the motoring public, transient and tourist populations with localized areas convenient to arterial streets. It is further intended that goods and services combined with safe and attractive facilities will be established to serve those needs. The district is designed to develop and infill within the U.S. #1 and S.R. 50-Cheney Highway and Garden Street areas of the City and along S.R. 405 one-half (1/2) mile north and south of the intersection of the center line of S.R. 405 and S.R. 50. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 21,780 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 100 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 50 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 2 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 2 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 2 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Plus one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
  2 Plus one (1) foot for every two (2) feet of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-313. - Neighborhood Commercial (NC). 
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) (a) Purpose The Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district is designed to provide a number of selected establishments that will principally serve one or several residential neighborhoods. These areas are generally located along or at the intersection of two collector streets or greater street designation, is designed as a low intensity land use category on the Future Land Use Map. The district is not intended for use by major or large scale commercial or service concerns. Orientation to and compatibility with the neighborhoods to be served are critical. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 10,000 1 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 100 2,3 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 25 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Minimum seven-thousand five-hundred 7,500 square feet for properties the Low Intensity Commercial or Downtown Mixed-Use future land use designations. 
  2 Must have frontage on a collector or higher classification thoroughfare. 
  3 Minimum seventy-five (75) feet in the Low Intensity Commercial or Downtown Mixed-Use future land use designations. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-314. - Community Commercial (CC). 
Community Commercial (CC) (a) Purpose The Community Commercial (CC) district is established for general commercial activity. This district is designed to provide for a wide range of permitted uses and conditional uses that offer goods and services of both a convenience and desirable nature to shoppers. This district will serve a group of neighborhoods and larger trade areas. Development within this district requires larger land areas and is primarily located along arterial thoroughfares and major street intersections. It is not the intent of this district that it shall be used to encourage the extension of strip commercial areas and the development of intersections is preferable to linear development. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 10,000 1 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 100 2,3 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 30 Lot Coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 4 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 5 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 5 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 5 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Minimum seven-thousand five-hundred 7,500 square feet for properties the Low Intensity Commercial or Downtown Mixed-Use future land use designations. 
  2 Must have frontage on a collector or higher classification thoroughfare. 
  3 Minimum seventy-five (75) feet in the Low Intensity Commercial or Downtown Mixed-Use future land use designations. 
  4 Plus one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
  5 Plus one (1) foot for every two (2) feet of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-315. - Regional Commercial (RC). 
Regional Commercial (RC) (a) Purpose The Regional Commercial (RC) district is intended to provide for intensive, highly automotive oriented uses that require an accessible location along thoroughfares designated as arterials in the comprehensive plan and these regulations. These districts provide a wide range of goods and services of both a convenience and desirable nature to shoppers. RC districts shall be located in a high intensity land use designations on the Future Land Use Map. Permitted uses and conditional uses require larger land areas with ample off-street parking and loading space. It is not the intent of this district that it shall be, used to encourage the extension of strip commercial areas. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 87,120 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 200 1 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 30 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 2 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 3 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 3 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 3 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Must have frontage on an arterial or higher classification thoroughfare and be located within one-thousand three-hundred twenty (1,320) feet of an intersection of at least a collector road and the required frontage road. 
  2 Plus one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
  3 Plus one (1) foot for every two (2) feet of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-316. - Office Professional (OP). 
Office Professional (OP) (a) Purpose The Office Professional (OP) district is created to encourage and accommodate the development of professional and business office space at locations where such use is compatible with the surrounding land use pattern and consistent with land use policies and future land use map of the comprehensive plan. These districts should be located adjacent to or have direct access to collector or higher classification roadways. The OP district is designed to be compatible with residential uses and is partially intended to serve as a buffer or transitional area between such development while occupying larger land areas. Properties developed as a Planned Office Park shall meet the regulations established in Chapter 33, Article III. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 43,560 1 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 150 2,3 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 25 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 4 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 5 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 5 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 5 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Minimum seven-thousand five-hundred 7,500 square feet for properties the Low Intensity Commercial or Downtown Mixed-Use future land use designations. 
  2 Must have frontage on a collector or higher classification thoroughfare. 
  3 Minimum seventy-five (75) feet in the Low Intensity Commercial or Downtown Mixed-Use future land use designations. 
  4 Plus one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
  5 Plus one (1) foot for every two (2) feet of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-317. - Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1). 
Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) (a) Purpose The Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) District is intended to provide areas for service and repair establishments, personal storage facilities and warehousing, light manufacturing processing and distribution. It is further intended that new development within this district will accommodate limited industrial and support facilities. These regulations are designed for the general public and are intended to prevent or reduce friction between uses in the district and to protect nearby residential and commercial districts. This district is only appropriate in areas convenient to collector or higher classification roadways and served by public service and facilities. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 5,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 50 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 70 Height, maximum (ft.) 50 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 1 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 1 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 1 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 1 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Plus one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-318. - Industrial (M-2). 
Industrial (M-2) (a) Purpose The Industrial (M-2) District is established to preserve such districts for the function of various heavy and extensive industrial activity, wholesaling, warehousing and distribution without creating hazards or property devastation to surrounding land uses. This district shall be located in areas accessible to collector or higher classification roadways and served by public services and facilities. These districts shall be discouraged from locating next to areas designated for residential or low intensity commercial uses. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 20,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 100 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 50 1 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Any structure which exceeds fifty (50) feet in height shall provide one (1) additional foot of setback in all required setbacks for each foot above fifty (50) feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-319. - Highway Industrial Infill (M-3). 
Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) (a) Purpose The Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) district is designed to accommodate smaller individual parcels located along the U.S. 1 north of Buffalo Road to City limits and 405 from S.R. 50 to Fox Lake Road corridors. It is intended that singular industrial development will infill within these areas. Therefore, the primary purpose of this district is to regulate this infill development by encouraging criteria and provisions that will promote creative design an improved level of aesthetics and the protection of existing and future City development. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 43,560 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 150 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 50 1 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 35 2 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 35 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 3, 4 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Any structure which exceeds fifty (50) feet in height shall provide one (1) additional foot of setback in all required setbacks for each foot above fifty (50) feet. 
  2 Parking permitted in the side setback must be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
  3 Parking permitted in the rear setback must be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
  4 When abutting I-95, the setback may be lowered to 25 feet. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only) (d) Additional Standards (1) Development procedure. Prior to review by various City Departments, the Administrator shall present the site plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their review, advice and comment as to the suitability of creative design and aesthetic enhancement of the site plan. (2) Mechanical/electrical equipment.  a. Mechanical equipment or other utility fixtures on the roof, ground or buildings shall be screened from public view with material harmonious with the building or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public street or adjoining property. (3) Building design. Buildings should demonstrate compatibility in materials and consistency in style with other property, in the district.  a. Architectural style is not restricted but evaluation of the building design shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.  b. Monotony of design shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest.  c. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well for aesthetic appearance.  d. Color schemes should be utilized that blend with those of neighboring developments and accent color chosen to enhance architectural details. (4) Site design. Site design should enhance the streetscape and provide for variety in relationship between buildings and site design.  a. Off-street parking areas are prohibited in front and side corner yard setbacks.  b. Service areas and refuse containers shall be located to the rear of the buildings.  c. Yard setbacks in excess of the zoning requirements is encouraged to provide diversity in site appearance.  d. The site should be planned to accomplish a smooth transition from adjacent properties that differ in land use and/or design philosophy by the use of site breaks such as screens, berms, fences and walls for aesthetic appearance.  e. The installation of building foundation landscaping should be considered as an option.  f. Walkways and circulation patterns should be defined through variations of pavement texture and sign placements. Landscape elements like flower beds, hedges and landscaped embankments can be utilized to achieve this purpose.  g. Site parking areas should indicate separation of parking and circulation relationship through landscaping. Large impervious surface masses should also be avoided and mitigated through the use of curbed landscape islands, wheel stops and other measures. (5) Open space and Greenbelt requirements are set forth per Chapter 30 Development Standards, Article II Improvements, Division 3 Open Space. (6) Lighting.  a. Artificial lighting utilized to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent properties and streets, shinning only on the subject site.  
Sec. 28-320. - Planned Industrial Development (PID). 
Planned Industrial Development (PID) (a) Purpose The Planned Industrial Development (PID) district is created to provide for areas of large scale, high technology and other clean light industry in an attractive parklike atmosphere. It is further intended that this district be utilized to promote industrial activity, more efficient and economical industrial land use, harmony in physical design and industrial relationships, variety and amenity in industrial development and the protection of adjacent and nearby existing and future nonindustrial uses and activities. Planned industrial development districts will encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development including architecture, landscaping, and graphic design. This district is intended to develop within those areas identified as Planned Industrial Park on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map. Developments within the PID zoning district shall also meet the regulations established in Chapter 33, Article II. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 30,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 150 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) NA Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 50 1 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 2 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 4 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 35 3 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 4 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Any structure which exceeds fifty (50) feet in height shall provide one (1) additional foot of setback in all required setbacks for each foot above fifty (50) feet. 
  2 Parking permitted in the front setback must be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
  3 Parking permitted in the side setback must be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
  4 Parking permitted in the side corner and rear setback must be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
No portion of any building or structure and no activity related to any use within the PID shall be located any closer than one hundred (100) feet to any PID perimeter boundary. Where a PID district abuts property zoned residential, greater setbacks may be imposed by City Council. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-321. - General Use (GU). 
General Use (GU) (a) Purpose The General Use (GU) District is created to apply to areas where urban services are not presently available. The regulations for this district are intended to retain these lands under this designation pending the proper timing of economical provision of public services and facilities to ensure orderly development. It is further intended that this district will implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 130,680 (3 ac) Lot width, minimum (ft.) 200 Density, maximum (du/ac) 1du/3ac Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 900 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 20 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-322. - Open Space and Recreation (OR). 
Open Space and Recreation (OR) (a) Purpose The Open Space and Recreation (OR) District is established to provide for the conservation and protection of sensitive lands within the City. It is intended that this district will not function as a holding designation for land but rather a permanent classification in order to ensure that present and future residents of the City are able to enjoy the benefits of the natural environment of the City. It is further intended that the district will implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) None Lot width, minimum (ft.) None Density, maximum (du/ac) 1du/5ac 1 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 50 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Single family homes must obtain a Conditional Use Permit prior to construction. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-323. - Public (P). 
28-323 Public (P) (a) Purpose The Public (P) District is established as a special district to protect the substantial public interest of real property owned and used by any governmental entity including local, state or federal government units. This district is not intended to be applied to land that is used by government units. This district is not intended to be applied to land that is used by governmental entities on an easement or leased basis if title to the land is in private ownership. It is not the intent to classify all lands owned by government into this district but only those lands particularly and peculiarly related to the public welfare. It is intended that the district be utilized for mapping purposes and to be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. (b) Use Standards See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) None Lot width, minimum (ft.) None Density, maximum (du/ac) 1 per 3 acres as accessory to permitted principal uses Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VIII NOTES:  
Sec. 28-324. - Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Smart Code. 
Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Smart Code (a) Purpose The Downtown Mixed-Use Zoning District (DMU) is established to promote the health, safety, social and economic welfare of the residents of the City by increasing the City's tax base and promoting the long-term economic growth and vitality of the downtown area. This district enables the City to encourage public and private development compatible with the character of the downtown area and in conformance with the Community Redevelopment Plan. The DMU encourages a mix of uses and development from throughout the District. Through the DMU, the City can become the center for economic and business affairs, expand employment and living opportunities, protect historic resources, promote new investment, protect the natural beauty and public spaces that make Titusville special, and encourage public use (not necessarily ownership) of the waterfront. It is further intended that this district will use the existing grid street network as the spine or bones of improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking management, and encouragement of excellence in urban design, preserving the unique character and historic fabric of the downtown. In this way, will the City have a diverse, welcoming downtown for entertainment, tourism, employment, recreation, business, and living. (b) Use Standards See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Development Parameters Downtown Uptown Midtown Civic Waterfront Notes/Comments Mixed-Use Allowance Residential Up to 100% Minimum 20% Up to 100% Not Permitted Parcel-by-parcel basis, measured by building square footage. Non-Residential Up to 100% Minimum 30% Up to 100% Up to 100% Civic/Public Open Space Required Yes Yes Yes NA Plazas, gathering spaces, outdoor seating, outdoor eating and like are Civic and Public spaces; Open space % includes setback, parking, stormwater, and all impervious areas; minimum size of public or civic spaces shall be 500 square feet. Ground Level Non-Residential Required No Yes No NA Density/Intensity Density 30 units per acre 20 units per acre 20 units per acre NA Max. Building Coverage 100% 60% 50% 15% Instead of using a Floor Area Ratio to govern intensity, this proposes to use building coverage percentage. Min. Open Space 0% 30% 25% 50% Setbacks Arterial Street 0' 40' 20' NA Side 0' 25' 15' NA Rear 15' 15' 20' NA If alleyway is used, rear setback is 0'. From Mean High Water Line Accessory Structures: Location, Size, and Setbacks 5' from property line 5' from property line 5' from property line NA Height (stories) 5 5 3 3 LEGEND: NA means Not Applicable General Notes: Transit Oriented Development Design provided on the next table. 
Setbacks, lot coverage, and parking subject to waiver provisions. 
Minimum lot size: None  
Transit-Oriented Development Development Parameters Notes/Comments Mixed-Use Allowance Residential 30% Min. Parcel-by-parcel basis, measured by building square footage. Non-Residential 40% Min Civic/Public Open Space Required Yes Plazas, gathering spaces, outdoor seating, outdoor eating and like are Civic and Public spaces; Open space % includes setback, parking, stormwater, and all impervious areas; Minimum size of public or civic spaces shall be 500 square feet. Ground level non-residential required Yes May be parking, or any approved non-residential uses Density/Intensity Density Minimum Net: 15 Max. Building Coverage 95% Instead of using a Floor Area Ratio to govern intensity, this proposes to use building coverage percentage Min. Open Space 5% Setbacks None Accessory Structures: Location, Size, and Setbacks NA Height (Stories) Max. 10 Where building is over 5 stories, there must be differentiation of heights, dimensions, articulation of upper floors/porte cocheres or other front façade treatment extending up to 25 feet to create a pedestrian connection.  
(Ord. No. 12-2018, § 1, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 28-325. - Urban Mixed-Use (UMU). 
Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) (a) Purpose The Urban Mixed-Use (UMU) district is [a] special district to be applied [to] the area north of Pine Street, west of the Florida East Coast Railroad, and east of Park Avenue intended to create a walkable, pedestrian-friendly environment allowing a mixing of both residential and commercial uses. Properties within this zoning district are intended intended to allow a mix of residential and commercial land uses, while ensuring adequate beffers/screening between property uses of differing intensities. These regulations are intended to encourage mixed-use development that capitalizes on the opportunities of the Coast-to-Coast trail and proximity to the City's downtown and provides flexibility in development standards. It is also intended to recognize the existing industrial businesses as permitted uses, while prohibiting the establishment of new industrial uses. (b) Use Standards See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) Commercial: 4,000 
Single-Family: 4,000 
Multifamily (2 units): 1,500 per dwelling unit 
Multifamily (>2 units): 1,500 per dwelling unit Lot width, minimum (ft.) Commercial: 40 
Single-Family: 40 
Multifamily (2 units): 20 
Multifamily (>2 units): one Density, maximum (du/ac) Commercial: 0.2 FAR (Floor Area Ratio) 
Single-Family: 15 
Multifamily (2 units): 15 
Multifamily (>2 units): 15 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) Commercial: NA 
Single-family: 900 
Multifamily (2 units): 600 + 100 per each additional bedroom 
Multifamily (>2 units): None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) Commercial: 35 
Single-Family: 35 
Multifamily (2 units): 35 
Multifamily (>2 units): 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) Commercial: 5 1 
Single-Family: 10 
Multifamily (2 units): 10 
Multifamily (>2 units): 10 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) Commercial: 15 1 
Single-Family: 15 
Multifamily (2 units): 15 
Multifamily (>2 units): 15 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) Commercial: 5 1 
Single-Family: 5 
Multifamily (2 units): 5 
Multifamily (>2 units): 5 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) Commercial: 20 1 
Single-Family: 20 
Multifamily (2 units): 20 
Multifamily (>2 units): 20 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES:;hg1; 1 Where the required building setbacks established in this section are less than that required by Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 10, Landscaping, the required landscape yard may be reduced to be consistent with the building setback regulations in this section.  
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 32, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 28-326. - Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU). 
Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) (a) Purpose The Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU) district is designed as a special district to protect the substantial public interest of the Indian River/Washington Avenue corridor. Based upon historical and existing land use commitments, it is the intent of the district to encourage and enhance a mix of residential, public/semi-public uses, tourist use, commercial uses, public and private recreational uses including wet docking and boat shops are promoted. Marine service activities are prohibited. It is further intended that careful treatment of the visual environment and principal views of the public be considered when development is undertaken. This district shall be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. (b) Use Standards See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, Minimum (sq. ft.) Single-Family: 7,500 
Townhomes: 2,500 
Multifamily: 2,500 per dwelling unit 
Patio Homes: 4,000 Lot width, Minimum (ft.) Single-Family: 75 
Townhomes: 25 
Multifamily: None 
Patio Homes: 40 Density, Maximum (du/ac) 15 1 
Property having access from a local street or Riveredge Drive 6 2 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 1,200 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) Single-Family: 45 
Townhomes: 50 
Multifamily: 55 
Patio Homes: 35 3 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 50 4, 5 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) Single-Family: 25 
Townhomes: 25 
Multifamily: 25 
Patio Homes: 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) Single-Family: 20 
Townhomes: 20 
Multifamily: 20 
Patio Homes: Minimum 10 feet from adjacent buildings Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) Single-Family: 10 
Townhomes: NA 
Multifamily: 10 
Patio Homes: Minimum combined side yard total of 10 feet Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) Single-Family: 25 
Townhomes: 25 
Multifamily: 25 
Patio Homes: 20 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: 
  1 Transient accommodations, boarding houses and other tourist accommodations not noted as a permitted use of this zoning district shall have a maximum density of fifteen (15) units per acre. If fifty (50) percent or more of the units do not have cooking facilities, thirty (30) units per acre may be allowed subject to conditional use permit approval. Density may be increased to 20 units per acre per the regulations in Sec. 28-71(c). 
  2 May be increased up to 15 units per acre per the regulations in Sec. 28-71(c). 
  3 If all required parking is covered by a permanent structure, the lot coverage may be increased to 50 percent. 
  4 An additional one (1) foot side yard setback shall be required for each foot of building height above 35 feet. 
  5 For properties with structures located adjacent to a local street or Riveredge Drive, the maximum building height along the street shall not exceed 35 feet at the setback lines. One and one-half feet of additional setback shall be required for each foot of building height over 35 feet.  
Sec. 28-327. - Regional Mixed-Use (RMU). 
Regional Mixed-Use (RMU) (a) Purpose The Regional Mixed-Use District (RMU) is established as a special district for the purpose of establishing a zoning category to facilitate development of a regionally mixed-use development that can accommodate a variety of land uses. This district is intended to be a Master Planned development and to allow the integration of uses so that all uses are developed into a harmonious fabric. This zoning district permits a mixture of recreation, open space areas, tourist, residential, office, retail, commercial, industrial park and marina uses within a single integrated development. It is intended to assure that the project shall be developed with the highest aesthetic standards of the City of Titusville, and to create a pleasant and attractive physical environment which will contribute to the work, living, shopping and recreation experiences of the occupants. The RMU district may permit any combination of residential, multifamily, commercial, industrial, park and recreation and public uses within a single Master Plan development. Recorded Covenants shall be required to ensure that integrated design standards within individual projects shall be provided. Site/development and projects shall be required to be designed so as to ensure compatibility. Developments within the RMU zoning district shall also meet the regulations established in Chapter 33, Article IV. (b) Use Standards See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) None Lot width, minimum (ft.) None Density (du/ac) MAXIMUM MINIMUM RMU-100 None None RMU-200 Per Comp. Plan Per Comp. Plan RMU-300 40 10 RMU-400 Resort/Timeshare: 40 Resort/Timeshare: 10 Commercial: 50% lot coverage/3.0 Floor Area Ratio None RMU-500 50% lot coverage/1.0 Floor Area Ratio None Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None, except as referenced above Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None, except as referenced above Height, maximum (ft.) 1 RMU-100: None RMU-200: Residential 35, Non-Residential 50 RMU-300: 50; however, multistory apartment and condominium complexes to include time shares and mixed use may have a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet RMU-400: 50 RMU-500: 50 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) RMU-100: None RMU-200: 25 RMU-300: 25 2 RMU-400: 25 RMU-500: 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) RMU-100: None RMU-200: 20 RMU-300: 20 2 RMU-400: 15 RMU-500: 20 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) RMU-100: None RMU-200: 10 RMU-300: 10 2 RMU-400: 10 RMU-500: 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) RMU-100: None RMU-200: 25 RMU-300: 25 2 RMU-400: 25 RMU-500: 20 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII  
Building setbacks from road right-of-way lines. In addition to other required setbacks and buffer areas, all buildings within a RMU district shall have the following minimum setback from the road right-of-way (ROW): 
RMU District Arterial ROW Collector ROW Local ROW RMU-100 None, use building setback above None, use building setback above None, use building setback above RMU-200 50 feet 50 feet None, use building setback above RMU-300 50 feet 50 feet None, use building setback above RMU-400 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet RMU-500 100 feet 100 feet 50 feet NOTES: 
  1 There may be additional height restrictions required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that may prevent structures from obtaining their maximum height due to the City of Titusville's proximity to the Kennedy Space Center and surrounding Airports/Airparks. 
  2 Multistory apartment structures which exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height shall provide one (1) additional foot of setback in all required setbacks for each foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet. 
No building or structure (excluding fences or walls and signs) shall be allowed within the setback areas. Landscaping, stormwater retention, sidewalks, and parking are permitted within the building setback area.  
Sec. 28-328. - Urban Village (UV). 
Urban Village (UV) (a) Purpose The Urban Village (UV) District is created as a special district to protect the substantial special public interest of the areas described in the US 1 Corridor Master Plan. The US 1 Corridor area is roughly bounded by Grace Street to the north, SR 50 and property immediately to the South, the Indian River Lagoon to the east and Hopkins Avenue to the west as shown on the study area map. This zoning district shall be limited to the three redevelopment sites identified in the US 1 Corridor Master Plan and have an emphasis on encouraging a mix of land use development with higher density residential and commercial, offices and similar uses with greater height limitations. Maintenance of the district character as identified in the adopted US 1 Corridor Master Plan, along with harmonious coexistence with surrounding land uses are paramount concerns. It is further intended that the district be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, the UMU future land use designation and the US 1 Corridor Master Plan. Developments within the UV zoning district shall also meet the regulations established in Chapter 33, Article V. (b) Use Standards See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) None Lot width, minimum (ft.) None Density, maximum (du/ac) 15 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 75% 1 Height, maximum (ft.) 50 2 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft) None Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) None Accessory Use Development Standards One (1) flag pole up to 80 feet may be installed within a project (defined as having shared infrastructure or shared ingress/egress or governed by a common site plan). The height shall be measured to the top of the flag pole from the ground, regardless of mounting on the ground or a building. NOTES: 
  1 A minimum 25% of the total gross acreage of the site shall be dedicated as common open space. 
  2 The maximum allowable height is fifty (50) feet, unless the ground floor of a residential and commercial mixed-use building is utilized as retail space, in which case the maximum allowable height may not exceed sixty (60) feet. Building height up to one hundred (100) feet shall only be allowed by conditional use approval, and meet the standards in Sec. 28-106. In no event shall the total height of a building/structure exceed one hundred (100) feet, including roof structures or elements affixed to the roof.  
(Ord. No. 38-2018, § 1, 8-28-18) 
Sec. 28-329. - Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C). 
Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) (a) Purpose In the Indian River City Neighborhood Commercial (IRCN-C) district, it is intended that positive design elements of both commercial and residential development be protected and enhanced, and where appropriate mixed residential and commercial structures be developed. It is intended to encourage the expansion of commercial uses where stormwater requirements, buffering to residential areas and aesthetics can be improved. It is further intended that the district be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 4,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 40 Density, maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) None Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 5 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 15 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 5 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Sec. 28-330. - Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R). 
Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R) (a) Purpose In the Indian River City Neighborhood Residential (IRCN-R) district, it is intended that the single-family residential land uses be recognized and enhanced as the predominant land use in this district, and to encourage new infill single-family residential development. Although the intent of the district is to preserve and expand single-family residential uses, existing multifamily uses shall be recognized as a permitted use. It is further intended that the district be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, specifically Future Land Use Element Policies 1.1.4 and Policy 1.1.5. (b) Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 Article IV and Article V (c) Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, minimum (sq. ft.) 10,000 Lot width, minimum (ft.) 85 Density, maximum (du/ac) 4 Floor area per dwelling unit, minimum (sq. ft.) 900 Building coverage, maximum (% of lot area) 35 Lot coverage, maximum (% of lot area) None Height, maximum (ft.) 25 Front yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Side corner yard setback, minimum (ft.) 20 Interior side yard setback, minimum (ft.) 10 Rear yard setback, minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Secs. 28-330-28-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ACCESSORY USE TABLE 
    The following regulations apply only to those uses that are accessory in nature to the principal use of a property: 

Sec. 28-341. - Use table key. 
(a)  In the event of a conflict between the use table contained in Section 28-342 and any other use table listed in Article VII Accessory Use Standards, the use table contained in Section 28-342 shall prevail. 
(b)  Types of Use. 
(1)  Accessory Uses Permitted By Right "P". A "P" indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective district. Such uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  Accessory Uses Permitted with Limitations "L". An "L" indicates a use that will be permitted subject to the use limitations in Chapter 28, Article VII (Accessory Use Standards). Such uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  Accessory Conditional Use "C". A "C" indicates a use that is allowed only where approved as a Conditional Use by the City Council and require public hearings. Such uses are subject to the use limitations in Chapter 28, Article VI (Accessory Use Standards) and all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(4)  Temporary Uses "T". A "T" indicates a use that is permitted on a temporary basis subject to the limitation in Chapter 28, Article VII (Accessory Use Standards). Such uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
(c)  Uses Not Allowed. A blank cell in the use table indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective district. 
(d)  Standards. The "Standards" column on the use table is a cross-reference to any limited or temporary use standards in Chapter 28, Article VII (Accessory Use Standards). All accessory uses are also required to comply with the appropriate dimensional standards in Article VIII. 
Sec. 28-342. - Accessory Use Table. 
    Click here to view the Accessory Use Table as a PDF. 
Agriculture and Public Residential Districts Commercial Districts Industrial Districts Mixed-Use Standards Permitted Principal Use GU OR P RE RR R1A R1B R1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN See Noted Section for Use Specific Standards Key: P = Permitted; L = Permitted subject to limitations; C = Condition; Blank Cell = Use Prohibited Downtown Uptown Midtown Civic Waterfront 100 200 300 400 500 C R Accessory dwelling unit L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-351 Arbor L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-352 Attached screen porch P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-353 Automatic teller machine (ATM) L L L L L L L C L L L L L L 28-354 Automatic vending and transaction machines L L L L L L L C L L L L L L 28-355 Clubhouse L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-356 Detached accessory building/structure P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-357 Dock P P P P P P P 28-358 Dormitory (as accessory to education use) P P P P P 28-359 Home based business L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-360 Outdoor areas of seating L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-361 Outdoor display of merchandise L L L L L C L L L 28-363 Outdoor storage (as an accessory use) L L 28-364 Parking or storage of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, airboats, or trailers in residential districts L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-365 Real estate office T T T T T T T T T 28-366 Recreation court P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-367 Residential generator L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 28-367.1 Retail sales (as accessory use) L L L L L 28-368 Security dwelling unit L L L L 28-369 Screened enclosures with screened roof P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-370 Skateboard ramp L L L L L L L L L 28-371 Swimming pool or spa or hot tub P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 28-372 Temporary storage units T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T 28-373  
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 19, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 1, 11-13-18; Ord. No. 12-2019, § 1, 4-9-19) 
Secs. 28-343-28-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ACCESSORY USE STANDARDS 
    The following regulations apply only to those uses that are accessory in nature to the principal use of a property: 

Sec. 28-351. - Accessory dwelling unit. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Accessory dwelling unit:" An ancillary or secondary living unit to a single-family dwelling use that has a separate entrance, kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area existing either within the same structure, or on the same lot, as the primary dwelling unit. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Residential Historic Properties (RHP), Office Professional (OP), General Use (GU), Open Space and Recreation (OR), Urban Mixed-Use (UMU), Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU), and Indian River City Neighborhood-Residential (IRCN-R): 
a.  An accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted only as accessory to, and on the same lot as, a single-family dwelling, and are not permitted as accessory to a two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, or mobile home dwelling. 
b.  Not more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot is permitted. 
c.  An accessory dwelling unit may be within or attached to the principal dwelling (e.g., a downstairs apartment), or exist within or as a detached structure (e.g., an apartment above a detached garage or a guesthouse). An accessory dwelling unit attached to the principal dwelling shall have an operative interconnecting door with the principal dwelling, and shall have a principal access only from the side or rear yard of the principal dwelling. 
d.  The use of a mobile home, recreational vehicle, or a similar vehicle as an accessory dwelling unit is prohibited. 
e.  The floor area of an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the entire floor area of the primary dwelling (exclusive of porches or basements) and shall be a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet and a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet in gross floor area. 
f.  The construction or addition of an accessory dwelling unit shall not cause the maximum lot coverage established by the zoning district to be exceeded. 
g.  At least one (1), but no more than two (2), off-street parking spaces shall be provided for an accessory dwelling unit (in addition to the off-street parking required for the principal use). 
h.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all accessory dwelling units. 
i.  The owner of the property shall reside in either the principal dwelling or the accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, accessory dwelling units are limited to the upper floors of buildings. 
(3)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, accessory dwelling units: 
a.  Shall be limited to one (1) ADU per commercial lot. 
b.  Shall have a minimum living area of six hundred (600) square feet plus one hundred (100) square feet per each additional bedroom. 
c.  Shall be one residential unit intended to be occupied by the owner or proprietor of the business, and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling, leased or otherwise made available for compensation of any kind. 
d.  Shall share a common wall (including the roof) of the commercial structure. 
Sec. 28-352. - Arbor. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  In all zoning districts, arbors: 
a.  Shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
b.  Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
c.  Shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all property lines. 
d.  Shall not be located in the sight distance triangle. 
e.  Shall not be used for storage, including vehicular storage. 
Sec. 28-353. - Attached screen porch. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 20, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 2, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 28-354. - Automated teller machine (ATM). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L C L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Automated teller machine:" An automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  Placement must be outside required landscape islands and stormwater management systems. 
(2)  Anchoring to trees, traffic signs, fire hydrants, fire connectors, lift stations or other site infrastructure is prohibited. 
(3)  Dispensers and service machines placed in parking lots shall have a finished exterior of brick, stucco, stone, stained wood, or similar materials and shall not contain windmills, nor be shaped to resemble objects (animate and inanimate). 
(4)  A sloped roof with a peak or parapet roof is required to be affixed to dispensers placed in parking lots with shingle, tile or other roof material in accordance with Florida Building Codes. 
(5)  Advertising, other than signage with the logo and name of the item being dispensed or service provided, is prohibited. 
(6)  Parking for at least one (1) space per each unmanned paid dispenser unit shall be provided unless otherwise specified in the Land Development Regulations. Required parking for the commercial accessory use cannot occupy required parking for the principal use. 
Sec. 28-355. - Automatic vending and transaction machines. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L C L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Detached automatic vending and transaction machines:" Any unattended self-service device that, upon insertion of coin(s), token(s), or by similar means, dispenses any item or conducts a transaction. These self-service devices may be attached, contained within, or adjacent to another structure or detached (freestanding and not adjacent to another building or structure). 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  Placement must be outside required landscape islands and stormwater management systems. 
(2)  Anchoring to trees, traffic signs, fire hydrants, fire connectors, lift stations or other site infrastructure is prohibited. 
(3)  Dispensers and service machines placed in parking lots shall have a finished exterior of brick, stucco, stone, stained wood, or similar materials and shall not contain windmills, nor be shaped to resemble objects (animate and inanimate). 
(4)  A sloped roof with a peak or parapet roof is required to be affixed to dispensers placed in parking lots with shingle, tile or other roof material in accordance with Florida Building Codes. 
(5)  Advertising, other than signage with the logo and name of the item being dispensed or service provided, is prohibited. 
(6)  Parking for at least one (1) space per each unmanned paid dispenser unit shall be provided unless otherwise specified in the Land Development Regulations. Required parking for the commercial accessory use cannot occupy required parking for the principal use. 
Sec. 28-356. - Clubhouse. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Clubhouse:" A building or room used for social or recreational activities by members of a club (e.g. golf course clubhouse) or occupants of a residential or other development. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  A clubhouse is allowed as an accessory use to a membership club or a multifamily development in any district in which those uses are permitted. They are also allowed as an accessory use to a residential subdivision development. Clubhouses: 
a.  Shall limit food and alcoholic beverages sales to members and their guests, and patrons actually using the club facilities. 
b.  Shall require a clubhouse, that is accessory to a residential subdivision or multifamily development, be proposed, reviewed, and developed in conjunction with the subdivision, or approved phase thereof. 
Sec. 28-357. - Detached accessory building/structure. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P P P P P P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Detached building/structure:" A detached subordinate structure(s), the use of which is incidental to that of the principal structure and located on the same lot therewith. Examples of detached accessory building/structure are: a garage, shed, carport or similar detached accessory building/structure. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  For all districts, a covered walkway open at least two (2) sides may be attached to the principal structure. The required separation shall be the distance measured between the vertical planes established from the eaves to the ground. Principal and accessory structures shall not be connected by any type of enclosed passageway or room addition unless all structures meet principal structure setbacks. If this walkway is enclosed between the accessory structure will be deemed attached to the principal structure and shall meet the minimum principal structure setbacks. 
(2)  Regulations for nonconforming detached metal carports are established in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VII, Nonconforming uses, structures/vested rights, Section 34-350, Nonconforming structure-Metal carports. 
(3)  The placement or use of any shipping container and other transport containers as an accessory building, storage building, living unit, or in any other matter on residentially zoned land and/or land used for residential purposes is prohibited. Licensed and bonded contractors may use shipping containers for temporary housing of equipment and materials during construction as authorized by a City building permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 21, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 44-2017, § 1, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 28-358. - Dock. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Dock:" A structure consisting of a fixed or floating platform extending from the shore over the water. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-359. - Dormitory (as an accessory to educational use). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P  
(b)  Definition. "Dormitory:" A building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations where such building is related to an educational or public institution. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-360. - Home based business. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Home based business:" A work activity carried on for profit or for nonprofit purposes, where all or part of the activity takes place within a structure where the principal use is for residential purposes. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  Home occupations shall only be permitted to exist in those particular instances whereby the residential character and integrity of the neighborhood are not disturbed. The occupational activity at the home shall not be noticeable. Home occupations which are characterized by a high intensity of use, only appropriate to a commercial zoning district, shall not be allowed as home occupations within residential districts. 
(2)  Home occupations shall be permitted for purposes of regulation and protection of residential neighborhoods. Home occupations which do not involve client business visits to the home shall be permitted. This type of home occupation is typified where business transactions with clients are conducted by telephone, mail or off the premises of the license holder. 
(3)  The following uses by the nature of the business investment and/or conduct or the environmental and social impacts, have a pronounced tendency to exceed the performance limits placed upon home occupations allowed under this section, and ultimately have a detrimental effect on the residential character of a neighborhood. Therefore, the uses listed below and others similar in nature shall not be permitted as home occupations when the specified activity is carried on at the home premises. 
•  Auto mechanical/body repairs, painting of vehicles, trailers or boats. 
•  Beauty salons and barber hair styling shops. 
•  Carpentry, cabinet makers, furniture refinishing or upholstery. 
•  Contractor's equipment storage yards. 
•  Escort services and massage parlors. 
•  Marijuana cultivation. 
•  Professional offices of medical doctors, dentists, chiropractors, ophthalmologists and optometrists and other health care professions. 
•  Restaurants and taverns. 
•  Retail/wholesale merchandising with in-person sales. 
•  Tow truck services. 
•  Veterinary uses. 
In addition to these enumerated, any work activity held illegal by other applicable civil or criminal statutes shall be prohibited as a home occupation. 
(4)  Performance standards. In order for any home to be permitted or continue to be permitted, the following performance standards shall be agreed to in writing by the applicant and be maintained for the duration of the permit. 
a.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the dwelling unit. 
b.  Number of occupations. Multiple home occupational licenses may be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  All multiple licenses shall only be for residents of that dwelling unit. 
2.  The total floor area for all licenses shall be subject to the requirements noted in Section 28-360(4)(d). 
c.  The home occupation shall be conducted at the permitted address only by residents of that dwelling unit. 
d.  The home occupation shall only be conducted within the living area of the dwelling unit and shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent and up to a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet. The living area is that part of the dwelling unit which is enclosed and which is protected from the elements and heated, including interior halls, closets, utility and storage areas, but excluding garages, carports, screened porches, unenclosed and unheated areas. In the event a residence has multiple licenses, the maximum floor area for all licenses shall not exceed the above noted maximum square footage. 
e.  No activity of a home occupation including the storage and outdoor storage or window display of merchandise is permitted. 
f.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the premises nor the installation of any sign to give indication that a home occupation is being conducted. 
g.  No supplies or equipment shall be used in the home occupation which create fire or explosion hazards, electrical interference, noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable to the normal senses off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family dwelling unit or mobile home or residential coach. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the premises. 
h.  In the conduct of the home occupation, the use of commercial vehicles by the home occupation personnel shall be limited to no more than one (1) vehicle which shall be no greater in size than one (1) ton, and shall be parked in an adequate off-street parking area. No auxiliary equipment or trailers shall be stored on site unless they are enclosed in a garage or screened from view. In the event a residence has multiple licenses, the maximum number and size of commercial vehicles for all licenses shall not exceed the above noted requirements. 
i.  No advertising in the public media shall include the residential address of the home occupation. Telephone numbers may be included in such advertising. 
(5)  Through the conditional use permit process the City Council may modify the foregoing requirements of this section to accommodate the special needs of handicapped individuals applying for home occupation permits, provided that the public welfare would not be adversely affected. 
(6)  A home occupation shall be subject to all applicable City occupational licenses and other permits and approvals as necessary. 
Sec. 28-361. - Outdoor areas of seating. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L L L L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for accessory uses permitted with limitations. 
(1)  In all zoning districts, outdoor areas of seating shall be included in the area of the building for means of determining required parking for the site. 
(2)  In the Indian River City Neighborhood-Commercial (IRCN-C) zoning district, outdoor areas of seating may only operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. and shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a residential property line. 
(3)  In the Urban Mixed Use (UMU) and Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zoning districts, outdoor areas of seating may only operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(4)  In the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, outdoor areas of seating: 
a.  Shall require a conditional use permit if music or other entertainment is proposed with the outdoor area of seating. 
b.  Shall have outdoor food service and music or other entertainment terminate no later than 10:00 p.m. on weekdays (Monday-Thursday) and 11:00 p.m. on weekends (Friday-Sunday) when the outdoor area is located within fifty (50) feet of the Residential Historic Preservation zoning district. 
c.  Shall include the number of outdoor seats provided by a restaurant as part of the restaurant's total permitted seating allotment and shall be shown on an approved site plan and/or survey of the property with a drawing indicating the seating area and compliance with parking requirements and all other conditions of this section. 
d.  Shall not cause a licensed restaurant's required parking to become inadequate. 
e.  Shall not encroach upon public rights-of-way, or public easements except public sidewalks, civic spaces or public plazas. 
f.  Shall be restricted to the sidewalk or building frontage of the subject licensed restaurant, the rear yard or a side yard if the side yard is abutted by a nonresidential use or zone unless otherwise specified in a binding development plan. 
g.  Shall be clearly delineated with planters, decorative fencing, and/or hedges to distinguish such area from the parking area serving the restaurant. When such seating areas are permitted to locate on elevated walkways, piers or docks, this condition does not apply. 
h.  Shall comply with all city performance standards. 
i.  Shall not encroach upon surface water/stormwater areas except as permitted by the City. 
j.  Shall maintain either a five-foot wide clear pedestrian path or fifty (50) percent of the sidewalk width, whichever is greater when outdoor seating is provided within a public or private sidewalk area. Such clear pedestrian paths shall be maintained at all times. 
k.  Shall not place tables and chairs within five (5) feet of bus stops, fire hydrants, aboveground public utilities, bike racks or any type of public street furniture. 
l.  Shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times and must be cleared of all debris on a periodic basis during the day and at the close of each business day. 
m.  If found to be necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, the city manager or his/her designee may require the subject property to immediately remove or relocate all or part of the tables, chairs, etc. of the outdoor seating area. 
n.  Serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages within an outdoor seating area shall comply with the regulations of applicable government agencies. 
o.  Shall not allow advertising signs or business identification signs within the outside seating area unless permitted by the City sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 22, 10-24-14) 
Sec. 28-362. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 23 of Ord. No. 31-2017, adopted Oct. 24, 2014, deleted § 28-362 which pertained to outdoor areas of seating with entertainment. 
Sec. 28-363. - Outdoor display of merchandise. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Outdoor display of merchandise:" The display of retail goods in parking areas, sidewalks, and other locations outside of an enclosed building. This section does not apply to farmers' markets or produce stands where permitted by the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Standards for accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  In the Regional Commercial (RC), Community Commercial (CC), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Tourist (T), Urban Village (UV), and Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning districts, outdoor display of merchandise: 
a.  Shall be located adjacent to the principal building and shall not impede pedestrian or traffic flow and shall not encroach into designated parking areas. The defined areas shall be well maintained, provide for walking and accessibility, be free of debris, and have proper lighting, seating, and trash receptacles. All other areas of the site shall be free of merchandise. 
b.  Shall be limited only to merchandise from the retail establishment to which it abuts. 
c.  Shall be located entirely under an awning or canopy that complies with the Code of Ordinances and Land Development Regulations. If no awning or canopy is present, the goods shall be displayed on an area abutting and not more than three (3) feet from the storefront. 
d.  Shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
e.  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of a primary roadway access into a parcel. 
f.  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of another outside vending location. 
g.  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of a building exit. 
h.  Shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
i.  Shall not be located within an area that abuts the display windows of a permanent business location not owned by the outside vendor. 
j.  Shall not be located where in the opinion of the Administrator it represents an obstruction to traffic safety or endangers the public welfare. 
k.  Shall not allow the display of vehicles, auto parts, tires, heavy equipment of any kind, fireworks, or any hazardous products. Automobile/vehice sales as established in Section 28-98 may display vehicles outdoors as part of the principal use. 
l.  Second-hand dealers shall meet all requirements established in Section 823.07, Florida Statute. 
m.  Shall only be utilized during the hours of operation of the associated business. Goods displayed outdoors shall not be left outdoors when the associated business is not operating. 
n.  In the Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district, an outdoor storage display plan may be submitted and reviewed by the Administrator if the business operator wishes to deviate from these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 19-2017, § 3, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 31-2017, § 24, 10-14-17) 
Sec. 28-364. - Outdoor storage (as an accessory use). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Outdoor storage:" The exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of materials, products, merchandise, vehicles, trailers, and the like on commercial or industrial properties. Outdoor storage may be enclosed by a structure that includes a roof, but no side walls, in which case the structure shall be deemed outdoor storage; outdoor storage may involve fencing or screening without a roof in which case fencing or screening shall be deemed outdoor storage. Parking lots do not qualify for outdoor storage. Outdoor storage does not involve any product representation or signage except for those emergency or safety-related signs specifically approved by the City. Automatic vending or transaction machines accessory to allowable uses do not constitute outdoor storage. The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours does not constitute outdoor storage. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  Outdoor storage areas shall not be allowed in the front yard of the building and shall not be allowed within the minimum building setback areas of the side and rear yards. All storage areas shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or chain link fence (provided it is screened with landscape). Storage of materials shall not be stacked so as to exceed the height of the enclosure. 
(2)  In the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) and Regional Mixed Use 500 sub-district (RMU-500) zoning districts, outdoor storage: 
a.  Shall require a conditional use when the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use designation is not industrial. 
b.  Shall only be permitted as an accessory use with a principal building on the same lot, unless the storage area is secured by appropriate fencing. In all cases, access to the site shall be improved and permitted as determined by the City Manager or designee. 
c.  Shall not be allowed within the minimum building setbacks. 
d.  Shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-of-way and from adjacent lots with non-industrial uses or zoning, by buildings and/or an opaque masonry wall, or closed, opaque fence extending at least six (6) feet in height from the ground. All fences shall be maintained in good condition. A chain link fence shall not meet the visual buffer or screening requirement from adjacent non-industrial uses. An opaque landscape buffer of no less than twenty (20) feet in depth may be utilized in place of a masonry wall or opaque fence. 
e.  Shall be kept in a neat and orderly arrangement; materials may not be stacked in piles higher than the screen wall or fence; and additional screening may be required for stored items that are large enough to exceed the height of the fence or wall. 
f.  Shall be located no closer than seventy-five (75) feet from property lines of residentially zoned properties. 
g.  Shall utilize paving or other stabilized surfaces that are designed and contructed to ensure soil or water contamination does not occur in all areas utilized for outdoor storage. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 25, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 28-365. - Parking or storage of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, airboats, or trailers in residential districts. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 L L L L L L L  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  Parking or storage of motor vehicles, recreation vehicles, boats, airboats, or trailers in residential districts shall adhere to the regulations in Section 20-58 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The placement or use of any shipping container as an accessory building, storage building, or living unit on residentially zoned land and/or land used for residential purposes is prohibited. Licensed and bonded contractors may use shipping containers for temporary housing of equipment and materials during construction as authorized by a City building permit. 
(Ord. No. 44-2017, § 2, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 28-366. - Real estate office. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP T T T T T T T T T HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards for temporary accessory uses. 
(1)  Within the Rural Residential (RR), Residential Estate (RE), Single-Family Low Density (R-1A), Single-Family Medium Density (R-1B), Single-Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily Medium Density Residential (R-2), Multifamily High Density Residential (R3), Residential Manufactured Housing (RMH-1) and Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) zoning districts, real estate sales offices: 
a.  Shall be permitted provided that there is only one (1) such sales office for each subdivision or unit in the process of being developed. 
b.  May be in a temporary structure within the development area for a period not to exceed one (1) year, or may be located within a model home or dwelling being offered for sale for a period not to exceed two (2) years. 
c.  Shall be limited to only for the sale of dwellings within the development or project in which the sales office exist. 
Sec. 28-367. - Recreation court. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Recreation court:" An improved surface, typically concrete or asphalt, that is used for accessory outdoor recreation uses such as tennis, basketball, and other similar uses. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-367.1. - Residential generator. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500> L L L L L L L L L L L  
(b)  Definition. "Residential generator:" A standby generator is a back-up electrical system that operates automatically, providing backup electrical power to HVAC systems, security systems, and household appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, and water heaters. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Only generators that do not exceed five (5) feet in height from finished grade to top of the generator are allowed for permanent installation within single-family residential development. 
(2)  If fuel tanks over one hundred twenty-five-gallon capacity are to be used to power the generator, review and approval of the fuel tanks by the Fire Marshal in accordance with applicable NFPA regulations is required. 
(3)  The location of a residential generator shall meet the following setbacks: 
a.  Front: Behind the front building line. 
b.  Rear: Same as rear setback for accessory structure in the zoning district as set forth in Section 28-391, Residential accessory use buildings and structures. 
c.  Side: five (5) feet and completely screened from view by an opaque wall or hedge. 
d.  Side corner: Behind the side corner building line, unless completely screened from view by an opaque wall or hedge. In no event shall a permanently installed generator be placed closer than ten (10) feet to the side corner property line. 
(4)  Residential generators that have been permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance (April 9, 2019) shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-2019, § 2, 4-9-19) 
Sec. 28-368. - Retail sales (as an accessory use). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Retail sales:" As specifically permitted in Chapter 28 and shall include those business activities which customarily provide retail convenience goods. Such uses may include: Department stores, variety stores, including retail pharmacies, however, excluding cash-only pharmacies, restaurants, delicatessens, cafeteria, grocery and markets, gift shops, wearing apparel, home and auto supply, furniture and appliances, hardware, package stores, cocktail lounges, taverns, newsstands, book and stationery stores, shoe repair shops, luggage shops, bakeries and candy shops (provided that products made on the premises are sold on the premises), camera and photo supply shops, radio and television sales and services, floor coverings, sporting goods, florists, jewelers, music and piano sales and services, art shops, pawnshops, electrical and lighting, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, coin-operated or self-service laundry, farm and garden supplies excluding farm machinery and equipment, pet shops, and similar uses. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-369. - Security dwelling unit. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID L L L L GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Security dwelling unit:" A dwelling unit associated with non-residential uses for the purposes of security. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  The use of a trailer, mobile home or residential coach requires a conditional use permit per Section 28-8. 
Sec. 28-370. - Screen enclosure with screened roof (including pool enclosures). 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Definition. "Screen enclosure with screened roof:" An enclosure, at least one (1) wall of which is a common wall to the principal building, the remaining wall surface area consisting of screen mesh with no more than a thirty-two-inch splash wall. All walls, except those common to the principal building, shall provide for the free flow of air between the outside and the interior of the enclosure. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-371. - Skateboard ramp. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP L L L L L L L L L HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500  
(b)  Definition. "Skateboard ramp:" An outdoor structure whether or not permanently affixed to the ground that has a semi-circular, or semi-oval shape, or more than one (1) surface and that is intended or used to permit persons on skateboards or roller skates to move continuously from one (1) side to another. 
(c)  Standards for permitted accessory uses with limitations. 
(1)  All skateboard ramps in excess of six (6) feet in height are prohibited within all residential districts. 
(2)  Skateboard ramps less than six (6) feet in height may be permitted as an accessory structure provided a permit is obtained for the erection of said ramp and full compliance with applicable lot and building requirements, noise ordinance, and other applicable codes. 
Sec. 28-372. - Swimming pool or spa or hot tub. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP P P P P P P P P P P HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID P P GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Reserved. 
Sec. 28-373. - Temporary storage units. 
(a)  Districts where permitted. 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP T T T T T T T T T T HM T NC CC RC OP M-1 M-2 M-3 PID T T T T T T T T T T GU OR P DMU UMU SMU RMU UV IRCN D U M C 100 200 300 400 500 T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T  
(b)  Definition. "Temporary storage units:" Transportable units designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, personal items and other materials for use on a limited basis on residential and commercial properties. This definition does not include storage units authorized by the Florida Building Code pursuant to Section 553.73, Florida Statutes. Truck bodies, shipping containers (except as described below) and semi-trailers are prohibited. 
(c)  Standards for temporary accessory uses. 
(1)  Temporary storage units are permitted provided the following criteria are met: 
a.  A maximum of one (1) temporary storage unit is permitted per lot with a maximum of one (1) placement permitted per year. Additional units may be placed in Special and Commercial zoning districts provided they are approved by the administrator and criteria items below are met. In the event that additional units are permitted, they will not exceed two (2) placements per year; 
b.  The maximum size of the temporary storage unit is eight (8) feet wide, twenty-four (24) feet long, and nine (9) feet high; 
c.  The maximum time a temporary storage unit is permitted to remain on the lot is thirty (30) consecutive days; 
d.  The temporary storage unit shall not be placed in any right-of-way or easement and shall not create a sight obstruction for any vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
e.  The temporary storage unit shall not be utilized for the storage of live animals, hazardous or flammable materials, or human habitation; 
f.  Advertising is prohibited on the temporary storage unit with the exception of the name and phone number of the vendor of the unit; 
g.  The exterior of the temporary storage unit shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be prohibited; 
h.  The applicant must affix a placard, issued at the time of permitting and clearly visible from the nearest roadway, to the temporary storage unit which provides information identifying the placement date, date of required removal, and the number to report violations to the Code Enforcement Department. Any person who violates this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in Section 1-15, "General penalty; continuing violations." Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this article and shall be punishable as such and/or said violation may be processed as a code violation pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162 and the Municipal Code Enforcement Board. 
i.  For storage units associated with commercial, multifamily, and office uses, the units shall not be located on required parking spaces. 
j.  Stacking of temporary storage unis shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Exemptions. The above regulations shall not apply to temporary storage units that are placed for construction purposes (truck bodies, shipping containers, and semi-trailers are prohibited from use as construction offices on project sites) in connection with a valid building permit or during any period of declared emergency by federal, state or local official action. 
(Ord. No. 44-2017, § 3, 12-12-17) 
Secs. 28-374-28-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ACCESSORY USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
This article establishes minimum standards to which the development of accessory uses must adhere. 
DIVISION 1. - RESIDENTIAL 
The regulations in this section apply only to the development of accessory uses within the residential zoning districts (RE, RR, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3, RMH-1, RMH-2, and RHP) within the City. 

Sec. 28-391. - Residential accessory buildings and structures. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and structures may be erected on any lot, provided that such buildings and structures comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot of record which does not have a completed principal structure on the same lot. 
(c)  The cumulative area of all accessory buildings or structures, excluding swimming pools and pool enclosures, shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the square foot area of the principal structure. 
(d)  Any accessory building or structure, excluding swimming pools and pool enclosures, exceeding twenty (20) percent of the square foot area of the principal structure shall be compatible in architectural style, color and exterior facing material to the principal structure. 
(e)  A building permit is required for all accessory buildings and structures. Accessory structures not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet, which are not physically anchored shall not require a permit. No accessory structure or equipment, such as permanently installed generators, shall encroach into a utility/drainage easement. 
(f)  Accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard with the following exception: 
(1)  One (1) detached landscape feature, arbor, or trellis under one hundred twenty (120) square feet, with a maximum height of twelve (12) feet, a minimum of five (5) feet from the property line, and shall not be placed in the sight distance triangle as specified in the City's Transportation Technical Manual. Such landscape feature shall not be used for storage, including vehicular storage. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures, including a swimming pool, may be located in the front yard of a single-family residential lot when the lot is five hundred (500) feet or greater in depth, provided that all accessory structures are set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the front property line. 
(g)  Accessory buildings and structures shall meet the standards for the zoning district in which they are located with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Rear yard setbacks for accessory buildings and structures (all dimensions are in feet): 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP SMU RMU Detached Building/ 
Structures 10 10 7.5 5 5 5 5 5 15 5 5 5 Attached Screen Porches 20 20 20 15 15 10 10 7.5 15 15 15 15 Swimming Pools 13 13 10.5 8 8 8 8 8 18 8 8 8 Pool Enclosures 10 10 7.5 5 5 5 5 5 15 5 5 5  
(2)  Side yard setbacks for accessory buildings and structures (all dimensions are in feet): 
RE RR R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 RMH-1 RMH-2 RHP SMU RMU Detached Building/ 
Structures 10 10 7.5 5 5 5 10 5 15 5 5 5 Attached Screen Porches 20 15 15 10 10 10 10 7.5 15 10 15 15 Swimming Pools 23 18 18 13 13 13 13 10.5 18 13 8 8 Pool Enclosures 20 15 15 10 10 10 10 7.5 15 10 5 5  
(Ord. No. 32-2018, § 1, 7-24-18; Ord. No. 12-2019, § 3, 4-9-19) 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL 
The regulations in this section apply only to the development of accessory uses within the Commercial zoning districts (HM, T, NC, CC, RC, OP, and CM) within the City. 

Sec. 28-392. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
(a)  In no instance shall the total floor area of all detached accessory buildings exceed three hundred (300) square feet on lots less than one (1) acre, or six hundred (600) square feet on lots larger than one (1) acre. 
(b)  Detached accessory structures shall adhere to the front and side corner yard setbacks of the zoning district and shall be placed at least one hundred (100) feet from the nearest residentially zoned property. 
(c)  Accessory structures placed in the front or side corner yard of commercially zoned properties shall adhere to the landscape code at the property line or close to the building. 
(d)  The use shall be clearly incidental to the use of the principal building, and shall comply with all other City regulations. No accessory structure shall be used for activities not permitted in the zoning district. 
(e)  Sanitary facilities and/or human habitation shall be prohibited in accessory structures. 
(f)  Structures shall not be placed in any public drainage and utility easement. 
(g)  Erection of tents as permanent accessory structures is prohibited. 
(h)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height nor the height of the principal structure, whichever is the lesser 
(i)  All detached accessory structures shall conform to the following minimum setbacks: 
Structure Size Structure Height Rear Setback (in feet) Side Setback (in feet) 300 s.f. or less <8 ft. 5 5 300 s.f. or less >8 ft. 10 7 301 600 s.f. <8 ft. 12 10 301 600 s.f. >8 ft. 15 10  
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL 
The regulations in this section apply only to the development of accessory uses within the Industrial zoning districts (M-1, M-2, M-3, PID) within the City. 

Sec. 28-393. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
    Accessory structures shall meet the principal structure setbacks of the Industrial zoning district in which it is located. 
DIVISION 4. - ALL OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS 
The regulations in this section apply only to the development of accessory uses within the zoning districts not previously addressed by Division 1, 2, or 3. 

Sec. 28-394. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
(a)  In the Open Space and Recreation (OR) zoning district, one (1) dwelling unit may be provided for each park, recreation area, golf course, or tennis club provided the principal use exceeds five (5) acres and is in single ownership. 
(b)  In the Open Space and Recreation (OR) zoning district, all accessory uses must abut either a public or approved private road right-of-way or other approved means of access. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and structures shall meet the standards for the zoning district in which they are located with the following exceptions: 
Side Setback Rear Setback Maximum Height Maximum Size Architectural Compatibility* Maximum Number of Structures UMU 5 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft. 50% of principal structure >20% size of principal structure 1 per principal structure IRCN-C 5 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft. 50% of principal structure >20% size of principal structure 1 per principal structure IRCN-R 5 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft. 50% of principal structure >20% size of principal structure 1 per principal structure  
* Any accessory building or structure, excluding swimming pools and pool enclosures, exceeding the percentage established in the table above of the square foot area of the principal structure shall be compatible in architectural style, color and exterior facing material to the principal structure. 
Secs. 28-395-28-400. - Reserved. 
Chapter 29 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS AND OVERLAYS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL INTENT 

Sec. 29-1. - Special districts and overlay districts. 
    Special districts are overlay district regulations that contain standards applicable to certain areas in addition to base district zoning standards in order to help development fit better with the site and surrounding properties. In the event of a conflict between these regulations the regulations set forth in this volume, including Chapter 33, Development options, and an overlay or special district of this chapter, the overlay or special district shall prevail. 
Secs. 29-2-29-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TITUSVILLE SHORELINE AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT (TSA) 

Sec. 29-21. - Short title. 
    The purpose of this overlay district is to provide regulations and rules which will minimize the effects of development within this district. The provisions of this section are in addition to, not in lieu of, the provisions of all other sections of this ordinance. 
Sec. 29-22. - Legal description of district/official map. 
    A point of beginning where the mean high water line of the Indian River meets the southern corporate limits of the City; thence west along the southern corporate limits to the east right-of-way of Riveredge Drive; thence north along the east right-of-way of Riveredge Drive to the east right-of-way of U.S. Highway #1; thence north along the east right-of-way of U.S. Highway #1 to the east right-of-way of Riverside Drive; thence north along the east right-of-way of Riverside Drive to the north right-of-way of St. Johns Street; thence west along the north right-of-way of St. Johns Street to the east right-of-way of Indian River Avenue; thence north along the east right-of-way of Indian River Avenue to the north right-of-way of State Route #406; thence west to the east right-of-way of U.S. Highway #1; thence north along the east right-of-way of U.S. Highway #1 to the east right-of-way of the Florida Eastcoast Railroad; thence north along the east right-of-way of the Florida East Coast Railroad to the north corporate limits of the City; thence east along the north corporate limits of the City to the mean water level mean high water line of the Indian River being the point of termination. 
Sec. 29-23. - Overlay districts. 
    Where development is located in other overlay districts (i.e. Community Redevelopment Area, Floodplains District, etc.), development shall also be in accordance with those districts. 
Sec. 29-24. - Underlying zoning. 
    The following zoning districts shall be permitted in the Titusville Shoreline Area: 
(a)  All residential districts established by Chapter 28, Zoning, except RMH-1 and RMH-2 districts. 
(b)  Shoreline Mixed-Use (SMU). 
(c)  Neighborhood Commercial (NC). 
(d)  Tourist (T). 
(e)  General Use (GU). 
(f)  Open Space/Recreation (OR). 
(g)  Community Commercial (CC) with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Uses permitted: 
Business, professional, and personal services 
Antique shops 
Bakery sales (baking permitted on premises). Everything baked to be sold at retail on premises. 
Bicycle sales and service 
Book stores and stationery 
Coin launderette 
Confectionery and ice cream stores 
Convenience markets 
Copy centers 
Drugstores 
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup point 
Florist shops 
Gift shops 
Grocery stores 
Hardware stores 
Hobby shops 
Interior decorating, costuming, draperies 
Meat markets 
Music, radio and television shops and repairs 
Newsstands 
Pet stores (property enclosed to prevent any noxious odors) 
Plant sales 
Pottery sales 
Restaurants and snack bars 
Shoe stores 
Tobacco stores 
Wearing apparel stores 
    Uses not expressly enumerated in this section as permitted uses, but closely similar may be allowed by the Administrator if it is determined that such use is consistent and compatible with the area. 
Sec. 29-25. - Minimum building setback from the mean annual flood line of the Indian River Lagoon. 
(a)  In all zoning districts in which properties abut the Indian River Lagoon, principal structures and accessory uses, except as specifically permitted below, shall be set back from the mean annual flood line (MAFL) of the Indian River Lagoon, as established by a land surveyor registered in the State of Florida, as specified in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article II, Environmental, Division 4, Shoreline Protection, Section 30-63, Shoreline Protection Setbacks. 
(b)  Land uses and/or structures permitted within the shoreline setback area are listed in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article II, Environmental, Division 4, Shoreline Protection, Section 30-63, Shoreline Protection Setbacks. 
(c)  Land uses or structures prohibited within the shoreline setback area are listed in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article II, Environmental, Division 4, Shoreline Protection, Section 30-63, Shoreline Protection Setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 29-26. - Breezeways. 
(a)  All properties in the Titusville Shoreline Overlay District shall have twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width open to breeze. Breezeways are encouraged adjacent to side lot lines. 
(b)  No structure, fence, or sign above four (4) feet in height shall be permitted in the breezeway area. Non-opaque fencing is encouraged. 
(c)  This breezeway shall be unobstructed vertically and in a straight line from the front to the rear of the parcel. Side yard setbacks may count toward meeting the breeze requirements subject to the same restrictions as required of breeze areas. 
Sec. 29-27. - Review of development in the district. 
    Any proposed development located within fifty (50) feet of a bulkhead line or altering the shoreline shall be processed as a conditional use in accordance with Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Division 4, Conditional use permits of these regulations. 
Sec. 29-28. - Density/submerged lands. 
(a)  Submerged lands located within the shoreline district, regardless of ownership, shall not be included in any calculations of allowable residential density within any zoning district permitted in the shoreline district. 
(b)  Vested rights/claims. Any property owner who claims to have vested rights of including submerged lands in computing density may submit to the City Manager, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this section, a written request for recognition of said vested rights. The applicant shall submit such information as he deems appropriate to demonstrate his claim of vested rights including legal description of property, dates of any recent rezoning, preparation of any plans, approval of any plans, any action of the city upon which applicant has relied, facts showing substantial reliance or change in position. Within ninety (90) days after receipt of said application, the City Council shall either recognize or reject the applicant's claim of vested rights. In reviewing the application, the City Council shall be guided by applicable Florida law in determining whether or not the applicant is entitled to vested rights. No suit shall be filed by the applicant unless prior thereto the applicant has made a request of the City prior to said litigation. 
(c)  This section shall supersede any conflicting provisions or ordinances of the City of Titusville and shall be controlling in the calculations of residential density for submerged lands within the Titusville Shoreline Area Overlay district. 
(d)  Any property owner that has an approved CUP and AIP as of February 8, 2005, shall be regulated by the Land Development Regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this section. 
(e)  Any substantially complete pending application on file with the City as of February 8, 2005, which requests a development order that utilizes submerged lands for its density calculations shall be reviewed by the City in accordance with the Land Development Regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this section. 
Sec. 29-29. - Titusville Shoreline Area overlay district. 
    The map below illustrates the boundaries of the Titusville Shoreline Area. 

Secs. 29-30-29-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT IMPACT AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT(S) (AIA) 

Sec. 29-41. - Intent. 
    This overlay district is intended to establish impact areas around Arthur Dunn Airpark and Space Coast Regional Airport in order to ensure compatibility of adjacent development. Airparks and Airports are defined in Chapter 37, Definitions of the Land Development Regulations. 
    Airpark and Airport Zones of Influence. 
    The City of Titusville hereby adopts three (3) airpark and airport zones of influence for the Arthur Dunn Airpark (hereafter referenced as the Airpark) and Space Coast Regional Airport (hereafter referenced as the Airport). These zones are established to regulate land development in relation to the airpark and airport as licensed for public use. The location of these Airpark and Airport Zones of Influence, and restrictions on the use of land within said zones are hereby established by these regulations. The boundaries of said zones, and restrictions on the use of land within said zones, shall be changed only through the amendment of these regulations by the City Council of the City of Titusville, with input of the Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority and the general public. 
    Any new application for land development within these airpark and airport zones of Influence shall comply with these regulations, any applicable state or federal regulations, and any applicable requirements of the land development regulations of the City of Titusville. The airpark and airport zones of influence established in these regulations include: 
(a)  The airpark and airport height notification zone; 
(b)  The airpark and airport runway protection zone; 
(c)  The airpark and airport noise impact zone; and 
(d)  The airpark and airport aviation easement/waiver of claims areas. 
Sec. 29-42. - Permitted zoning districts. 
    All zoning categories established in Chapter 28, Zoning provided that they comply with the standards in Section 29-44, Airpark and airport height notification zoning and regulations below. 
Sec. 29-43. - Prohibited zoning districts. 
(a)  Any use which would interfere with the normal operation of an airpark or airport. 
(b)  Urban Village, Planned Unit Development. 
Sec. 29-44. - Airpark and airport height notification zones and regulations. 
(a)  Establishment of zones. The airpark and airport height notification zones are hereby established as overlay zones on the adopted City Zoning Map Atlas. The airpark and airport height notification zones are established to regulate the height of structures and objects of natural growth in areas around the Arthur Dunn Airpark and Space Coast Regional Airport. The airpark and airport height notification zones are defined as follows: 
    Airpark and airport extending outward twenty thousand (20,000) feet from the ends and each side of all runways depicted on the airpark and airport impact maps, Section 29-52. 
    The boundary of the airpark and airport height notification zone established in these regulations is based on the runways and approved extensions and documented as such in Section 29-52, as the airpark and airport height notification maps. The airpark and airport height notification maps are attached in Section 29-52, and made a part hereof. 
(b)  Airpark and airport height notification regulations. 
(1)  The City shall review all development proposals for land lying within an airpark and airport height notification zone for conformance with the federal obstruction standards contained in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 77, for civil airports as shown on the map in Section 29-52 for specific airpark and airport height restrictions. 
(2)  A proposed development shall be considered "potential airfield obstruction" if the proposed development would result in a structure object of natural growth having a height that would exceed any imaginary surface as outlined in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 77 as determined by the City. 
(3)  The applicant for any land development proposal determined to result in a structure or object of natural growth that constitutes a "potential airfield obstruction" shall either obtain a variance or obtain approval from the FAA and FDOT. No land development proposal determined to result in a structure or object of natural growth that constitutes a potential airfield obstruction shall be approved for construction unless: 
a.  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals grants an airpark and airport obstruction variance, if applicable. 
(4)  Any land development proposal that has been determined to include no "potential airfield obstruction" is exempt from any airpark and airport height notification coordination and variance requirements contained herein. 
(5)  Any proposed development of permanent, accessory or temporary structures or use which is not determined to be a "potential airfield obstruction" is exempt from any airpark and airport height notification zone permitting regulations contained herein. 
(6)  Any existing structures or objects of natural growth are grandfathered into the Airpark and Airport Height Notification Ordinance with no permits, variances or alterations/modifications necessary. 
(c)  Airpark and airport obstruction variance procedures and criteria for approval. 
(1)  Procedures for obtaining a variance for the airpark and airport obstruction. 
a.  The applicant shall submit to the City a completed variance application, as provided by the City. At the time of filing a variance application, the applicant must provide proof to the City that a copy of said application has been forwarded by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the. Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Central Aviation Office in Tallahassee, Florida and the Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority (TCAA). The FDOT and TCAA shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the application to provide comments to the City of Titusville Community Development Department, after which time its right is waived. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may approve, deny or approve the application with conditions. 
b.  Prior to the variance request being scheduled for consideration by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, comments must be received from the FDOT and TCAA or the applicant must submit a copy of the return receipt showing that the FDOT and TCAA have waived their right to comment. In addition, the applicant shall submit to the City the following: 
1.  A copy of the Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration (FAA Form 7460-1) submitted to the FAA; 
2.  A copy of the final written determination issued by the FAA, based on its review of the applicant's Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration, (FAA Form 7460-1) in accordance with the provisions of 14 CFR Part 77 and other applicable federal regulations; 
3.  A written letter of support from the Airport Authority; 
4.  A valid aeronautical study approved by the FDOT, and all other documents required by in Section 333.025, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time; and 
5.  A proposal for obstruction marking and lighting as established by FDOT. 
(2)  Criteria for granting an airpark and airport obstruction variance. 
a.  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall consider the criteria enumerated in Section 333.025(6) and Section 333.07(2), Florida Statutes (as amended from time to time), in its consideration of a variance for an airpark and airport height obstruction. 
b.  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may grant an airpark and airport obstruction variance if it determines that a literal application or enforcement of these regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and that the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of these regulations and Chapter 333, Florida Statutes, and the proposed development can be accommodated in navigable airspace without adverse impact to the Arthur Dunn Airpark and Space Port Regional Airport aviation operations. 
c.  In granting an airpark and airport obstruction variance, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions, requirements and safeguards in conformity with these regulations and the intent hereof, including aviation easements if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 1, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 29-45. - Airpark and airport runway protection zones and regulations. 
(a)  Establishment of zones: 
(1)  There is hereby established the airpark and airport runway protection zones as an airpark and airport zone of influence. The airpark and airport runway protection zones are established to regulate the uses of land lying in specified areas above which aircraft must routinely operate at low altitudes and climb from or descend to the runways of the Arthur Dunn Airpark and Space Coast Regional Airport. Within the airpark and airport runway protection zones, certain land uses are restricted or prohibited due to land use characteristics which could result in further death, injury, and property damage in the event of an aircraft accident, as such areas are more likely, statistically, to be exposed to accidents involving aircraft climbing from, or descending to, the runway at low altitudes. 
The airpark and airport runway protection zones include the areas over which aircraft routinely operate above the runway end elevation, and are defined as follows: 
That portion of the approach surface, as defined by 14 CFR Part 77.25(d), that extends outward from, and perpendicular to, its common boundary with the primary surface, as defined in 14 CFR Part 77.25(c), as amended from time to time, for a horizontal distance of: 
a.  Two hundred fifty (250) feet for utility/visual runways; 
b.  Five hundred (500) feet for non-precision instrument/other than utility runways; and 
c.  One thousand (1,000) feet for precision instrument runways. 
The airpark and airport runway protection zones are shown on the maps attached in Section 29-52. 
(2)  In the event a discrepancy arises between an airpark and airport runway protection zone boundary depicted on the maps in Section 29-52, and an airpark and airport runway protection zone boundary located by application of the definition of said boundary as set forth in these regulations, the boundary as prescribed in same Section 29-52 shall prevail. 
(3)  Airpark and airport protection zone regulations. 
a.  Prohibited uses. The following types of new land uses shall be prohibited within the established airpark and airport runway protection zones: 
1.  Educational facilities as defined in Chapter 37, Definitions of the Land Development Regulations and per Chapter 333.03(3) Florida Statutes; 
2.  Hospitals, medical; inpatient treatment facilities, nursing and/or convalescent home facilities; 
3.  Place of religious assembly; 
4.  Land uses which involve emission of light or smoke or attraction of birds that interfere with normal airport operations; 
5.  Control bums for public safety and natural area management may be authorized by the City as long as they do not interfere with normal airport operations. 
b.  Allowable uses. Any use that is not prohibited in the airpark and airport runway protection zones as determined above, is allowable within such zone, subject to compliance with applicable Federal Aviation Regulation Part 77, Criteria and Airport Noise Zone, land use and zoning district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 2, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 29-46. - Airpark and airport noise impact zones and regulations. 
(a)  Establishment of zones. There is created and established as an overlay zone on the adopted official zoning map, an airpark and airport noise impact zone for areas surrounding the Arthur Dunn Airpark and Space Coast Regional Airport. The noise impact zone is an area in which uses are restricted to minimize the impact of airpark and airport-generated noise routinely produced by continuation of normal airfield operations. The airpark and airport noise impact zones are defined as an area contiguous to the airpark and airport measuring half the length of the longest runways depicted on the map in Section 29-52. Residential construction as defined in Chapter 37, Definitions and any educational facilities, as defined in Chapter 37, Definitions, of the Land Development Regulations, with exception of aviation school facilities, shall be prohibited within this noise impact zone. For land use control purposes, this boundary shall be considered to be consistent with the 65 to 75 LDN zone determined by an official 14 CFR 150 noise study. 
(b)  [Additional provisions.] Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, should the airpark or airport implement an approved 14 CFR 150 program and receive an approved 14 CFR 150 noise exposure map, the boundaries of the airfield noise impact shall be modified to comply with the official noise study, subject to amendment of the official zoning atlas. The airpark and airport noise impact zone map is shown in Section 29-52 as part of the Airport Impact Area Overlay District. 
(c)  Airpark and airport noise zone land use regulations. The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, expansion, alteration, moving and changes of use or occupancy of any new structure located within any airpark and airport noise impact zone defined by these regulations subsequent to the effective date of this section as provided herein. 
(1)  Nonconforming uses. Any existing nonconforming use may continue their use except as provided in Section 29-49. 
(2)  Moved structures. Structures moved into or within any airpark and airport noise impact zone defined by these regulations shall comply with requirements of these regulations before permanent occupancy is permitted. 
(3)  New structures. New structures proposed within any airpark and airport noise impact zone defined by these regulations shall comply with the requirements of these regulations before permanent occupancy is permitted, except for those uses already allowed prior to adoption of the airpark and airport noise impact zone as stated in Section 29-49(a). 
(4)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the established noise impact zone, unless prohibited by airpark and airport runway protection zone or zoning district regulations: 
a.  Governmental services. 
b.  Transportation. 
c.  Off-street parking. 
d.  Offices, business and professional. 
e.  Wholesale and retail building materials, hardware and farm equipment. 
f.  Retail trade-General. 
g.  Utilities, heavy or limited. 
h.  Communications. 
i.  Manufacturing-General. 
j.  Photographic and optical services. 
k.  Mining and fishing, resource production and extraction. 
l.  Nature exhibits and zoos. 
m.  Amusement parks, resorts and camps. 
n.  Golf courses, riding stables and water recreation. 
o.  Agricultural operations. 
p.  Similar uses, as determined by the City Manager or designee. 
q.  Residential uses, excluding those defined in Chapter 37, Definitions. 
r.  Educational uses excluding those defined in Chapter 37, Definitions. 
s.  Hotel/motel uses. 
(5)  Restricted uses and criteria. The following uses if not permitted above, shall be permitted within the established noise impact zone (unless prohibited by airpark and airport runway protection zone or zoning district regulations) if the proposed development complies with the applicable criteria described below: 
a.  Educational and residential (other than mobile homes), and similar uses. Developers of proposed educational centers and residential uses (other than mobile homes) shall verify to the City in writing that proposed buildings are designed to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise level reduction (NLR) of at least twenty-five (25) decibels. (Normal residential construction can be expected to provide an NLR of twenty (20) to twenty-five (25) decibels.) 
b.  Animal hospitals and veterinarian clinics and similar uses. Developers of proposed animal medical treatment centers shall not exceed a building floor area ratio of 0.20 and shall verify to the City in writing that proposed treatment facilities are designed to contain less than twenty-five (25) persons on a regular basis. 
c.  Hospitals, homes for the aged, places of religious assembly, auditoriums, concert halls and similar uses. Hospitals, homes for the aged, places of religious assembly, auditoriums and concert halls shall verify to the City in writing that proposed buildings are designed to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise level reduction (NLR) of at least twenty-five (25) decibels. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 3, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 29-47. - Avigation easements/waiver of claims/notice of disclosure. 
    There is hereby established additional areas surrounding the airpark and airport, when certain land uses are permissible in accordance with the zoning district and comprehensive plan, for which avigation easements, waiver of claims and notice of disclosure may be required as a condition of development. Said additional area is shown in Section 29-52, attached hereto as the same area as the airpark and airport noise impact zone. Such documents shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and airport authority and substantially similar to the documents contained in Section 29-52, and shall be executed in a recordable form by the property owner: 
(a)  Prior to release of a development site plan or final Master Plan; or 
(b)  Prior to or via recording of a final plat; or 
(c)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, as applicable. 
    The property owner shall record the documents and provide a copy to the City and to the Airport Authority. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 4, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 29-48. - Construction modification (airpark and airport noise impact zones). 
    Notwithstanding the above regulations, if the applicable zoning and land use regulations permit the construction of a use otherwise prohibited in the airpark and airport noise impact zones, the development may proceed if: 
(a)  The owner or developer shall provide written verification from a registered professional engineer or registered architect to the City that proposed structures or buildings will achieve an outdoor to indoor noise level reduction (NLR) of at least twenty-five (25) decibels. A copy of this verification will be provided to the Titusville-Cocoa Airport (TCAA). In the case of the expansion of an existing facility, verification that the addition to the building or structure meets the NLR criteria will be required. 
(b)  In addition to providing written verification that a proposed building or addition to a building is designed for an NLR of twenty-five (25) decibels, as stated in subsection (a), the owner or developer shall execute a record of an avigation easement in a form acceptable to the City and the Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority. 
(1)  Prior to release of a development site plan; or 
(2)  Prior to or via recording of a final plat; or 
(3)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, as applicable. 
    The property owner shall record the easement and provide a copy of same to the City and to the Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 5, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 29-49. - Other regulations. 
(a)  Limitation on airpark and airport noise/land use controls. Notwithstanding the requirements and prohibitions stated in Section 29-46, no provision of this section shall apply to any existing land use and/or zoning. 
(b)  Variances. Any person desiring to make a new or changed use of their property in a manner not in accordance with the regulations established by Section 29-46, may apply to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals for a variance from such requirement. At the time of filing an airport obstruction variance application, the applicant must provide proof to the City that a copy of said application has been forwarded by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), Aviation Office, M.S. 46, 605 Suwannee Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0450, and to the Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority (TCAA). The FDOT and TCAA shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the application to provide comments to the City of Titusville Community Development Department, after which time its right is waived. A variance shall be granted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals where, owing to conditions of the specific property, a literal enforcement of relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of these regulations. In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions, requirements, or safeguards in conformity with the intent of these regulations, including avigation easements, waivers of claims, and/or notification of noise impact if deemed necessary. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses-Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree or use of land not conforming to these regulations as of the effective date of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this section, and is diligently pursued. 
(d)  Enchanted Forest. These regulations shall not be construed to require the removal, cutting, or lowering of the trees within the Enchanted Forest. 
(e)  Other permits. These regulations shall not require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations when adopted or amended, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as provided in Sections 333.07(1) and (3), Florida Statutes, as follows: 
(1)  Permits. 
a.  A permit must be obtained before any existing use or structure may be substantially changed or substantially altered or repaired. Before any nonconforming structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, a permit must be secured. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or would permit a nonconforming structure or tree or nonconforming use to be made or become higher or to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was when the applicable regulation was adopted or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
b.  Whenever a nonconforming use or nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or is more than eighty (80) percent torn down, destroyed, deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow said structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations; and, whether application is made for a permit under this subsection or not, the said City may by appropriate action, compel the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree, at his or her own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip such object as may be necessary to conform to the regulations. If the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for ten (10) days after notice thereof, the City may report the violation to the political subdivision involved therein, which subdivision, through its appropriate agency, may proceed to have the object so lowered, removed, reconstructed or equipped and assess the costs and expense thereof upon the object or the land whereon it is or was located, and, unless such an assessment is paid within ninety (90) days from the service of notice thereof on the owner or the owner's agent, of such object or land, the sum shall be a lien on said land, and shall bear interest thereafter at the rate of six (6) percent per annum until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes or real property are collected by said political subdivision, or, at the option of said political subdivision, said lien may be enforced in the manner provided for enforcement of liens by Chapter 85, Florida Statutes. 
Notwithstanding the above, any residential structure may be reconstructed if it is located in an approved zoning district and otherwise complies with the Code of Ordinance. 
Notwithstanding the above (1)a., b., these [Land Development] Regulations shall not be applicable to the Enchanted Forest. 
c.  Except as provided herein, applications for permits shall be granted, provided the matter applied for meets the provisions of this chapter and the regulations adopted and in force hereunder. 
(2)  Obstruction marking and lighting. 
a.  In granting any permit or variance under this section, the City Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain thereon, at his or her own expense, such marking and lighting as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft pilots the presence of an obstruction. 
b.  Such marking and lighting shall conform to the specific standards established by rule applicable state and federal regulations. 
(f)  Appeals. Determinations by the Community Development Director relating to interpretations or decisions involving this Section 29-49 may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals by an applicant or any aggrieved person, taxpayer affected, governing body of a political subdivision, or FDOT. All such appeals to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be filed, reviewed, and heard in a manner consistent with Sections 333.08 and 333.10, Florida Statutes. Application for action by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the Community Development Department. 
(g)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may appeal to the Circuit Court as provided in Section 333.11 of the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 6, 7-10-18) 
Sec. 29-50. - General. 
(a)  Determination of noise zone boundaries. In determining the location of airpark and airport runway protection zone or noise zone boundaries, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where boundaries are shown to follow streets or alleys, the centerline of such streets or alleys, as they exist on the effective date of the ordinance, shall be the runway protection zone or noise zone boundary; 
(2)  Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross platted lots, property lines of lots as they exist on the effective date of the ordinance, shall be the runway protection zone or noise zone boundary; 
(3)  Notwithstanding the above, where boundaries are shown on any platted lot, provisions of the more restrictive runway protection zone or noise zone shall apply; 
(4)  Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property of less than five (5) acres in area, provisions of the more restrictive runway protection zone or noise zone shall apply; and 
(5)  Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property of five (5) or more acres in area, the location shall be determined by the airpark and airport noise impact zone as shown in subsection 29-52(c), by application of the definition of said zone boundaries set forth in these regulations. 
(b)  Conflicting regulations. Where there exists a conflict between any of the requirements or limitations prescribed in these regulations and any other requirements, regulations or zoning applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or objects of natural growth, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. The variance to or waiver of any such more stringent limitation or requirement shall not constitute automatic variance or waiver of the less stringent limitations or requirements of these regulations. 
(c)  Severability. If any of the provisions of these regulations or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of these regulations that can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of these regulations are declared to be severable. 
(d)  Penalties. In addition to other remedies for violation of these regulations provided in the Land Development Code, the City may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of Chapter 333, Florida Statutes, these regulations, or any order or ruling made in connection with their administration or enforcement. The court shall adjudge to the City such relief, by way of injunction (which may be mandatory), or otherwise, as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case in order to fully effectuate the purposes of Chapter 333, Florida Statutes. and of these regulations, and the orders and rulings made pursuant. 
Sec. 29-51. - Airport operations development waiver zone. 
(a)  The airport operations development waivers shall only be available to properties within the airport operations development waiver zone [Space Coast Regional Airport] shown on the map in Section 29-52. Within this area only, the City of Titusville Administrator shall have the authority to administratively waive any site and zoning land development regulation that is demonstrated to be in conflict with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airport construction standards and the regulations of the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT). This waiver shall be recorded in the site plan review comments and documents, and shall be noted on the approved site plan, including information regarding the FAA or FDOT standard that is conflicting and the regulation that has been waived. 
(b)  Additionally, the City of Titusville Land Development Regulations shall be applied to the airport operations development waiver zone (AODWZ) with the following provisions: 
(1)  The City shall waive all provisions of Chapter 30, Article II, Environmental, and Chapter 30, Article III, Improvements of the Land Development Regulations with the following provisions: 
a.  The Space Coast Regional Airport shall adhere to all state and federal requirements regarding the impact and removal of endangered species and shall coordinate these efforts through the Brevard County Department of Natural Resources. 
b.  The Space Coast Regional Airport shall provide the following minimum landscape requirements for all developments within the AODWZ: 
i.  Land within the boundaries of the AODWZ determined by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Florida Department of Transportation to be required for the ground or aerial maneuvering of aircraft, or land owned or operated by a public aviation authority in connection with the development, operation, or maintenance of airports and aviation areas or taxiways, aprons, runway protection zones and approaches, air traffic control towers, and aircraft navigational aids shall be exempt from the City's landscaping requirements. 
ii.  Developments within the AODWZ must meet the City's landscaping requirements, with the exception of the requirements for overstory trees, for any facades that have public access and any surface parking lot facilities that have public access. 
c.  The Space Coast Regional Airport shall adhere to all provisions of Chapter 30, Article III, Division 6, Stormwater Management and Aquifer Protection with the exception of the direction, flow rate, and volume of stormwater runoff under existing conditions and subsections 25-56(a) and (d). Therefore, the City shall impose all regulations for stormwater management with the exception of volume control. Additionally, the City agrees to support and assist in the permitting of regional stormwater solutions for the Space Coast Regional Airport AODWZ. 
d.  The Space Coast Regional Airport shall adhere to all provisions of Chapter 30, Article II, Division 7, Subdivision 3, Flood-Resistant Development. 
e.  The Space Coast Regional Airport shall adhere to all provisions of Chapter 30, Article II, Division 8, Hazardous and Toxic Materials. 
(2)  All provisions of Chapter 30, Article III, Improvements, shall be waived subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The Space Coast Regional Airport shall adhere to all provisions of Chapter 30, Article III, Division 8, Subdivision 1, Utility Requirements, with the exception of Section 30-255 and Section 30-259. 
b.  Any infrastructure that will be owned and maintained by the City of Titusville must be constructed to City Standards, as provided in Chapter 30, Article III, Improvements. 
c.  Chapter 30, Article IV, Concurrency shall be waived upon the adoption of Comprehensive Plan amendments exempting the Space Coast Regional Airport from concurrency provisions for transportation impacts. 
(3)  All provisions of Chapter 28, Zoning and Chapter 29, Special Districts and Overlays with the exception of Article III, Airport Impact Area Overlay District shall be waived. However, all land uses within the airport operations development waiver zone must be aviation related or must be an affiliated or supporting commercial, industrial or residential use. Special events shall be allowed on the AODWZ and shall only be required to be permitted through the City's special events permitting process if affecting City services and rights-of-way. 
(c)  All provisions of Chapter 34, Procedures shall apply for the review and permitting of development plans for applicable sections of the Land Development Regulations, including the subdivision of land, plans review, permitting, and inspections. 
(d)  There shall be no waivers of building code requirements, plans submittal and review requirements, or permitting and inspection requirements. 
Sec. 29-52. - Airpark and airport impact areas. 
(a)  Height obstruction zones. 
(1)  Height obstruction zones (Arthur Dunn Airpark). 

(2)  a.  Airport height notification zone. 

b.  Height obstruction zones (Space Coast Regional Airport). 

(b)  Runway clear zones. 
(1)  Runway clear zones (Arthur Dunn Airport). 

(2)  Runway clear zones (Space Coast Regional Airport). 

a.  Airport runway protection zone (Space Coast Regional Airport). 

b.  Restricted zones for educational facilities (Space Coast Regional Airport). 

(c)  Airport noise impact zones. 
(1)  Airport noise impact zones (Arthur Dunn Airport). 

(2)  Airport noise impact zone (Space Coast Regional Airport). 

(d)  Avigation easements and avigation waiver of claims. 
(1)  Avigation easement and avigation waiver of claims (Arthur Dunn Airport). 

(2)  Avigation easement/avigation waiver of claims/notice of disclosure (Space Coast Regional Airport). 

(Ord. No. 25-2018, § 7, 7-10-18) 
Secs. 29-53-29-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND AND CONSERVATION AREA (WCA) 

Sec. 29-71. - Intent. 
(a)  This overlay is intended to allow land uses which are compatible with the function of wetlands and to prohibit negative impacts to wetlands which possess significant functional value. The overall policy for the regulation of wetlands is to achieve no net loss. This overlay applies to wetlands five (5) acres or greater in size as shown on the U.S. Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service Wetland Maps (1988), and shown as a Conservation Land Use Category on the Future Land Use Map. Wetlands less than five (5) acres will be subject to a development review as set forth in Section 30-205. 
(b)  It is the further intent of the City to coordinate both the identification (actual boundaries) and regulation of wetlands and the habitat contained therein, with the St. John's River Water Management District (SJRWMD) and other applicable state and federal agencies. 
(c)  Wetlands preserved by a conservation easement or other method for preserving open space as provided in Chapter 30 Development Standards, Article I General Provisions, Division 3 Operations and Maintenance of this Code, shall be exempt from the Wetlands and Conservation Area overlay, and shall be regulated and managed according to the applicable method of administering common open space provided. 
(Ord. No. 6-2018, § 1, 2-27-18; Ord. No. 4-2019, § 1, 2-26-19) 
Sec. 29-72. - Permitted zoning districts. 
    Open Space and Recreation (OR). 
    Planned Development (PD). 
(Ord. No. 4-2019, § 2, 2-26-19) 
Sec. 29-73. - Prohibited zoning districts. 
(a)  Areas in which a site specific evaluation shows no wetlands or limited wetlands may be used consistent with the adjoining land use designation and at a density consistent with surrounding zoning. 
(b)  Areas which show to be wetlands based on site specific evaluation, or areas where no evaluation has been performed, shall be limited to the above permitted uses or any conditional uses that may be permitted by Section 29-74. 
Sec. 29-74. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Utilities and service easements. 
(b)  Roads and bridges, and associated sidewalks, utilities, etc. within the right-of-way. 
(c)  Accessory structures not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet. 
(d)  Single-family detached residential structure. 
(e)  Transfer of development density/units from the wetland portion of a site to the upland portion of a site, where the total site or property under single ownership is less than twenty (20) acres. 
(f)  Other uses associated with a site specific evaluation of environmental sensitivity as part of a requested development order. 
(Ord. No. 4-2019, § 3, 2-26-19) 
Sec. 29-75. - Standards. 
(a)  Residential density shall be no greater than one (1) dwelling unit per five (5) acres in wetland areas. 
(b)  In cases where there are uplands adjacent to wetlands on a single parcel of land or on property under the same ownership, the use restrictions above would only be applicable to the wetlands portion of the site. That portion of the site which is uplands shall be permitted to be developed consistent with the underlying zoning district. Adjacent zoning must be consistent with the overlay. In any event, the uplands site may only accept as much development density as the lot and building requirements of the underlying zoning category would allow plus any transferred density allowed as set forth in Section 29-74(e), above, or as part of an optional development approved as provided for in these regulations and in Chapter 33, Development Options. 
(c)  All requirements in Chapter 30, Development Standards, including mitigation measures as required to attain no net loss of wetlands Section 30-205. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Conditional use shall be reviewed based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The use is water dependent or water related, or there is no practical alternative to ensure reasonable use of the applicant's property; and 
(2)  The use is ecologically sound, or the use is the least environmentally damaging alternative; and 
(3)  Any unavoidable damage or loss of wetlands shall be mitigated pursuant to the City's Stormwater Management Technical Manual, to insure no loss of functional value. 
Sec. 29-76. - Official map. 
    The Conservation Area Overlay District shall conform to the conservation land use designation noted on the City of Titusville Future Land Use Map. Wetlands preserved by a conservation easement or other method for preserving open space as provided in Chapter 30 Development Standards, Article I General Provisions, Division 3 Operations and Maintenance of this Code, shall be exempt from the Wetlands and Conservation Area overlay, and shall be regulated and managed according to the applicable method of administering common open space provided. 
(Ord. No. 4-2019, § 4, 2-26-19) 
Secs. 29-77-29-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN OVERLAY DISTRICT (ACC) 

Sec. 29-91. - Intent. 
    This overlay district is intended to protect the aquifer by outlining an area of critical concern as shown on the official map, dated 13th day of September 1988, a copy of which is on file with the City Clerk and an illustration of which is attached in the Appendix. 
Sec. 29-92. - Permitted zoning districts. 
(a)  All zoning categories established in Chapter 28, Zoning provided that they comply with the standards in Article III, Airport Overlay of this chapter, below. 
Sec. 29-93. - Prohibited zoning districts. 
(a)  Any use which would be detrimental to the aquifer. 
Sec. 29-94. - Standards. 
(a)  Hazardous materials restrictions as set forth in the City's Hazardous Materials Technical Manual. 
(b)  Impervious surface limitations as set forth in Chapter 30, Article III, Division 6. 
Sec. 29-95. - Official map. 
(a)  A map of the areas of critical concern at a scale of 1?=1,000 feet is located in the Community Development Office and serves as the official map of this district. 
(b)  An illustration of the areas affected by the areas of critical concern is to be found in Section 29-96. 
Sec. 29-96. - Areas of critical concern. 

Secs. 29-97-29-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION (HPA) 

Sec. 29-111. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Preservation Code." 
Sec. 29-112. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  This article is intended to and shall govern and be applicable to all property located in the incorporated City Limits of Titusville, Florida. 
(b)  The Historic Preservation Ordinance shall be filed, and it shall address the following sections: The establishment of a Historic Preservation Officer and duties, the creation of a process to designate individual historic resources, archaeological sites and zones, a process of issuing certificate of appropriateness, and an appeal process. The City shall also submit the Ordinance to the U.S. Department of Interior, National Park Service, for its certification in order to be eligible for the federal income tax credits under the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, as amended, Public Law 97-34. 
Sec. 29-113. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, education, and cultural and economic welfare of the public by preserving and protecting properties of historic, cultural, archaeological, aesthetic and architectural merit which serve as visual reminders of the City's cultural, social, economic, political, scientific, religious, and architectural history. Furthermore, it is the purpose of this article to strengthen the economy of the City by stabilizing and improving property values in historic areas, by combating urban decay through rehabilitation and revitalization, and by encouraging new construction and developments that are harmonious with neighboring historic structures. 
(b)  In addition, the provisions of this article will assist the City and property owners to be eligible for federal tax incentives, federal and state grant funds, and other potential property tax abatement programs for the purpose of furthering historic preservation activities, including, but not limited to, Section 193.502, Florida Statutes or subsequent statutes and the National Register of Historic Places Program. 
(c)  It is also the purpose of this article to foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past, to protect and to enhance the City's attraction to visitors, and to promote the use of individual sites and districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City. 
Sec. 29-114. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adaptive use. The process of converting a building to a use other than that for which it was designed. 
    Addition. A construction project physically connected to the exterior of a historic building. 
    Allee. A broad walk, planted on either side with trees, usually at least twice as high as the width of the walk. 
    Alteration. Any change affecting the exterior or appearance of an existing improvement by additions, reconstruction, remodeling, or maintenance involving change of form, texture of materials, or any such changes in appearance of specially designated interiors. 
    Archaeological site. A single specific location that has yielded or is likely to yield information on local history or pre-history. Archaeological sites may be found within historic districts or places. 
    Artifact. Any object, which is a product of human modification, or objects that have been transported to a site by a people. 
    Board. The City Historic Preservation Board created by Chapter 31, Article VI, of the Land Development Regulations. 
    Certificate of appropriateness. The permit, which is required by the Historic Preservation Board prior to any action. 
    Certificate to dig. A type of certificate of appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Board that gives the Board's permission for certain ground disturbing activities, such as filling, grading, swimming pool excavation and the removal of vegetation or trees that may involve the discovery of as yet unknown or known archaeological resources within a designated archaeological zone. 
    Certificate of recognition. A certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Board recognizing properties designated pursuant to this article. 
    Certified local government. A government satisfying the requirements of the United States National Historic Preservation Act amendments of 1980 (Public Law 96-515) and the implementing of regulations of the U.S. Department of the Interior and the State of Florida. 
    Contributing resource. A building, landscape feature, object, structure or archaeological site or zone that adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which a property is significant because (a) it was present during the period of significance, it relates to the documented significance of the property and it possesses historic integrity reflecting character at that time or is capable of yielding important information about the period, or (b) it independently meets the National Register Program criteria. 
    Demolition. The act or process of wrecking, destroying or removing any building or structure, or any portion thereof. 
    Department. The City's Planning and Growth Management Department. 
    Designated exterior. All outside surfaces of any improvement listed in the designation report as having significant value to the historic character of the building or district. 
    Designation report. A document prepared by the Historic Preservation Officer for all properties and districts that are proposed for local historic designation. The designation report at a minimum must include a boundary description of the proposed historic property or district, an evaluation of its historic significance as it relates to the criteria for significance, location map, representative photographs, and physical description of the historic resource. 
    Documentation. Photographs, slides, drawings, plans and/or written descriptions submitted to support a decision by the Historic Preservation Board or City Council. 
    Historic district. A geographically defined area, which includes or encompasses such historic sites, landmarks, buildings, signs, appurtenances, structures or objects as the City Council may determine to be appropriate for historical preservation. 
    Historic site. A site, structure, building or object meeting one (1) or more of the criteria specified herein and designated as such by the City Council. 
    Historic survey. The results of the systematic process of identifying significant buildings, sites and structures through visual inspection and research, with the results archived in the Florida Master Site File maintained by the Florida Department of State, Division of Historic Resources. 
    Infill. Descriptive of buildings that have been designed and built to replace missing structures or otherwise fill the gaps in the streetscape. 
    Integrity. Any resource proposed for historic designation must retain its historic integrity. Integrity is measured by the retention of location, design, feeling and association. For example, if a building has been subject to unsympathetic alterations that have compromised the quality of its design, it may not be designated. With regard to association, if the property proposed for designation has been moved, or the context of its original use or setting has been compromised, it may not be designated. 
    Material alteration. Any construction, or change in appearance of the exterior. For buildings, structures or objects, material alteration shall include, but it is not limited [to], the changing of roofing or siding substances; changing, eliminating, or adding doors, door frames, windows, window frames, shutters, fences, railings, porches, balconies or other trim or ornamentation. For buildings, structures, or objects, material alteration shall not include ordinary maintenance, repair or repainting consistent with the criteria of the Uniform Design Manual. 
    Minor alteration. Any work proposed that is deemed to have a minimal impact on historic resources or when the work is deemed to be a replacement in kind. Examples of work that may be considered to have a minimal impact could include: minor alterations to the rear of the historic building that is not visible from the public right-of-way or the construction of a deck to the rear of a historic building that does not obscure architectural features, and that is easily removable. 
    Ordinary maintenance or repair. Work done to repair damage or to prevent deterioration or decay of a building or structure or part thereof by restoring the building or structure or part thereof as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such damage, deterioration or decay. 
    Resource(s). Sites, buildings, structures, objects and areas, whether public or private, either singly or in combination, as defined in this section of the chapter. 
    Significant properties. Individual properties that meet the criteria for listing in the Register of Historic Places set forth in Section 29-116 of this chapter, and if located in a district listed in the Register of Historic Places that meet the criteria for structures that contribute to a district. 
    Titusville Register of Historic Places. A list of various sites, buildings, structures, objects, areas, and districts as historically and/or architecturally significant to the City of Titusville. 
Sec. 29-115. - Appointment and duties of the Historic Preservation Officer. 
    The Historic Preservation Program provided for in this article shall be assigned to the Planning and Growth Management Department of the City, but such assignment may be altered from time to time as determined by the City Manager. The City Manager shall appoint a person to serve as Historic Preservation Officer to assist the Historic Preservation Board. The appointee shall be experienced with, and knowledgeable in, architectural history, urban design, local history, landscape materials, site planning and land use regulations. The Historic Preservation Officer shall: 
(a)  Schedule meetings of the Historic Preservation Board, prepare agendas for the Historic Preservation Board meetings, and ensure that proper notice is given to the public for all regular and special Historic Preservation Board meetings and hearings. 
(b)  Prepare local historic designation reports and make recommendations to the Historic Preservation Board as to whether or not the subject property, resource or district meets the designation criteria established in Section 29-116. 
(c)  Prepare and review National Register of Historic Places Nominations. 
(d)  Provide advice to applicants for certificates of appropriateness regarding the standards and guidelines incorporated within the Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
(e)  Serve as a resource to applicants concerning the criteria as well as the process and procedures for the designation of historic resources, historic districts, archaeological sites and zones. 
(f)  Review completed applications for a certificate of appropriateness for a designated historic property or for contributing properties within a historic district; provide any necessary field checks of the site, and make approval/denial recommendations to the Historic Preservation Board. 
(g)  Maintain and update an official inventory that includes photographs and maps for all officially designated historic resources, districts, archaeological sites and zones listed in the Titusville Register of Historic Places. 
(h)  Prior to issuance of any building permits, review all final development plans for designated historic resources and historic districts for their compliance with terms and conditions of the approved certificate of appropriateness. 
(i)  Issue all certificates of recognition for designated historic resources. 
(j)  Issue all approved certificates of appropriateness for designated historic resources and for properties within historic districts. 
(k)  Coordinate with other city departments, public agencies and private groups, and the general public, as required, to provide a continuing effort to protect and preserve significant elements of the manmade and the natural environment through public education and encouragement of preservation policies. 
(l)  Serve as the certified local government coordinator between the Historic Preservation Board and the Division of Historical Resources, Florida Department of State. 
(m)  Promote the awareness of historic preservation and its community benefits to the general public and to school children through promotional materials, guidebooks, tours, informational brochures, educational tools, workshops, lectures, and presentations. 
(n)  Apply for preservation awards and grants. 
(o)  Participate in other preservation programs, as appropriate. 
(p)  Prepare and submit a Board-approved annual report to the State Historic Preservation Office by November 1 covering activities of the previous October 1 through September 30. Information to be included in the annual report (at a minimum): 
(1)  A copy of the Rules and Procedures. 
(2)  A copy of the Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
(3)  Resumé of Board members. 
(4)  Changes to the Board. 
(5)  New local designations. 
(6)  New National Register listings. 
(7)  Review of survey and inventory activity with a description of the system used. 
(8)  Grant-assisted activity. 
(9)  Number of projects reviewed. 
Sec. 29-116. - Historic designation criteria. 
    Consistent with the criteria established by the National Register of Historic Places, the Historic Preservation Board shall recommend for designation places, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features, archaeological sites, archaeological zones, and other improvements as historic sites, archaeological sites or zones. 
    These sites or zones must be significant in Titusville's history, architecture, archaeology and culture, and possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship or association; and must meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  Events. Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to the pattern of history in the community, Brevard County, the State or the Nation. In order to justify eligibility for a property under the "events" criterion, the property must have an important association with the event or historic trend, and retain its historic integrity. Examples of properties associated with events could be the site of a battle; the building in which an important invention was developed; or an archaeological site at which a major new aspect of prehistory was discovered, such as the first evidence of man and extinct Pleistocene animals being contemporaneous. Properties associated with a pattern of events could include the following: A trail associated with migration; a railroad station that served as the focus of a community's transportation system and commerce; a building used by an important social organization; or a downtown district representing a town's growth as the commercial focus of the surrounding area. 
(b)  Persons. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in the past of the community, Brevard County, the State or Nation. In order to justify eligibility for a property under the "person" criterion, the property is usually associated with the person's productive life, reflecting the time period when he or she achieved significance. In some instances that may be the person's home; in other cases, a person's business, office, laboratory, or studio may best represent his or her contribution. Properties associated with a person significant in the past could include the following: The home of an important merchant; the studio of a significant artist; or the business headquarters of an important businessman or woman. 
(c)  Design and construction. Recognizes the quality of design and construction and embodies the distinctive characteristics of an architectural type, period, style or method of construction; or the work of a prominent designer or builder; or contains elements of design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship of outstanding quality; or that represents a significant innovation or adaptation to the local Florida environment; or represents a distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. In order to justify eligibility for a property under the "design and construction" criterion, the property must physically convey the qualities for which it is nominated. Distinctive characteristics refer to the physical features or traits that commonly recur in individual types, periods or methods of construction. Characteristics may be expressed in terms such as form, proportion, structure, plan, style or materials. They can be general, referring to ideas of design and construction such as basic plan or form, or they can be specific, referring to precise ways of combining particular kinds of materials. Properties associated with design and construction could include a residence or commercial building representing a significant style of architecture; a movie theater embodying high artistic value in its decorative features or a bridge representing technological advances. 
(d)  Information potential. Has yielded, or is likely to yield, historical or pre-historical information. In order to justify eligibility under the "information potential" criterion, the property must have, or have had, information to contribute to our understanding of human history or prehistory, and the information must be considered important. The site must retain the ability to convey its association as the repository of important information, the location of historic events, or the representation of important trends. 
(e)  National Register Listing. Is listed in the National Register of Historic Places as established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (as amended). 
(f)  Distinctive feature. Is a part of, or related to, a landscape, park, environmental feature or other distinctive area, and should be developed or preserved according to a plan based upon a historical, cultural, or architectural motif; or because of its prominent or spatial location, contrast of siting, age, or scale is an easily identifiable visual feature of a neighborhood or the City and contributes to the distinctive quality of such neighborhood or the City. 
(g)  Other criteria considerations. Ordinarily cemeteries, birth places, or graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature and properties that have achieved significance within the past fifty (50) years shall not be considered eligible for the Titusville Register of Historic Places. However, such properties will qualify for designation if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria, or if they fall within the following categories: 
(1)  A building or structure that has been removed from its original location but is significant primarily for architectural value, or is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; or 
(2)  A birthplace or grave of a local historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no appropriate site or building directly associated with his or her productive life; or 
(3)  A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons of outstanding importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or 
(4)  A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan and no other building or structure with the same association has survived; or 
(5)  A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own exceptional significance; or 
(6)  A property achieving significance within the past fifty (50) years if it is of exceptional importance; or 
(7)  A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance. 
    The Historic Preservation Board or the Planning and Growth Management Department may adopt specific operating guidelines for historic structure, site, and district designation providing such are in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance [chapter]. 
Sec. 29-117. - Historic site and resource designation process and procedure. 
    Properties that meet the criteria for local historic resources and sites, archaeological sites and zones, shall be designated according to the following procedures: 
(a)  Petition of the owner. The owner of any property in the City may petition the Historic Preservation Board for designation of the property as an individual resource, site or archaeological site or zone by submitting a preliminary application for historic designation to the Historic Preservation Officer. The Historic Preservation Board shall either accept or deny the application only after written verification that the applicant is the owner of record or their authorized agent. By accepting the application, the Historic Preservation Board must set a date for a public hearing and shall direct staff to complete the designation report and notify the proper parties of the public hearing as provided below. 
(b)  Directive of Historic Preservation Board. The Historic Preservation Board is empowered to initiate the designation process pursuant to this section. If the Historic Preservation Board is initiating designation, the preliminary application will be waived and the full application presented at the public hearing. 
(1)  No individual historic resource or site will be designated without consent of the property owner. For those individual designations initiated by the Historic Preservation Board, the Historic Preservation Officer will notify the legal owner of record of the proposed designation (as determined by the most current Brevard County Tax Rolls), by registered or certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, at least thirty (30) days before the Historic Preservation Board meeting at which the matter is scheduled. 
(2)  The notice will explain the designation process and its implications, and inform the owner that they may object to the designation of their property. The notice from the City will also include the required form, which must be completed by the owner of record indicating their support or objection. Evidence of their objection will be documented by a copy of the required form, which must be received by the Historic Preservation Officer within twenty-one (21) days after the owner's receipt of the notification. If the owner objects to the designation within sixty (60) days of notification, then the designation process will be withdrawn. 
(c)  Designation reports. After establishing the owner's consent for the designation of a historic resource or site, and prior to the designation of an individual resource, a site, or an archaeological site or zone, an investigation and designation report must be prepared by the Historic Preservation Officer and filed with the Historic Preservation Board. All reports must address the following: 
(1)  Legal description of the property; 
(2)  Historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance of the property and how the property fulfills the criteria for designation; 
(3)  Boundaries for individual historic sites and a recommendation of boundaries for archaeological zones. Boundaries shall be drawn to encompass, but not exceed the extent of the significant resources and land areas comprising the property. For example, in defining the boundaries for a residence, the boundary should be drawn so that it incorporates the footprint of the building as well as the yard, as the green space acknowledges the setting and context of the property. Buffer zones, or acreage not directly contributing to the significance of the property shall not be included; 
(4)  Every historic site and historic district designation report may include detailed zoning regulations compatible with its designation. Such regulations may be designed to supplant or modify elements of existing zoning regulations, including, but not limited to, use, floor/area ratio, density, height, setbacks, parking, minimum lot size and transfer of development rights, or create any additional regulations provided for in this section. The zoning amendment may identify individual properties, improvements, landscape features, or sites; or categories of properties, improvements, landscape features or sites for which different regulations, standards and procedures may be required; 
(5)  All reports shall be based on the existing conditions of the property, and shall address whether or not the historic integrity of the property has been maintained; 
(6)  The report shall also contain a location map and photographs of all exterior surfaces and interior if applicable; 
(7)  Optional designation of interiors. Normally interior spaces shall not be subject to regulation under this section. However, in cases of existing structures having exceptional architectural, artistic or historical importance, interior spaces that are normally open to the public may be specifically designated. The designation report shall describe precisely those features subject to review; 
(8)  Designation reports shall also include the parcel identification number and tax account number related to such property, the property appraiser's records of such property, and a copy of the public hearing newspaper advertisement. 
(d)  Procedures for notifications and hearings. Notification to property owners and surrounding properties of the proposed public hearings shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Notification of owners. For each proposed designation of a historic resource, site, or archaeological site or zone, the Historic Preservation Board shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to a public hearing held pursuant to this section, mail a copy of the designation report and a notice of the public hearing to all property owners of record, as determined by the latest ad valorem tax records as published by the Brevard County Property Appraiser, whose properties are located within the boundaries of the designation. A courtesy notice shall also be mailed to property owners of record within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the affected property to the last known address of the party being served. Failure to receive such notice shall not invalidate the same as such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and County. This notice shall serve as notification of the intent of the Historic Preservation Board to consider designation of the property. 
(2)  Public hearing. For each historic resource, historic site, archaeological site or archaeological zone proposed for designation, a public hearing shall be held at least thirty (30) days after the date a preliminary designation report has been presented to the Historic Preservation Board. Such notice shall be given by publishing notice of the time and place of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and the County at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. All interested persons will be provided an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing on the proposed designation. 
(3)  Notification to the community redevelopment agencies. Upon the proposal for designation, notification of such proposal shall be furnished to any City or County Community Redevelopment Agency within which the site, resource or archaeological zone is located. The Community Redevelopment Agency may submit comments or make recommendations to the Historic Preservation Board concerning the designation of such property prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(e)  Moratorium. In addition to the provisions provided herein, upon the filing of a designation report, the owner of the real property, which is the subject matter of the designation report or any individual or private or public entity shall not: 
(1)  Erect any structure on the subject property, or 
(2)  Alter, restore, rehabilitate, renovate, move or demolish any structure on the subject property, until such time as a final administrative action as provided for in this article is completed, or one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of filing the designation report, whichever event first occurs; or an appeal to the City Council for the designation of the property is upheld. 
(f)  Permitting. No permits shall be issued by the City for any new construction, alteration, rehabilitation, renovation, restoration or demolition, of the real property that is the subject of the designation report, until such time as a final administrative action as provided for in this article is completed, or one hundred twenty (120) days from the filing of the designation report, whichever event first occurs; or an appeal to the City Council for the designation of the property is upheld. 
(g)  Decision of the Historic Preservation Board. The Historic Preservation Board shall make its decision to approve, deny or amend the proposed designation at the public hearing. It may also continue the matter for additional information or cause. Should the Historic Preservation Board find that the historic resource is eligible for designation pursuant to the criteria set forth in Section 29-116 that recommendation will be forwarded to the City Council for final consideration within sixty (60) days after approval of the eligibility for designation. 
(h)  Modification of zoning. For the designation of individual resources, archaeological sites and archaeological zones that require a modification or variance in the zoning, the Historic Preservation Board must first send its recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Board for its review. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then send its recommendations along with the Historic Preservation Board's recommendation to the City Council for final approval. 
(i)  City Council actions. The City Council shall approve, deny or approve with conditions the designation, and shall designate pursuant to the criteria set forth in Section 29-116 for the property by resolution. The following parties shall be notified of its actions with a copy of the resolution: 
(1)  All affected City departments; 
(2)  The City Clerk, so that the resolution is recorded in the Brevard County public record; 
(3)  Owner of the affected property and other parties having an interest in the property, if known; and 
(4)  Appropriate county and state officials as per the requirements for the Certified Local Governments Program. Notify the State Historic Preservation Officer immediately of all new historic designations or alterations to existing designations. 
(j)  Amendment or rescission. The City Council may amend or rescind any designation provided the amendment or rescission request complies with the criteria set forth in Section 29-116 and the same procedures used in the original designation. 
Sec. 29-118. - Nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. 
    As part of the duties under the Certified Local Government Program, the Historic Preservation Board shall receive all nominations of local property to the National Register of Historic Places following the regulations of the Florida Bureau of Historic Preservation. 
(a)  Notice requirements. The Historic Preservation Board shall give notice to the owner of the property at least thirty (30) days but not more than seventy-five (75) days prior to the Historic Preservation Board meeting at which the nomination will be considered. The Historic Preservation Board shall also obtain a written recommendation from the City Council and the Board of County Commissioners regarding the nomination to the National Register. 
(b)  Owner notification and requirements for comment. The Historic Preservation Board shall obtain comments from the public that shall be included in the report making a recommendation. Objections to the National Register listing by surrounding property owners must be notarized and filed with the Historic Preservation Officer. Within thirty (30) days after its meeting, the Historic Preservation Board shall forward the nomination and Board recommendations to the State Historic Preservation Officer. 
(c)  Referral to the Florida State Historic Preservation Officer. The State Historic Preservation Officer will take further steps on the nomination in accordance with federal and state regulations. If the Historic Preservation Board and/or local officials support the nomination, the State Historic Preservation Officer will schedule the nomination for consideration by the State Review Board for the National Register at its next regular meeting. If both the Historic Preservation Board and the local officials recommend against the nomination to the National Register, the State Historic Preservation Officer will take no further action on the nomination unless an appeal is filed with the State Historic Preservation Officer. 
Sec. 29-119. - Certificate of appropriateness procedures and review criteria. 
    No building, structure, object, or landscape feature within the City of Titusville which has been designated as a historic resource will be erected, altered, restored, rehabilitated, renovated, excavated, relocated, or demolished until a certificate of appropriateness regarding any architectural features, landscape features, or site improvements has been approved under the procedures in this article. Architectural features shall include, but not be limited to, the architectural style, scale, massing, siting, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of the building or structure, including the type, style and material and color of roofs, windows, doors, siding, masonry, porches, storefronts and other architectural features. Architectural features shall include, when applicable, interior spaces where interior designation has been given pursuant to Section 29-117(c). 
(a)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be a prerequisite to the application of any other permits required by law or this Code. The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining other permits or approvals required by the City, or other regulatory agency. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained for the proposed work prior to the application for a building permit or other City permit. 
(b)  The construction of new buildings or structures within a historic district (infill) will require the same review procedure as described in this section. 
(c)  Landscape features and site improvements that are associated with the historic context of the property will include, but are not limited to, individual plants, such as a specimen tree, or groups of plants, such as a hedge, allee, agricultural field, planting bed, or naturally occurring plant community or habitat, walls, fences, signs, sidewalks, planters, driveways, paving and exterior lighting. 
(d)  No certificate of appropriateness will be approved unless the architectural plan for said construction, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, excavation, restoration, rehabilitation, renovation, or demolition is approved by the Historic Preservation Board or the Historic Preservation Officer, as provided in this section. 
(e)  Relocation of a building or structure will include, but not be limited to, moving a building or structure into or within any historic district, and moving a historic building or structure within or out of the City or any historic district, and will require the same review procedures as described in this section. Relocation of historic buildings and structures to other sites will not take place unless it is shown that their preservation on their existing or original sites is not consistent with the purposes of this ordinance [chapter] or would cause undue hardship to the property owner. 
(f)  A certificate of appropriateness will not be required for ordinary maintenance of any historic building, structure or object, or any building, structure or object within a historic district. 
(g)  The Historic Preservation Board may delegate to the Historic Preservation Officer the authority to review and grant standard certificates of appropriateness without their referral to the Historic Preservation Board. A standard certificate of appropriateness is authorized when the work proposed is deemed to have a minimal impact to the historic resource, or when the work proposed is deemed a replacement in-kind. Examples of work that may be considered to have a minimal impact could include: minor alterations to the rear of a historic building that is not visible from the public right-of-way or the construction of a deck to the rear of a historic building that does not obscure architectural features, and that is easily removable. 
(h)  General procedures for the certificate of appropriate application and hearings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application for a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may confer, at such applicant's election, with the Historic Preservation Officer to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and historic data. The purpose of such conference is to further discuss and clarify preservation objectives and design guidelines. In no case, however, shall any statement or representation made prior to completion of official application review be binding on the City. 
(2)  Standard certificate of appropriateness. Where the action proposed in an application is a minor alteration to a designated historic resource or a resource within a historic district, the Historic Preservation Officer shall, within twenty (20) business days from the receipt of a complete application, approve or deny the application. The findings of the Historic Preservation Officer shall be mailed to the applicant, accompanied by a statement that explains the officer's decisions. The applicant shall have the opportunity to challenge the officer's decision by applying for a special certificate of appropriateness within thirty (30) days of the officer's findings. Further, the applicant may initially request that his/her application be classified as a special certificate of appropriateness so that the Historic Preservation Board will consider it. 
(3)  Special certificate of appropriateness. When the action proposed involves a material alteration, relocation, addition, new construction or demolition of a designated historic resource, or where the Historic Preservation Officer finds that the application is more appropriately considered by the Historic Preservation Board, the application shall be classified as a "special certificate of appropriateness" and the following procedures shall govern: 
a.  Time limit and public hearing. The Historic Preservation Board shall be presented the application within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed application. The Historic Preservation Board shall hold a public hearing with notice provided to the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting. 
b.  A courtesy notice shall be mailed to the owner of record for properties within a five-hundred-foot radius of the affected property using addresses as determined by the latest ad valorem tax records as published by the Brevard County Property Appraiser. Failure to receive such notice shall not invalidate the same as such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and county. 
c.  An advertisement shall be placed in a newspaper at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. 
d.  At the public hearing, the Historic Preservation Board shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, subject to the acceptance of those conditions by the applicant. The Historic Preservation Board may suspend action on the application in order to seek technical advice from outside its members or to further meet with the applicant to revise or modify the application. 
e.  In the event the Historic Preservation Board denies any completed application, the applicant may appeal the Historic Preservation Board's decision to the City Council in the manner provided for in this article (refer to Section 29-120). 
(i)  Guidelines for review and issuance. The U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation are hereby adopted as the standards as adopted on the effective date of this ordinance [Ord. No. 29-2012] and as may be amended from time to time. In adopting these guidelines, it is the intent of this article to promote the proper maintenance, restoration, preservation, rehabilitation, or reconstruction appropriate to the property, and compatible contemporary designs, that are harmonious with the exterior architectural and landscape features of neighboring buildings, and streetscapes. The salient points of these standards are as follows: 
(1)  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
(2)  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
(3)  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken. 
(4)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
(5)  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be retained and preserved. 
(6)  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
(7)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(8)  Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(9)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(10)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(j)  From time to time, the Historic Preservation Board may adopt additional standards to preserve and protect special features unique to the City. Based on the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, the designation report, a complete application, any additional plans, drawings, photographs, and samples of materials to fully describe the proposed project, the Historic Preservation Board may approve, with or without conditions, or deny the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(k)  Scope of review and general design considerations. The review of the exterior architectural features will include the architectural style, scale, massing, siting and the general arrangement of the structure's exterior including: 
(1)  The type and texture of building material; 
(2)  The type, style and materials of roofs, windows, doors, siding, and signs; 
(3)  Prominent architectural features such as porches, balconies, dormers, storefronts, and other important elements that comprise the overall design; and 
(4)  The collective composition of these elements. 
(5)  In considering proposals for alterations to the exterior of historic buildings and structures and in applying development and preservation standards, the documented, original design of the building may be considered, among other factors. 
(l)  Changes in approved work. Any change in work proposed subsequent to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Officer. 
(1)  If the Historic Preservation Officer finds that the proposed change does not materially affect the historic character, or the proposed change is in accord with approved guidelines, standards, and the certificate that was previously approved, the Historic Preservation Officer may approve the change and amend the current certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  If the Historic Preservation Officer finds that the proposed change materially affects the historic character, or the change is not in accordance with guidelines, standards, or the certificate of appropriateness previously approved by the Historic Preservation Board, a new certificate of appropriateness shall be required. The same time limits, notification procedures and all other procedural requirements shall be met, as the application is considered a new application. 
(m)  Demolition. Review of any certificate of appropriateness for demolition shall be in accordance with criteria set forth in this section. 
(1)  In connection with any certificate of appropriateness for demolition of buildings or improvements, the Historic Preservation Board may encourage the salvage and preservation of building materials or architectural details and ornaments, fixtures and the like for reuse in restoration of other historic properties. 
(2)  The Historic Preservation Board may also require, at the owner's expense and prior to demolition, the recording of the building for archival purposes by photographs. 
(3)  The Historic Preservation Board's refusal to grant a certificate of appropriateness for the purpose of demolition will be supported within fifteen (15) calendar days by a written statement describing the public interest that the Historic Preservation Board seeks to preserve. 
(4)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, the Historic Preservation Board shall consider the following standards in evaluating applications for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition of designated sites or buildings: 
a.  Is the structure of such interest or quality that it would reasonably meet national, state, regional or local criteria for designation as a significant historic or architectural site or structure? 
b.  Is the structure of such design, craftsmanship or material that it could be reproduced only with great difficulty or expense? 
c.  Is the structure one (1) of the last remaining examples of its kind in the City, county or region? 
d.  Does the structure contribute significantly to the historic character of a designated district? 
e.  Would retention of the structure promote the general welfare of the City by providing an opportunity for study of local history, architecture and design or by developing an understanding of the importance and value of a particular culture and heritage? 
f.  Are there definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what will be the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area? 
(5)  A property owner shall not permit a structure with a Historic Designation to fall into a state of disrepair that may result in the deterioration of exterior appearance or architectural features so as to produce, in the judgment of the Historic Preservation Board, a detrimental effect upon the life and character of the structure in question. If the Historic Preservation Board finds a designated historic structure has been deliberately neglected, the Historic Preservation Board may refer the property to the Department of Building and Code Enforcement for immediate attention and may be subject to code violation fines in addition to the penalties in accordance with this article. 
(6)  Special notice requirements. Notice of application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition shall be posted on the premises of the building, structure or appurtenance proposed for demolition in a location and manner clearly visible from the street. Such notice will be posted within three (3) working days of receipt of the application for demolition by the Historic Preservation Board and must remain for the duration of the permitting process. 
(n)  Moving existing structures. An individually designated historic resource may not be relocated except through the certificate of appropriateness process. In considering such Certificate, the Historic Preservation Board shall determine whether or not any reasonable alternative is available for preserving the improvement or structure on its original site and whether or not the proposed relocation site is compatible with the historic setting and architectural integrity of the improvement or structure. 
(o)  Certificate to dig. For the purposes of this article, an archaeological zone shall be defined as an area in which the likelihood of evidences of past cultures remaining in situ, i.e., undisturbed under or partially under the surface, is high. Within an archaeological zone, any construction, placement of utilities, stormwater retention, filling, digging, removal of trees, or any other activity that may alter or reveal an interred archaeological site shall be prohibited without a type of certificate of appropriateness called a certificate to dig. 
(1)  All applications to the City, and any work done by the City or utility companies, involving construction, large-scale digging, the removal of trees or any other activity that may reveal or disturb an interred archaeological site, in an archaeological zone shall require a certificate to dig before approval. 
(2)  The certificate to dig may be subject to specified conditions, including, but not limited to, conditions regarding site excavation. In order to comply with this requirement, the City may require the applicant to conduct an archaeological survey. 
(3)  All construction requiring surface intrusion of known archaeological sites require a phase I archaeological survey, as defined by the Florida Bureau of Historical Resources, to determine the extent of the archaeological site relative to the proposed construction and to recommend plans for mitigating damage to the site. Completed surveys shall be submitted by the City to the Florida Bureau of Historical Resources, archaeological compliance review for concurrence or further recommendation. The State, based on the results of the phase I archaeological survey, may recommend any of the following: 
a.  If the important historical record cannot be preserved, encapsulating the affected portion of the site with fill and constructing above the fill may be an option. 
b.  If the owner proposes destroying a portion of or the entire site, a recommendation for complete salvage excavation may be made. 
c.  An excavation sampling of the affected portions of the site may be another option. 
(4)  The City Council may elect to approve the recommendations, alter the recommendations, or even disregard the recommendations, except, in sites containing human remains, marked or unmarked. 
(5)  The archaeological survey/review shall take place during the time specified by the City after preliminary development plans have been submitted by the owner for review. The review and notification time limits for these certifications shall be the same as for a regular certificate of appropriateness. 
(6)  Approved certificates to dig shall contain an effective date not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days at which time the proposed activity may begin, unless the Historic Preservation Board designates the site in question as an individual historic site or historic district pursuant to this article in which all the rules and regulations pertaining to the designation process shall apply from the date the designation report has been filed. 
(p)  Compliance with certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to the issuance of any certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of the certificate. The City shall make necessary inspections and the inspector shall be empowered to issue a stop work order if performance is not in accordance with the issued certificate. 
Sec. 29-120. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Variances. The Historic Preservation Board shall have the power to recommend, with or without conditions, the setback, off-street parking, height, signage, density and floor area ratio requirements of the underlying zoning district of those properties designated by the City Council as historic sites where it is deemed appropriate for the continued preservation of the historic site or historic district. The Historic Preservation Board shall recommend such variances only in conjunction with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The recommendation of the Historic Preservation Board will be forwarded to the City Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(b)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any improvement that does not involve change of design, material, appearance, color, or to prevent ordinary maintenance of landscape features. 
(c)  Modification of Florida Building Code requirements. Structures and buildings listed individually on the Local Register or judged as contributing or significant to the character of a district listed on the Local Register shall be deemed historic and entitled to modified enforcement of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building current edition. 
(d)  Unsafe structures. In the event the City's Building Official determines that any structure within a designated historic site or historic district is unsafe pursuant to the Florida Building Code, as adopted by the City, such official shall immediately notify the Historic Preservation Officer with a copy of any findings. Where reasonably feasible, within applicable laws and regulations, the City shall endeavor to encourage repair of the structure rather than its demolition and shall take into consideration any comments and recommendations by the Historic Preservation Board. The Historic Preservation Board may take appropriate action to encourage preservation of any such structure. 
(e)  Emergency demolitions. In the event the Building Official declares a building in need of emergency demolition to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the Building Official shall order such demolition and proceed with such demolition. The Building Official shall then notify the Historic Preservation Board of the final action. 
(f)  Undue economic hardship. Undue economic hardship may be considered after an application for approval to alter or demolish a structure has been denied by the Historic Preservation Board. In any instance in which there is a claim of undue economic hardship, the owner shall submit, by affidavit, to the Historic Preservation Board within ten (10) days after the public hearing at which an application was denied, the following information: 
(1)  The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased; 
(2)  The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon, according to the two (2) most recent assessments; 
(3)  Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years; 
(4)  Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years; 
(5)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
(6)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any; 
(7)  Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property; 
(8)  Estimates for repair using modern materials and, for comparison, estimates for historical reproduction; 
(9)  For income-producing property: Annual gross income from the property for the previous two (2) years; the assessed value of the land and improvements thereon, according to the two (2) most recent assessments; the annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two (2) years; and the itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years; 
(10)  The Historic Preservation Board may require that an applicant furnish such additional information believed to be relevant in the determination of undue economic hardship and may provide, in appropriate instances, that such additional information be furnished under oath or seal; 
(11)  In the event that any of the required information is not reasonably available to the property owner and cannot be obtained by the property owner, the property owner shall file with the required affidavit a statement of the information that cannot be obtained and the reasons why such information cannot be reasonably obtained. When such unobtainable information concerns required financial information, the property owner will submit a statement describing estimates that will be as accurate as are feasible. 
(g)  Appeals. Within twenty (20) days of the rendition of the written decision of the Historic Preservation Board, an aggrieved party may appeal the decision on a certificate of appropriateness by filing a written notice of appeal, and an appeal fee, if any, as set by the City Council from time to time by resolution, payable to the City. The notice of appeal shall state the decision that is being appealed, the grounds for the appeal, and a brief summary of the relief that is sought and shall be filed with the secretary to the Historic Preservation Board. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing at which time Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the Historic Preservation Board's decision. The decision of the City Council shall constitute final administrative review, and no petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be considered by the City. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City Council from seeking additional information prior to rendering a final decision. The decision of the City Council shall be in writing and a copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Board and the appealing party. 
(h)  Violations. Failure by an owner of record or any other individual or private or public entity to comply with any provisions of this article shall constitute a violation hereof and shall be punishable by penalties for each day the violation continues. Any person who carries out or causes to be carried out any work in violation of this article shall also be required to restore the subject improvement, landscape feature or site, either to its appearance prior to the violation or in accordance with a certificate of appropriateness approved by the Historic Preservation Board. 
(i)  Notification to division of pending amendments. The Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources shall be provided with any proposed amendment of this article for review and comment prior to final adoption. 
Secs. 29-121-29-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 29-131. - Intent. 
    The Economic Opportunity District is an overlay intended to address the transitional need of a new or expanding business within the City. The Economic Opportunity District will permit the temporary use of large, vacant building while permanent facilities are being constructed or remodeled to meet the needs of an economic development project. This district is for the temporary use of a facility, and shall not be construed to permanent establishments of uses approved through this district. 
Sec. 29-132. - Applicability. 
(a)  The following zoning districts shall be permitted in the Economic Opportunity District: 
(1)  Community Commercial (CC). 
(2)  Regional Commercial (RC). 
(3)  Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1). 
Sec. 29-133. - Approval process. 
    The Economic Opportunity District shall be processed as a Conditional Use Permit and follow the procedures established in Chapter 34, Article II, Division 4. 
Sec. 29-134. - Use criteria. 
(a)  The site must contain an existing building at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(b)  The site shall have space that has been vacant for at least one (1) year, or in the case of a structure having multiple units, at least fifty (50) percent of the units must have been vacant for at least one (1) year. 
(c)  The structure shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the property line of residentially zoned property. 
(d)  The traffic trip generation rate of the proposed use shall not exceed the maximum daily trips allowed by the most intense use in the zoning classification in which the property is located. 
(e)  Adequate parking shall be provided for the proposed use. 
(f)  Any outdoor activities, including outdoor storage, shall be consistent with the zoning classification in which the property is located. 
(g)  The proposed use shall generate at least ten (10) new permanent full-time jobs. 
(h)  The conditional use permit shall expire within two (2) years from date of occupancy, with a single one (1) year extension that may be approved by City Council. 
(i)  The proposed activities are required to meet noise, lighting, odor and other performance standards consistent with the performance standards established in Chapter 31 of the Land Development Regulations. 
(j)  All uses shall be conducted so as not to produce hazardous, objectionable or offensive conditions at or beyond the property line boundaries by reason of odor, dust, lint, smoke, cinders, fumes, noise, vibration, heat, glare, solid and liquid wastes, fire or explosion. 
(k)  Other site-specific conditions, including hours of operation and prohibition of uses, may be imposed based upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood as determined by Council. 
Secs. 29-135-29-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL LAND USE STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS IN THE LOW INTENSITY COMMERCIAL FUTURE LAND USE 

Sec. 29-141. - Commercially zoned districts located in low intensity commercial land use categories. 
(a)  In addition to the restrictions and requirements of each zoning district established in the Chapter 28, Zoning, commercially zoned property identified on the adopted Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map as low intensity commercial shall be developed according to the following criteria: 
(1)  Sites zoned community commercial must either be located at the intersection of two (2) collector roadways or have frontage on an arterial or higher classification roadway. Community commercial districts may only be located in a low-intensity or high intensity or DMU land use designation on the Future Land Use Map. 
(2)  Existing conditions on improved parcels within this zoning district not meeting the Community Commercial zoning standards described in Section 28-314 shall be considered to be conforming and shall establish the standards for that parcel if: 
a.  The improvements were completed prior to the adoption of this ordinance [article]. 
b.  The parcel was administratively rezoned in order to implement this ordinance [article]. 
(3)  The following requirements shall be met by retail gasoline sales uses (including full service fuel stations). 
a.  All gasoline pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands and pump island canopies shall conform to setback requirements for the district except that no such pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands or pump island canopies shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any side property line. 
b.  All outdoor display of merchandise is prohibited. 
c.  Off-street loading spaces which are provided for the delivery of materials, merchandise, fuel oils or any similar accessory or product shall be located in such a manner on the site in order to completely separate these off-street loading areas from customer parking areas and access drives and aisles thereto. 
DIVISION 2. - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL SERVICES AND WAREHOUSING (M-1) ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 29-142. - Conditional use permit required for the certain uses in the M-1 zoning district when the land use is not industrial. 
(a)  A conditional use permit is required for the following uses in the M-1 zoning district when the Comprehensive Plan Land Use designation is not industrial: 
(1)  Wholesale or warehouse. (Section 28-222) 
a.  No facility shall contain bulk storage or flammable liquids. 
b.  No outdoor display. 
(2)  Light manufacturing. (Section 28-210) 
a.  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre. 
b.  Manufacturing, assembly and fabrication activities shall be located no closer than seventy-five (75) feet from property lines of residentially zoned properties. 
(3)  Outdoor storage. For purposes of Section 34-77, if the outdoor storage is joined with a required conditional use specified in the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district, the uses shall be deemed one (1) particular use. 
a.  Outdoor storage shall only be permitted as an accessory use with a principal building on the same lot, unless the storage area is secured by appropriate fencing. In all cases, access to the site shall be improved and permitted as determined by the City Manager or designee. 
b.  Outdoor storage shall not be allowed within the minimum building setbacks. 
c.  Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-of-way and from adjacent lots with non-industrial uses or zoning, by buildings and/or an opaque masonry wall, or closed, opaque fence extending at least six (6) feet in height from the ground consistent with Section 30-340. All fences shall be maintained in good condition. A chain link fence shall not meet the visual buffer or screening requirement from adjacent non-industrial uses. An opaque landscape buffer of no less than twenty (20) feet in depth may be utilized in place of a masonry wall or opaque fence. 
d.  Outdoor storage must be kept in a neat and orderly arrangement; materials may not be stacked in piles higher than the screen wall or fence; and additional screening may be required for stored items that are large enough to exceed the height of the fence or wall. 
e.  Outdoor storage shall be located no closer than seventy-five (75) feet from property lines of residentially zoned properties. 
f.  All areas utilized for outdoor storage shall utilize paving or other stabilized surfaces that are designed and constructed to ensure soil or water contamination does not occur. All such areas shall provide stormwater measures consistent with the requirements of Chapter 30, Article III, Division 6 of the Land Development Regulations. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN MIXED USE FUTURE LAND USE 

Sec. 29-143. - Additional requirements for zoning districts consistent with Downtown Mixed-Use land use. 
    In addition to the applicable requirements contained elsewhere in these regulations, all property developed after the date of adoption of this section and zoned Single Family High Density (R-1C), Multifamily High Density (R-3), Tourist (T), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Office Professional (OP), Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) and Public (P), that is located in a Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use as shown on the adopted Future Land Use Map shall comply with the following additional requirements set forth in Section 27-30. 
ARTICLE IX. - HEIGHT OVERLAY 

Sec. 29-160. - Short title. 
    The purpose of this overlay district is to provide regulations and rules that will allow for additional height in a manner which creates more opportunities for in-fill redevelopments and mixed-use development while considering impacts to existing neighborhoods by directing increased building height and intensities to major transportation corridors. The provisions of this article are in addition to, not in lieu of, other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 50-2018, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 29-161. - Overlay districts. 
    Where development is located in other overlay districts (i.e. Community Redevelopment Area, Floodplains District, etc.), development shall also be in accordance with those districts, except as described in Article IX, Height Overlay. 
(Ord. No. 50-2018, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 29-162. - Maximum building height. 
(a)  For properties located within the area encompassed by the Riveredge Drive Small Area Plan, the maximum building height shall be governed by the Small Area Plan. 
(b)  Properties abutting single-family residential uses shall be limited to no more than thirty-five (35) feet higher than the abutting single-family structure. Properties abutting vacant single-family residential zoning district shall be limited to no more than thirty-five (35) feet higher than the maximum height permitted in the single-family zoning district. 
(c)  Multi-family and commercial properties shall be limited to six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet whichever is greater, except as noted in (d) below. 
(d)  Mixed use, which may include a minimum of two (2) uses such as multi-family, commercial and hotel, which provide public access along the entirety of the Indian River Lagoon shoreline and in which the lower floor is developed for commercial use, may increase height to one hundred and fifty feet (150) feet. In buildings in which the lowest floor is parking, commercial uses which are provided on the second floor shall be considered to meet the mixed use requirement. 
(Ord. No. 50-2018, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 29-163. - Transitional height plane. 
    A transitional height plane shall apply to nonresidential or multifamily building that is greater than fifty (50) feet in height. No portion of a nonresidential or multifamily structure shall protrude into a transitional height plane. The transitional height plane shall begin at a point fifty (50) feet above any setback line, and then extend at an upward angle of forty-five (45) degrees over the lot of the nonresidential or multifamily building. Transitional zones shall not be required along property lines that abut publicly owned parks or major water bodies. 

(Ord. No. 50-2018, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 29-164. - Height Overlay District. 
    The map below illustrates the boundaries of the Height District, which is described as follows: 
•  East of U.S. 1, Buffalo Road north to the northern City limits; and 
•  East of U.S. 1, between Cheney Highway and Kennedy Point Park; and 
•  East of U.S. 1, south of the terminus of Riveredge Drive to the southern City limits. 

(Ord. No. 50-2018, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Chapter 30 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 30-1. - Applicability. 
    This chapter applies to any application for development approval, except as otherwise provided. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 30-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  To facilitate flexibility in design while maintaining the safety, health, and welfare of the public, the Administrator may grant administrative exceptions to the following technical design requirements found in the following sections of this chapter provided the standards are met as specified in Section 30-3. 
(b)  Trees and vegetation (preservation and mitigation). 
(1)  Sections 30-32(b) and (d), Criteria for removal, 
(2)  Section 30-33, Relocation or replacement of trees, 
(3)  Section 30-34, Mitigation plan, and 
(4)  Section 30-37, Recreation, open space and agricultural provisions. 
(c)  Topography. 
(1)  Section 30-83, Prohibition. 
(d)  Fences/walls. 
(1)  Section 30-182, Height and location requirements, (c) Commercial uses, (d) Industrial uses, and (e) Planned Industrial Development, and 
(2)  Section 30-183, Interior high security fences. 
(e)  Lighting. 
(1)  Section 30-193(d), Other site lighting requirements, and 
(2)  Section 30-194(b), Planned industrial development lighting standards. 
(f)  Stormwater management. 
(1)  Section 30-203(a) and (d), Same-Exemptions, and 
(2)  Section 30-207, Soil removal and impervious parking in the area of critical concern performance standards. 
(g)  Streets/sidewalks/bikes. 
(1)  Section 30-227(b) and (c), Street entrances, 
(2)  Section 30-238, Road and sidewalk requirements, and 
(3)  Section 30-239, Bicycle facilities. 
(h)  Parking/loading/storage. 
(1)  Section 30-277, Joint use of required parking spaces, and 
(2)  Section 30-281, Excessive parking, 
(i)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Section 30-306, Redevelopment, 
(2)  Section 30-322, Minimum size of planting/grading of planting, 
(3)  Section 30-324, Landscape standards, 
(4)  Section 30-338(b), Permitted uses within the landscape bufferyard, 
(5)  Section 30-362(d), Standards, 
(6)  Section 30-373, Irrigation, and 
(7)  Sections 30-382(a)(6), (7) and (b)(7), Design. 
Sec. 30-3. - Standards for administrative exceptions. 
(a)  No administrative exception shall be granted unless: 
(1)  The Administrator certifies that the proposed exception does not conflict with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; and 
(2)  The applicant demonstrates, through documentation and/or studies based on generally accepted engineering principles, that the proposed exception would not pose a threat to health and safety. 
(3)  In addition to these standards, at the discretion of the Administrator, exceptions may be forwarded to the Design Review Committee (DRC) for review. 
(4)  Additional criteria may apply as specified in Section 30-2, Applicability of this division administrative exceptions. 
Sec. 30-4. - Variances. 
    Where an administrative exception is not granted, or where an administrative exception is not permitted the applicant may seek a variance from the Board of Adjustment (BAA) pursuant to Article III, Division 6 in Chapter 34, Procedures, of the Land Development Regulations (LDR) in the case of subdivision plats; or an appeal or variance pursuant to Article V, Division 1 in Procedures Chapter through Article V, Division 2 in the Procedures Chapter in the case of zoning development approvals. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 30-5. - Operations and maintenance. 
(a)  Common open space areas shall be required in accordance with Article III, Division 2 of this chapter. The open space requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any developments in the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district. Open space provided pursuant to this requirement shall be accessible to all residents of the development. 
(1)  All common open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the master development plan. No conservation area shall be cleared, graded, filled, or subject to construction. 
(2)  The developer shall choose one (1), or a combination of, the following three (3) methods of administering common open space: 
a.  Dedication to the City of the common open space. This method is subject to formal acceptance by the City Council. 
1.  The City of Titusville may, but shall not be required to accept undivided open space provided: 
i.  Such land is accessible to all residents of the City; and 
ii.  There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the transfer of ownership such as title insurance; and 
iii.  The City agrees to and has access to maintain such lands. Where the City accepts dedication of common open space that contains improvements, the City may require the posting of financial security to ensure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements for a term not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The amount of financial security shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. 
iv.  All facilities and improvements within any subdivision, as well as any required off-site improvements required as part of Preliminary and/or Final Plat approval which are required to be dedicated for public use, shall be maintained by the owner of said subdivision in a clean, healthy and non-hazardous condition until such dedication and acceptance by the City has been made. 
b.  Establishment of an association or nonprofit corporation of all individuals or corporations owning property to ensure the maintenance of all common open space, as provided by the Development Order. 
c.  Retention of ownership, control and maintenance of all or a portion of all common open space by the developer, as provided by the Development Order. 
(3)  Land designated as open space will be restricted by appropriate legal instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney as open space perpetually, or for a period of not less than ninety-nine (99) years. Such instrument shall be binding upon the developer, its successors, and assigns, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land. Such instrument shall be in recordable form. 
(4)  All common open space as well as public and recreational facilities, shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures, or the development order will be in default. 
Sec. 30-6. - Ownership standards. 
(a)  Should the developer elect to administer common open space through the association or nonprofit corporation, said organization shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The developer must establish the association or nonprofit corporation prior to the sale of any lots. 
(2)  The developer shall provide a description of the association, including the bylaws and methods for maintaining the common open space. 
(3)  Membership in the association or nonprofit corporation shall be mandatory for all residential property owners with the development and said association or corporation shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders. 
(4)  The association or nonprofit corporation shall manage all common open space and recreational and cultural facilities that are not dedicated to the public, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of said land and any other land not publicly or privately owned, and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land. Should the developer elect an association or non-profit corporation as a method of administering common open space, the title to all residential property owners shall include an undivided fee simple estate in all common open space, as approved by the development order. 
(5)  The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided common open space, enforceable by liens placed by the City of Titusville on the association. 
(6)  The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining and developing such undivided open space. 
(7)  In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of undivided common open space land by the association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land by the City of Titusville, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the development. 
Sec. 30-7. - Maintenance standards. 
(a)  In the event that the association or any successor organization shall, at any time after establishment of a development containing undivided open space, fail to maintain the undivided common open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting forth the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain the undivided common open space in reasonable condition. 
(b)  Failure to adequately maintain the undivided common open space in reasonable condition and condition constitutes a violation of this ordinance. The City is hereby authorized to give notice to the owner of any violation, directing the owner to remedy the same within twenty (20) days. 
Secs. 30-8-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL 
DIVISION 1. - LAND ALTERATIONS 

Sec. 30-21. - General provisions. 
    No use of property or change to same, including clearing, grubbing, grading or excavation, shall be commenced, nor shall buildings or other structures be constructed, erected, moved or altered without first obtaining a permit or approval as set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures. Materials and equipment required for the permitted activity shall not be stored on site for longer than thirty (30) days prior to commencement of the permitted activity. 
(Ord. No. 52-2018, § 1, 11-13-18) 
Secs. 30-22-30-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREES AND VEGETATION (PRESERVATION AND MITIGATION) 

Sec. 30-31. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to improve and protect the environment, character and value of surrounding properties. The provision of landscaping and the retention of natural plant growth reduces erosion, provides natural water retention and filtration, provides shade, buffers incompatible uses, aids in urban temperature control and improves the aesthetic quality of a community, thereby promoting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Sec. 30-32. - Criteria for removal. 
(a)  Trees located in a portion of a lot or parcel in which a building, driveway, sidewalk, retention area or accessory structure will be constructed where redesign to avoid tree removal is not feasible. 
(b)  Trees with their critical root zone in such close proximity to buildings, driveways, sidewalks, or accessory structures that they prevent the property development of the lot or parcel. Sufficient evidence must be provided to the Administrator to substantiate the need for any tree removal. 
(c)  Critical root zone (CRZ) is also called the "tree protection zone" is often defined as an imaginary circle on the ground that corresponds with the "dripline" of the tree. However, the dripline is very irregular and misleading, so the trunk diameter is referred to. To determine a CRZ: 
(1)  Measure tree diameter four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade. 
(2)  Multiply this by twelve (12) inches. 
(3)  The calculation gives the diameter of the CRZ centered on the tree. For example, a twenty-five-inch diameter tree would have a twenty-five-foot diameter CRZ. 
(d)  Trees, which are dead, diseased or weakened by age, storms, fire or other injuries, which pose a threat to the welfare of the general public. The permit fee will be waived in these cases. 
(e)  If after consideration of the above criteria, tree removal cannot be avoided, the Administrator is authorized to grant reduction to the setback regulations applicable, for all non-single-family residential uses, up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required setback in order to avoid the removal of the protected tree. However, no setback shall be reduced to less than the required fire separation for structures of the proposed. 
Sec. 30-33. - Relocation or replacement of trees. 
(a)  As a condition of granting a permit, the applicant may be required to relocate trees being removed or replace the tree being removed with a tree of similar type elsewhere on the site which shall be a minimum of one (1) inch caliper as measured at a height of four and one-half (41/2) feet above ground (dbh) provided the site can reasonably support the relocation or replacement as determined by the Administrator. 
(b)  For every protected tree, reasonable relocation includes techniques such as root pruning, tree spades and other similar techniques. Relocation techniques shall be reviewed and approved by the City prior to being used for any relocation of trees on the property. 
(c)  All relocation areas shall be permanently protected in a recorded plat condition, or declaration of covenants recorded in the official records of the City of Titusville, or with sufficient protective language, as noted on the approved landscape plan, which shall be noted as a condition of approval, in property records maintained by the City of Titusville. 
Sec. 30-34. - Mitigation Plan. 
(a)  As a condition of granting a permit, the applicant is required to prepare a Mitigation Plan for all major trees (measuring twenty (20) inches dbh or more) which are designated for removal. Said plan shall provide for a two-to-one replacement based on tree caliper (i.e. if a twenty-two-inch dbh tree is being removed a total of forty-four (44) inches dbh shall be replanted on the site). Alternatively, the applicant may in lieu of replanting preserve native vegetation on the site consisting of at least of one hundred (100) square feet per tree caliper-inch lost. The preservation of native vegetation shall be in addition to any required landscaping or preservation required by any other regulation. As a last resort for sites which cannot accommodate the plantings required by the Mitigation Plan (as determined by the Administrator), the applicant shall contribute to the City's Public Landscaping Trust Fund an amount equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per net caliper-inch lost. This provision can be reduced to seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per a net caliper-inch lost when the trees are logged, in lieu of burning. 
(b)  When mitigation trees are removed to address requirements established by floodplain compensatory storage regulations (Section 30-103(f)(3)), the mitigation criteria for that portion of the development shall be enforced as shown below: 
(1)  The replacement ratio shall be one-to-one replacement based on tree caliper. 
(2)  The contribution to the City's Public Landscape Trust Fund shall be an amount equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per net caliper-inch lost. 
(c)  The provision of payment into the City's Public Landscaping Trust Fund shall not be eligible for a variance before the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(d)  Appeals. Appeals of the Administrator's determination as to the practicality of installing required mitigation trees shall be processed as described in Section 34-248(b). If the appeal is granted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the applicant shall make the required payment into the City's Public Landscaping Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 2, 2-28-17) 
Sec. 30-35. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Emergency conditions. The City Manager or his designated representative may waive all or part of these requirements in the event of natural disaster such as hurricanes, tornados, floods, or hard freezes. 
(b)  Licensed plant and tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article when trees planted or growing on the premises of said licensee are so planted and growing for the sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business. 
(c)  Persons donating trees to a public body for transplanting on public property shall be exempt from the payment of fees for obtaining the required permit when said trees are accepted by the public body. 
(d)  Nuisance trees shall be removed and a permit is not required. A list of nuisance trees can be found Section 2.3 of the Tree Protection/Removal of the Environmental Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-36. - Tree protection during construction. 
    Measures for the protection of trees during construction shall adhere to the provisions set forth in Section 2.5, Tree Protection during Construction of the Environmental Protection Technical Design Manual. 
Sec. 30-37. - Recreation, open space and agricultural provisions. 
(a)  For all land use that provides for open space as part of an active recreational use (such as golf courses and field sports), the requirements for mitigation set forth in Section 30-34, Mitigation may be reduced by fifty (50) percent as determined by the Administrator. 
(b)  Lands with an agricultural tax exemption and that are engaged in a commercial agricultural operation may also receive a fifty-percent reduction to the requirements of Section 30-34, Mitigation as determined by the Administrator. 
Sec. 30-38. - Protection of habitat of endangered and threatened species. 
(a)  The City shall recognize and promote the protection of threatened and endangered species identified by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission (FGFWFC) and the Florida Department of Natural Resources (FDNC), as most recently amended. Development shall adhere to the regulations established in Sec. 2.6 of the City's Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-39. - Tree removal, permit required. 
(a)  No person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging any tree with a trunk diameter of four (4) inches or more, said diameter being measured four and one-half (41/2) feet above ground level. 
(b)  Diameter breast height (DBH) is the measurement of the tree's diameter made by tree professionals, taken at breast or chest height. This diameter is measured over the outside bark using a diameter tape at the point "breast height." Breast height is specifically defined as a point around the trunk at four and one-half (4.5) feet (1.37 meters in metric using countries) above the forest floor on the uphill side of the tree. For the purposes of determining breast height, the forest floor includes the duff layer that may be present, but does not include unincorporated woody debris that may rise above the ground line. 
(c)  A tree removal permit shall not be required from an owner of an existing single-family residential dwelling. For the purposes of tree removal, a single-family residence shall be considered existing one (1) year after issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Common areas and tracts within a single-family development shall not be exempt from permit requirement for removal of trees. 
Sec. 30-40. - Tree survey required before permit. 
    Before obtaining a clearing and grubbing permit, building permit, preliminary plat approval or site plan approval, in addition to other requirements set out in these regulations all applicants shall submit a survey provided by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect or certified nursery professional detailing the following: 
(a)  The location of trees six (6) inches or more in trunk diameter; 
(b)  Designation of trees proposed to be removed, retained or replaced due to buildings, roads, sidewalks, manmade structures or improvements; 
(c)  Designation of such trees considered diseased or hazardous to buildings, pavement, utilities or other proposed improvements; and 
(d)  Designation of trees which may be adversely affected by proposed grade changes. 
(e)  For subdivisions, and individual lots greater than five (5) acres, the developer shall provide the following: 
(1)  An aerial photograph of the subject property which indicates where the streets and utilities are planned and which trees are proposed to be removed. 
(2)  Written evaluation of the number of trees to be removed and any reasons for the proposed layout. All trees twelve (12) inches dbh and greater, proposed to be removed shall be flagged or painted in the field. 
(3)  The location of all mitigation size trees as located by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect or certified nursery professional. 
(4)  The location of trees six (6) inches or greater in buffer areas or twenty (20) feet from property lines. 
(5)  An explanation of how trees are to be protected during site clearing activities. 
(6)  Whenever possible, shredding, chipping and/or off-site wood logging is desirable alternative to burning. In electing this option, a twenty-five (25) percent credit will be given towards required tree mitigation and/or contribution to the City's Public Landscaping Trust Fund. 
(7)  The developer agrees to work with staff and adjust the proposed layout to preserve more trees and specifically to preserve mitigation size trees. 
Secs. 30-41-30-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 30-51. - Intent. 
    This section [division] provides flexible regulations that encourages for the preservation of wetland areas. 
Sec. 30-52. - Applicability. 
    This section [division] applies to any subdivision plat or site plan application. 
Sec. 30-53. - Generally. 
    Applications for subdivision or site plan approval shall adhere to regulations set forth by the Wetlands and Conservation Overlay in Chapter 29, the Area of Critical Concern Overlay in Chapter 29, and any state regulations. 
Secs. 30-54-30-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SHORELINE PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 18-2018, adopted Mar. 27, 2018, changed the title of Div. 4 from Riparian buffer to Shoreline protection. 

Sec. 30-61. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this division to improve the quality of Class II and Class III surface waters surrounding and within the City, minimize shoreline erosion, manage stormwater runoff, and protect and enhance the natural functions of these waters. It is also the intent of this division to apply the standards set out in this division for development along Class II and III waters as defined by the Florida Administrative Code Rule Number 62-302, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 3, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-62. - Administration. 
    This section applies to any development approval including, but not limited to, a subdivision plat, building permit, or site plan along the Indian River Lagoon and other Class II and Class III waters within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Titusville. The Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of this division. The Administrator shall be responsible for the review of all applications, in addition to providing the administrative decisions which pertain to this division. Any permit may be suspended by the Administrator for noncompliance by the permittee with the terms of the permit. No building permits for construction will be issued on newly created land through dredge and fill action until the fill area and bulkhead construction is inspected and approved by the Administrator. Illustrations and specific technical specifications for the following sections will be included in Section 7, Stormwater Management Technical Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 4, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 18-2018, adopted Mar. 27, 2018, amended § 30-62 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 30-62 pertained to applicability and derived from the original codification. 
Sec. 30-63. - Shoreline protection setbacks. 
(a)  Setbacks for properties located within the Titusville Shoreline Area Overlay (TSA) and developed prior to the effective date of this ordinance [division] shall adhere to the minimum building setbacks set forth per the Shoreline Protection Setbacks Table [Section 30-63(c)] of this chapter and per Chapter 29, Special Districts and Overlays, Section 29-25, Minimum building setback from the mean annual flood line of the Indian River Lagoon. 
(b)  All other setbacks not regulated by the Titusville Shoreline Area Overlay shall adhere to the standards set forth in the Shoreline Protection Setbacks Table [Section 30-62(c)] and this article. 
(c)  Shoreline protection setbacks. 
Table 30-1 Shoreline Protection Setbacks Zoning District Shoreline Protection Setbacks Max Impervious Coverage of Shoreline Setback Area Water Class Lots within the Titusville Shoreline Overlay (TSA) developed with a principal use prior to the effective date of this ordinance [division] Shoreline Mixed-Use Zoning (SMU) Less than 100 ft. lot depth = 25 ft. 
100-150 ft. lot depth = 35 ft. 
Greater than 150 ft. = 50 ft. 35% II and III All other zoning districts in the TSA 20 ft. unless more restrictive in the applicable underlying zoning district Vacant lots within the TSA and all other areas not regulated by the Shoreline Overlay All zoning districts 50 ft. 30% II 25 ft. III  
(d)  In addition to the exemptions specified in Section 30-67, Exemptions of this article. Land uses and/or structures permitted within the shoreline setback area include: 
(1)  Bulkheads and seawalls (See Section 30-64, Alterations in the shoreline protection setbacks and surface water protection permit). 
(2)  Piers, wharves and docks. 
(3)  Boathouses. 
(4)  Sidewalks, walkways and boardwalks. 
(5)  Boat launching facilities. 
(6)  Tennis courts, swimming pools and similar recreational uses. 
(e)  Land uses or structures prohibited within the shoreline setback area include: 
(1)  Parking facilities. 
(2)  Artificial grass or turf. 
(3)  Garages or carports. 
(4)  Driveways. 
(5)  All uses or structures which would cover more than maximum impervious coverage of the shoreline setback area. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 5, 3-27-18) 
Editor's note- Sec. 5 of Ord. No. 18-2018, adopted Mar. 27, 2018, amended § 30-63 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 30-63 pertained to buffers/setbacks, and derived from the original codification. 
Sec. 30-64. - Alterations in the shoreline protection setbacks and surface water protection permit. 
(a)  Any alteration within the shoreline protection setback which changes the existing topography, shoreline, or vegetation shall be reviewed and/or permitted by the City and necessary authorities unless exempt pursuant to Section 30-68, Exemptions. The storage, placement or depositing of any materials prior to receiving all required approvals is prohibited. Required as a condition of approval shall be the issuance or approval of any necessary floodplain development permit. A shoreline protection setback is defined as the area measured from the mean annual flood line extending across the entire width of the lot to the principal building line. 
(b)  Any alteration as allowed under this division, including redevelopment, within the shoreline protection setback shall require stormwater management so as not to degrade the water quality of the receiving water body. Properties shall, through the use of swales, berms, native vegetation, or other appropriate methods: convey and detain stormwater runoff prior to discharge to the surface water. 
(1)  For activities in the shoreline protection setback, stormwater management shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The provision of a stormwater system designed, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Florida, which is consistent with Chapter 62-302 F.A.C., as amended, and is capable of preventing the first inch of runoff from a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm, from all impervious surfaces that drain to the property's shoreline from entering surface waters; or 
b.  A densely planted shoreline of viable native vegetation, a minimum of ten (10) feet in width for the entire length of the shoreline, with the exception that a maximum five-foot length of shoreline remain unplanted with the intent to maintain access to the waterbody. 
(2)  With the exception of activities that are exempt in accordance with Section 30-65, all requirements for stormwater management shall be reviewed, approved, and inspected by the City, as necessary. 
(3)  All discharges into surface waters shall not degrade existing water quality below existing conditions, or those outlined in Chapter 62-302, F.A.C., as amended, whichever provides for better water quality. 
(4)  All stormwater management systems shall be maintained for functionality in perpetuity by the property owner. 
(5)  Stormwater management retrofitting in accordance with this subsection, shall be required for all back lot drainage at the time of the permitted activity. 
(6)  Stormwater management systems shall demonstrate avoidance and minimization of impacts to native vegetation. 
(7)  The Administrator may consider alternative stormwater management systems that utilize established low impact development best management practices. 
(c)  Shoreline stabilization and bulkhead projects completed under a city, and state permit as applicable, may be located within the shoreline protection setback. Any shoreline project involving bulkheads, revetments, or retaining walls shall be implemented by a marine contractor licensed in the State of Florida, or by a person recognized by the Administrator as qualified in construction in the marine environment. Alternatively, projects may be completed by a property owner/builder provided that the project is designed, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Florida. Shoreline stabilization projects completed primarily by means of vegetation may be implemented by a person recognized by the Administrator as qualified in the evaluation of environmental systems and vegetative resources, such as a biologist, environmental scientist, or landscaping professional. 
(d)  All improvements, mitigations and special conditions approved or set forth by this division shall be required to be installed, constructed and maintained in a viable, approved, functional working order. 
(e)  All applications for bulkheads and reinforced rock revetments shall meet the following minimum criteria, as applicable: 
(1)  For lots along Class II and Class III waters, the following shall apply: 
a.  New bulkheads shall be prohibited. 
b.  For those properties on the shoreline immediately between two (2) adjacent existing bulkheads, a reinforced rock revetment may be permitted, provided that all additional required permits and reviews from appropriate agencies have been obtained. All permitted structures shall be subject to the additional requirements of this division. When feasible, the bulkhead portion of the structure shall be located above the mean annual flood line. 
c.  The permitted system design shall provide reasonable assurance that the erosion of the abutting properties will not be accelerated by the establishment of the applicant's bulkhead. 
d.  The repair and replacement of legally existing bulkheads as of the effective date of this ordinance [division] shall be allowable in accordance with the "repair and replacement of bulkheads" standards set forth in subsection 30-64(e)(2) of this section. 
e.  Stormwater management shall be provided in accordance with Section 30-63(b). 
f.  Applications for permits along the shoreline shall be submitted for a City of Titusville Surface Water permit per the Titusville Procedures Manual. The applicant shall also obtain permits from all applicable state and federal agencies prior to submittal of the City of Titusville Surface Water permit. 
(2)  The repair and replacement of legally existing bulkheads may be permitted in accordance with the following: 
a.  If an existing bulkhead cannot be removed due to safety, structural, or other environmental concerns, the waterward extension of the new bulkhead, where practicable, shall meet the least waterward extension of these criteria: 
1.  Shall not exceed a maximum of eighteen (18) inches from the existing waterward bulkhead face, except where otherwise permitted by Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
2.  Shall be located parallel and in line with adjacent existing and legally permitted bulkheads. 
b.  Stormwater management shall be provided in accordance with "alterations" standards of subsection 30-64(b) of this section. 
(f)  For shorelines where bulkheads are prohibited, shoreline stabilization shall be allowed to protect structures and real property from both gradual and accelerated erosion. A city surface water permit for shoreline stabilization shall be obtained prior to any stabilization activities. 
(1)  Living shorelines shall be a preferred shoreline stabilization technique. A living shoreline is defined as an erosion management technique, such as the strategic placement of plants, stone, sand, and other structural and organic materials, that is used primarily in areas with low to moderate wave energy, and is designed to mimic natural coastal processes. 
(2)  Riprap material, rock revetments, pervious interlocking brick systems, filter mats, vegetation, and other allowable methods may be used as stabilization methods within the shoreline protection setback. The following standards shall be implemented unless the state provides alternative project-specific construction criteria: 
a.  Material shall be natural or clean (free from reinforcing rods and other debris). 
b.  Rock size shall be one (1) to three (3) feet in diameter. 
c.  Slope shall be no steeper than two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. 
d.  Filter fabric shall be installed. 
e.  Navigation shall not be impeded. 
(3)  If a revetment restoration or replacement project meets all of the following criteria, the City shall approve the required stormwater management system under an environmental review; however, a city surface water permit shall not be required when one (1) of the following applies: 
a.  A St. Johns River Water Management District or Florida Department of Environmental Protection permit or exemption has been issued. 
b.  No filling can occur except in the actual restoration of the revetment. 
c.  The project will not require wetland impacts or the removal of native vegetation. 
d.  No construction shall be undertaken without necessary ownership or leasehold interest, especially where private and public ownership boundaries have changed as a result of natural occurrences such as accretion, reliction, and natural erosion. 
e.  This exemption shall be limited to functioning revetments. 
(g)  For any proposed shoreline stabilization, the applicant must provide plans, test results or other professionally accepted information that affirmatively demonstrates that any proposed shoreline stabilization project will not: 
(1)  Adversely impact water quality. 
(2)  Result in the loss of shoreline and aquatic vegetation. 
(3)  Adversely affect adjacent properties. 
(4)  Increase the waterward extension of the existing shoreline, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(5)  Adversely affect the flow of water or create a navigational hazard. 
(h)  The City Manager may temporarily suspend the provisions of this section if strict compliance with the provisions would in any way prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action required to prevent material harm to or destruction of real or personal property in coping with any local emergency or natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 6, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-65. - Public sanitary sewer and onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems. 
(a)  For shoreline lots platted or established by deed on the official record books of the county after the effective date of this ordinance [division], with or without existing septic tank and drainfield systems, and where a public sanitary utility is available to the property as defined herein, building sewers shall connect to the public sanitary utility via gravity lateral or private lift station. 
(1)  "Public sanitary utility" is defined in Section 30-63 as any public gravity sewer or force main. 
(2)  "Available" is defined in Section 30-63 as where any public easement or right-of-way that abuts any property line of the subject lot and contains a public sanitary utility. 
(b)  For shoreline lots platted or established by deed on the official record books of the County after the effective date of this ordinance [division], and where a public sanitary utility is not available to the property as defined herein, onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from the mean annual flood line, except where a variance has been granted by the state, and there is insufficient room to increase the setback. Advanced wastewater treatment or advanced secondary treatment shall be required for any onsite sewage treatment and disposal system within one hundred (100) feet of the shoreline. 
(c)  For shoreline lots with no existing onsite sewage treatment and disposal system platted or established by deed on the official record books of the County before the effective date of this ordinance [division], and where a public sanitary utility is not available to the property as defined herein, onsite sewage treatment and disposal system shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from the mean annual flood line. In those cases where there is insufficient lot depth, the onsite sewage treatment and disposal system shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the mean annual flood line, except where a variance has been granted by the state, and there is insufficient room to increase the setback. Advanced wastewater treatment or advanced secondary treatment shall be required for any onsite sewage treatment and disposal system within one hundred (100) feet of the shoreline. 
(d)  For shoreline lots platted or established by deed on the official record books of the County prior to the effective date of this ordinance [division], with existing septic tank and drainfield systems, and where a public sanitary utility is available to the property as defined herein, property owners are encouraged to connect building sewers to the public sanitary utility via gravity lateral or private lift station. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 7, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-66. - Nonconforming impervious areas. 
(a)  For structures and impervious areas that existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance [division], and exceed the allowable impervious impact criteria established herein, remodeling and other types of development which do not increase the amount of impervious surfaces within or threaten the integrity of the shoreline protection setback will be allowed. Proposed redevelopment may occur in the existing vertical envelope or may be relocated within the shoreline protection setback to achieve a net impact reduction. At a minimum, staff will assess the following mitigating factors: 
(1)  The applicant shall not increase the amount of impervious surfaces within the shoreline protection setback, regardless of location within the setback. 
(2)  New impervious areas shall be located parallel with, or landward of, the waterward-most pre-existing impervious areas. 
(3)  Stormwater management in accordance with Section 30-64, Alterations in the shoreline protection setbacks and surface water protection permit. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 8, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-67. - Class II and Class III waters and Surface Water Protection Plan. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to development in and adjacent to Class II and Class III waters: 
(1)  A shoreline protection setback per Section 30-63(c), Table 30-1 shall be established extending landward from the mean annual flood line. 
(2)  Except as allowable per subsection (a)(6) below, principal structures shall not be allowed within the shoreline setback area. Alteration or construction of accessory structures is allowable within the shoreline setback provided that: 
a.  Stormwater management is provided in accordance with Section 30-64, Alterations in the shoreline protection setbacks and surface water protection permit; and 
b.  Impervious areas within the required shoreline setback area do not exceed the percent specified in Section 30-63(c), Table 30-1, "Shoreline protection setbacks" of this division; and 
c.  Alteration occurs in accordance with all other applicable federal, state, and local regulations. Alteration or construction other than that which is allowed under this division shall be prohibited, unless it is shown to be in the public interest and does not adversely impact water quality and natural. 
(3)  All alteration shall demonstrate avoidance and minimization of shoreline protection setback impacts, including the location of the alteration within the most landward portion of the setback, as practicable. The remainder of the shoreline protection setback shall be maintained in unaltered vegetation, except for non-native invasive plants. Approved shoreline stabilization systems are not subject to the provisions of this section. This shall not preclude mitigation projects, the planting of native vegetation, or the development described in applicable sections of this division within the shoreline setback areas. 
(4)  For projects or parcels with mangroves, mangrove alteration shall be in compliance with applicable federal and state regulations. 
(5)  For residential lots platted or established by deed on the official record books of the County prior to the effective date of this ordinance [division], a principal structure may be built within the shoreline protection setback, as indicted below, only if it can be shown that there is insufficient lot depth to allow the development of a principal structure as defined by the existing zoning classification of the property, and if all other alternatives and remedies are not applicable. 
a.  Within Class II waters, principal structures may be built within the landward twenty-five (25) feet of the shoreline protection setback, as measure from the mean annual flood line, if all other requirements of this division are met. 
b.  Within Class III waters, principal structures may be built within the landward ten (10) feet of the shoreline protection setback, as measured by the mean annual flood line, if all other requirements of this division are met. 
c.  The total amount of impervious area within the required shoreline setback area shall not exceed the percent set forth in Section 30-63(c), Table 30-1 in this division. 
[(6)  Reserved.] 
(7)  A surface water protection plan must be submitted to and approved prior to the establishment of structures or uses described herein. The surface water protection plan must include: 
a.  A survey of the property, signed and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state, locating the mean annual flood line. Within Class III waters, principal structures may be built within the landward ten (10) feet of the shoreline protection setback, as measured by the mean annual flood line, if all other requirements of this division are met. 
b.  A sketch, drawn to scale, on the survey indicating the location and building dimensions of the structures, and any proposed alteration of the shoreline protection setback. 
c.  A description of the type of structures proposed and the construction materials to be used. 
d.  A description of how stormwater management shall be provided in accordance with this article. 
(8)  Dredging and filling shall not be permitted in or connected to Class II waters, Outstanding Florida Waters, Aquatic Preserves, and conditionally approved Class III shellfish harvesting waters unless: 
a.  The activity is approved maintenance dredging on existing public navigational channels, or 
b.  Where dredging is in the public interest by improving the water quality by removing accumulated silt or improving circulation, or 
c.  For maintenance of existing structures and utility crossings, or 
d.  For the construction of bulkheads or other shoreline stabilization methods as allowed by this division. 
(9)  Discharges into Class II waters, Outstanding Florida Waters, Aquatic Preserves, and conditionally approved Class III shellfish harvesting waters shall not degrade existing water quality below existing conditions, or those standards outlined in Chapter 62-302, F.A.C., as amended, for Class II water bodies, whichever provides for better water quality. 
(10)  Discharges into Class III waters shall not degrade existing water quality below existing conditions, or those standards outlined in Chapter 62-302. F.A.C., as amended, for Class III water bodies, whichever provides better water quality. 
(11)  Within the shoreline protection setback, the storage of fertilizers, pesticides, hazardous materials or other pollutants which may run off into surface waters shall be prohibited unless the storage system is an above ground vehicular fuel system meeting the requirements of Chapter 62-762 F.A.C., as amended. The release of petroleum or hazardous materials into Class II and III waters and designated stormwater systems shall be prohibited as referenced in the Code of Ordinances Chapter 16, Solid Waste and Section 7, Stormwater Management Technical Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 9, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-68. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Alterations within the shoreline protection setback set forth in subsections (1) through (3) below shall be exempt from a surface water permit under this division, provided that the conditions set forth in subsection (4) below are met: 
(1)  The construction of up to two hundred fifty (250) square feet of impervious surfaces including, but not limited, to decks, paver stones, and walkways. Impervious areas within the required shoreline setback area shall not exceed the percent set forth in Section 30-63(c), Table 30-1 in this division. Impervious surfaces shall not convey drainage to the shoreline. 
(2)  The construction of elevated walkways, not to exceed five (5) feet in width. 
(3)  The removal of non-native invasive plants. 
(4)  Alterations identified in subsections (1) through (3) of this section shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Stormwater management is provided in accordance Section 30-64, Alterations in the shoreline protection setbacks and surface water protection permit; and 
b.  The alteration does not necessitate the removal of protected native vegetation; 
c.  The alteration does not impact wetlands; and 
d.  Applicants shall be subject to and responsible for obtaining all additional necessary federal, state, local, and building permits, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 10, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-69. - Density/submerged lands. 
(a)  Submerged lands, regardless of ownership, shall not be included in any calculations of allowable residential density within any zoning district adjacent to the shoreline. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 11, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BULKHEAD/DREDGE AND FILL PERMITS 

Sec. 30-71. - Minimum building setback from the mean annual flood line of the Indian River. 
(a)  Land uses and/or structures prohibited within the shoreline setback area: 
(1)  Parking facilities. 
(2)  Artificial grass or turf. 
(3)  Garages or carports. 
(4)  Driveways. 
(5)  Other uses or structures which would cover more than the maximum impervious coverage of the required shoreline setback area established in Section 30-63, Shoreline protection setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018, § 12, 3-17-18) 
Sec. 30-72. - Bulkhead line. 
    All bulkhead lines heretofore established pursuant to former Section 25A-9 of the original 1964 Code are hereby established at the line of mean high water or ordinary high water. There shall be no filling waterward of the line of mean high water or ordinary high water except upon compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws. 
Sec. 30-73. - Fill restricted; permits required. 
    From and after the effective date of this chapter, no fill or filling or other creation or extension of land shall be made or maintained on the channel side of the above-described line, and no filling or dredging or similar activity shall be made on the landward side of said line without formal written approval from the necessary authorities. 
Sec. 30-74. - Maintenance requirements of upland property owner. 
    The owner of upland property shall be required to maintain at his expense the seawall abutting his property. All bulkheads, docks, piers and retaining walls along the shoreline or in the water body shall be properly maintained in a good state of repair by the owner of the property abutting such structures, so that there is no evidence of incipient failing, cracking, panel separation, or loss of fill into the water area. 
Sec. 30-75. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the extension of land or placing of any fill on the channel or seaward side of the bulkhead line described in this section, nor beyond any bulkhead line now or hereafter established by the City of Titusville, the County, the State of Florida, the United States of America, or any of their authorized agencies. 
(b)  Any person receiving a permit shall, in the constructing of islands or adding to or extending the existing lands within the said bulkhead line, comply and adhere to the provisions as set forth in the approved application. Any deviation from the provisions of the application shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided herein. 
Sec. 30-76. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person, firm or corporation which violates this chapter or any provision hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VI, Enforcement of these Land Development Regulations. 
Secs. 30-77-30-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TOPOGRAPHY 

Sec. 30-81. - Intent. 
    To protect the natural topography in Titusville and thereby preserve the land's ability to perform the function of recharging the groundwater aquifer, and to prevent erosion, sedimentation, flooding, water pollution and other harmful effects to the general population of the City of Titusville. 
Sec. 30-82. - Conflict. 
    Nothing contained in this article is intended to supersede, modify, alter or in any way affect the provisions, requirements and prohibitions contained in Article III. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions, requirements or prohibitions set forth in Article III, the provisions, requirements and prohibitions of Article III shall prevail. 
Sec. 30-83. - Prohibition. 
    No person, firm or other entity may cut, fill, grade or in any other manner alter the natural topography within the corporate limits of the City of Titusville unless such activity has been approved as a part of a valid development order issued pursuant to these regulations. Materials and equipment required for the permitted activity shall not be stored on site for longer than thirty (30) days prior to commencement of the permitted activity. 
    In the case of single-family lots, alteration (i.e. ponds, retention areas, etc.) shall be subject to review and permitting by the Administrator. Violations of this section shall be processed through Section 34-320, Initiation of actions (Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VI, Enforcement) of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 52-2018, § 2, 11-13-18) 
Secs. 30-84-30-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FLOOD MANAGEMENT 
Subdivision 1. - Administration 

Sec. 30-91. - General. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Titusville, hereinafter referred to as "this division." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this division shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including, but not limited to, the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(c)  Intent. The purposes of this division and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(d)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This division is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this division and the Florida Building Code, as amended by the City, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this division. 
(f)  Disclaimer of liability. This division shall not create liability on the part of City Council of the City of Titusville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Sec. 30-92. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Areas to which this division applies. This division shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Titusville, as established in Section 30-92(c) of this division. 
(c)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Brevard County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated March 17, 2014, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this division and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Community Development Department, 555 South Washington Avenue, Titusville, FL. 
(1)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Section 30-95 of this division the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the City indicates that ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this division and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
b.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(d)  Other laws. The provisions of this division shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This division supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including, but not limited to, land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This division shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this division. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
Sec. 30-93. - Duties and powers of the Floodplain Administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The City Engineer is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  General. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this ordinance consistent with the intent and purpose of this division and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this division without the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 30-97, Variances, of this ordinance. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the City, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this division; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this division is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this division. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement"; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this division is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 30-97 of this division. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this division. 
(g)  Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in Section 30-96 of this division for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the Building Official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to Section 30-93(d) of this division; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six (6) months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this division and the Florida Building Code and this division to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Titusville are modified. 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this division and the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this division; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood-carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this ordinance and the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at City Hall, 555 South Washington Avenue, Community Development Department. 
Sec. 30-94. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this division for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this ordinance: 
a.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
b.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in Section 604.50, Florida Statutes. 
c.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
d.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
e.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in Section 366.02, Florida Statutes, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
f.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
g.  Family mausoleums not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
h.  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
i.  Structures identified in Section 553.73(10)(k), Florida Statutes, are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(c)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the City. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in Section 30-94 of this division. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(d)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this division shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this division, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of the City. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(e)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this division or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of the City. 
(g)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The St. Johns River Water Management District; Section 373.036, Florida Statutes. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; Section 381.0065, Florida Statutes and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the joint coastal permit; Section 161.055, Florida Statutes. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
Sec. 30-95. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this division shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with Section 30-95(c)(2) or (3) of this division. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with Section 30-95(c)(1) of this division. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation, including any required compensatory storage. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
(b)  The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this division but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this division. 
(c)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than three (3). 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(d)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 30-95(e) of this division and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the City. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 30-95(e) of this division. 
(e)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
Sec. 30-96. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(1)  Development other than buildings and structures. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
a.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with Section 30-95 of this division, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
b.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in Section 30-96(a)(2) of this division. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. The Building Official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Building Official. 
Sec. 30-97. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  General. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this ordinance. Pursuant to Section 553.73(5), Florida Statutes, the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(b)  Appeals. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision of Board of Adjustments and Appeals may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in Section 30-97(f) of this division, the conditions of issuance set forth in Section 30-97(g) of this ordinance, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this division. 
(1)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in Section 30-95(d) of this division. 
(d)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11, Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of Section 30-97(c)(1), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(f)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the City; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(g)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this ordinance or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the Board of Adjustments and Appeals that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
Sec. 30-98. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this division that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this division, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this division or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this division and that is determined to be a violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and the City of Titusville's Land Development Regulations, Section 27-5. 
Subdivision 2. - Definitions 

Sec. 30-99. - Definitions-General. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this division, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(b)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
Sec. 30-100. - Definitions. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled "Flood Resistant Design and Construction" that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Compensatory storage. The excavation within a flood hazard area of equivalent volume as any proposed fill for the purpose of balancing the effects of proposed fill on the floodplain (no net loss of floodplain storage volume). 
    Critical facility. Hospitals, nursing homes, police stations, fire stations, and emergency operation centers that are needed for flood response activities before, during, or after a flood; and public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after a flood; and structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. The term includes facilities that are assigned Risk Category III and Risk Category IV pursuant to the Florida Building Code, Building. 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two (2) feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 25, 1975. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 25, 1975. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodplain Administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the City, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this division. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11, Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the City's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of forty-five (45) square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than twelve (12) persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this ordinance, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 25, 1975, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 25, 1975. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in Section 320.01, Florida Statutes.] 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See in Section 320.01, Florida Statutes.] 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the five-year period begins on the date of issuance of a permit for the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to February 27, 1996. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the Building Official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, or the flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this ordinance or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
Subdivision 3. - Flood-Resistant Development 

Sec. 30-101. - Buildings and structures. 
    Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to Section 30-94(b)(1) of this division, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of Section 30-107 of this division. 
Sec. 30-102. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with Section 30-95(c)(1) of this ordinance; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of Section 30-103 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 30-103. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; and 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO; adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Density and Open Space Limitations. 
(1)  Density in flood hazard areas shall be no greater than one (1) dwelling unit per acre for residential zoning categories. For special zoning categories the density allowed in the underlying zoning district would apply. 
a.  In cases where uplands are adjacent to floodplains on a single parcel of land or on property under the same ownership, the density restriction in Section 30-103(1) above, would only be applicable to the floodplain portion of the site. Any development of that portion of the site which is uplands shall include transfer of development rights from the floodplain. In any event, the uplands site can only accept as many dwelling units as the lot and building requirements of the underlying zoning category would allow plus the transferred density allowed in the Wetlands and Conservation Overlay. 
(2)  Flood hazard area, including areas used as part of a stormwater management system, may be credited [up to fifty (50) percent] as part of the required open space of a development if it is utilized for passive recreation, nature observation or other accessible recreational activities. 
(c)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. However, installations of new septic systems are serving new or substantially improved structures are prohibited in special flood hazard areas. 
(d)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(e)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including, but not limited to, site improvements, and land-disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in Section 30-95(d)(1) of this division demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(f)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this division. 
(1)  Fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. 
(2)  If intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(3)  Compensatory storage shall be provided above the normal high groundwater table elevation and below the base flood elevation; alternatively, site specific data shall be provided to demonstrate the proposed fill will not raise the base flood elevation on adjacent or downstream properties, such data shall be derived from technical information that is submitted to and subject to the approval of the City, such applicability of this provision shall be determined by the City Engineer. 
Sec. 30-104. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to section 320.8249, F.S., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this division. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with Section 30-104(d)(1) or 30-104(d)(2) of this division, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of Section 30-104(d)(2) of this division, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, 
shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to Section 30-104(d)(1) of this division, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(e)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
(f)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
Sec. 30-105. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(a)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(b)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in Section 30-105(a) of this division for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Section 30-104 of this division for manufactured homes. 
Sec. 30-106. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of Section 30-106(c) of this division shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
Sec. 30-107. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this ordinance or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of Section 30-103(e) of this division if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of Section 30-103(e)of this division. 
(c)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 30-103(e) of this division. 
(d)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one (1) side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 30-103(e) of this division. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of Section 30-95(d)(3) of this division. 
Sec. 30-108. - Critical facilities. 
(a)  Location of critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, to the extent feasible, be located outside of the special flood hazard area (100-year floodplain) and outside of the two-tenths (0.2) percent annual chance flood hazard area (500-year floodplain). If documentation is provided that feasible sites outside of the special flood hazard are not available that satisfy the objectives of a proposed critical facility, then the critical facility shall: 
(1)  Have the lowest floors elevated to or above the two-tenths (0.2) percent annual chance flood hazard area (500-year floodplain) elevation plus one (1) foot (three hundred five (305) mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(2)  Meet the applicable flood-resistant requirements of the Florida Building Code and ASCE 24, and where elevation requirements are specified, the minimum elevation shall be the two-tenths (0.2) percent annual chance flood hazard area (500-year floodplain) elevation plus one (1) foot (three hundred five (305) mm), or to the design flood elevation, whichever is higher; and 
(3)  Have access routes that are elevated to or above the two-tenths (0.2) percent annual chance flood hazard area (500-year floodplain) elevation. 
Secs. 30-109-30-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS 

Sec. 30-121. - Intent. 
    The intent of this section is to set forth the City's requirements and intent to reduce the potential harm to the environment by strict control and regulation of the emission, storage and movement of hazardous waste, toxic materials and substances. Recognizing that hazardous and toxic material management is a regional issue, intergovernmental coordination on the development and implementation of the actions specified in the Hazardous Material Technical Manual shall be utilized. 
Secs. 30-122-30-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - SUBDIVISION-LOTS AND BLOCKS 

Sec. 30-131. - Lots. 
    Refer to subdivision standards in Chapter 34 Procedures, Article III, Subdivision. 
Sec. 30-132. - Compliance with zoning district regulations. 
    The size, width, depth, shape, and orientation of lots shall comply with the applicable zoning district regulations. 
Sec. 30-133. - Frontage. 
(a)  In all districts, except residential districts, no building or structure shall be erected on a parcel of land which does not abut a public street for a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  In RR, RE, R-1A, and R-1C districts, no dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one (1) public street for at least fifty (50) feet, except that a minimum street abutment distance of twenty-five (25) feet shall apply to properties of an irregular shape provided that the minimum lot width is met at the building line. These requirements shall not apply to lots created through the Lot Split and Small-Scale Plat process contained in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Site plan. 
(c)  In all other residential districts, access, in lieu of frontage, may be provided to lots platted in accordance with Chapter 34 Procedures, Article III, Subdivision. Access shall meet the requirements contained in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article VI, Zoning District Standards and Article III, Improvements of this chapter. 
Sec. 30-134. - Double frontage lots. 
    Double frontage lots shall be avoided except as reverse frontage lots necessary for separation of residential development from arterial and collector roads and railroads, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. In such cases, a six-foot high masonry wall (or equivalent) within the landscape easement meeting the buffering requirements outlined in Division 10, Landscaping of this article, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided. 
Sec. 30-135. - Easements. 
    Generally easements are permitted for specific a purpose when requested by a particular utility. Such specific use easements shall be a part of a lot or lots unless designated to be converted into a public street right-of-way. 
Sec. 30-136. - Maintenance of easements. 
    The property owner shall maintain the utility easement. The property owner shall keep the area clear of any structure, debris, vegetation, trees, shrubs, or landscaping. 
Sec. 30-137. - Structures within easements. 
    No portion of a structure shall be placed within an easement, except for fences, as provided elsewhere in this article. 
Sec. 30-138. - Setbacks. 
    Front and side setbacks adjacent to streets shall be shown on all plats as required by Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Subdivisions. A subdivider may elect to impose greater setbacks through restrictive covenants. The City of Titusville shall only enforce the setbacks required by zoning regulations. 
Sec. 30-139. - Corner lots. 
    The front setback of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street with the least frontage, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. 
(Ord. No. 33-2018, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 30-140. - Flag lots. 
    Flag lots shall adhere to the standards set forth in Section 34-113, Lot split qualifications. 
Sec. 30-141. - Blocks. 
(a)  General. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities presented by the topography. 
(b)  Length. Residential blocks shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length, unless greater length is accepted by the City, nor shall they be less than five hundred (500) feet in length. 
(c)  Width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots. Blocks may consist of single tier lots where such are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or from nonresidential uses. 
(d)  Nonresidential blocks. Nonresidential blocks shall require a length sufficient to serve the intended use without adversely affecting traffic circulation of existing or proposed surrounding streets. The width shall be sufficient to provide adequate service areas and parking without requiring excessive points of ingress and egress of abutting streets, or requiring vehicular maneuvering on public right-of-way. Lots within such blocks shall require a common vehicular access easement dedicated to the use, maintenance and benefit of all lots within the block or a marginal access street shall be provided, to prevent points of ingress and egress from each lot to the abutting street. 
Secs. 30-142-30-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STRUCTURES PROJECTING OVER CERTAIN PROPERTY 

Sec. 30-151. - Projections. 
(a)  For all zoning districts, unless specified elsewhere in this section, every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky, unobstructed, except for the customary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, ornamental features and eaves and except that marquees or canopies may extend to within two (2) feet of the outer edge of the sidewalk. None of these projections shall extend into a required yard or over the building line more than thirty-six (36) inches. Open or enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, balconies, chimneys, flues, or other projections shall not extend into any required yard except that uncovered steps may project not more than three (3) feet into any required yard. 
(b)  In any commercial district or any M-1 Industrial district, there shall be permitted fixed marquees or canopies to overhang the public right-of-way and no closer than two (2) feet to a vertical projection of the curb line ten (10) feet the lowest portion of such marquees or canopies shall be at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk elevation. Fixed marquees and canopies may extend to a vertical projection of the street side of a sidewalk provided that a vertical distance of fourteen (14) feet is maintained between the sidewalk elevation and any marquee or canopy. 
(c)  Within any commercial district or M-1 district, there be permitted awnings, canopies or covered walkways of canvas or other nonpermanent material not structurally tied into principal building, providing that such awnings or covered walkways shall in no case be closer than two (2) feet to a vertical projection of the curb line. Such canopies or covered walkways shall have a minimum vertical height of seven (7) feet above the sidewalk elevation. Within the T district and M-2 district, such awnings, canopies, or covered walkways may be erected within any front yard or side yard abutting a street, provided such awnings, canopies, or covered walkways do not exceed six (6) feet in width; in no event shall such structures extend over any public right-of-way line. All such awnings, canopies, or covered walkways shall be specifically designed and intended for the protection of pedestrians. 
(d)  Within any townhome development adjacent to the Indian River Lagoon and located in the R-3 district, elevated decks or balconies (excluding screen rooms or other enclosures) on townhouses may project into the rear yard setback a maximum of five (5) feet toward the water where the property is adjacent to a major water body, or a common area. Open stairs, fire escapes and chimneys on townhouses may project no more than four (4) feet into the required side or rear setback. Principal structures, including balconies, may not extend into the shoreline protection setback required by Section 30-63, Shoreline protection setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 53-2018, § 2, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 30-152. - Permit-Required application. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, direct or maintain over the sidewalks of the City any awning, shed, shelter, or other structure hanging or projecting over the sidewalks of the City without first obtaining from the Building Official a permit. The application for such permit shall state the kind of awning, shed, shelter, sign or other structure, the weight thereof and the method of attaching or affixing to the building. If the same shall meet with the approval of the Building Official he shall, upon payment of the required fee, issue a permit for the same; provided, no permit shall issue for the erection of any awning, shed or shelter over a sidewalk, except for the type known as a "marquee." 
Sec. 30-153. - Permit fees. 
(a)  No permit provided for the Section 30-152 shall be issued until after the following fees shall have been paid to the Building Official: 
(1)  For any awning, shed, shelter or other structure not a sign, the same fees are required for the issuance of permits for the construction, alteration and repair of buildings based upon the cost of such construction, alteration, extension or repair in Section 6-103 of the Code of Ordinances of Titusville. 
(2)  The permit fees for all signs shall be as prescribed in Section 6-103(10) of the Code of Ordinances of Titusville. 
Sec. 30-154. - Condemnation of unsafe awnings and signs. 
    The Building Official shall inspect all awnings, sheds, shelters, signs and other structures hanging or projecting over the sidewalks of the City and shall be authorized to condemn all such awnings, sheds, shelters, signs and other structures hanging or projecting over such sidewalks as unsafe and dangerous and to cause a notice to be served on the owner of the building to which such a structure may be attached, his agent in charge or the tenant thereof, and such owner, agent or tenant shall within three (3) days from receipt of such condemnation notice, or within such shorter time as the emergency in the judgment of the City Manager may require, after the service of such notice, remove such structure. 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, Chapter 32. 
Sec. 30-155. - Public liability; property damage insurance. 
    All persons erecting marquees, canopies, or any projection over the public right-of-way of the City shall be required to post a cash bond with the City or to secure public lability insurance against damage occasioned to any person or property as a result of any defect herein and/or falling thereof. Every such insurance policy shall be of form and substance approved by the City Attorney, shall be executed by an insurance company, or companies, authorized to do business in the state, and acceptable to the City Council, and shall be in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injury or death to any one (1) person, in the penal sue of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury or death to all persons caused by any one (1) accident, and in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for damage to property resulting from any one (1) accident, each of such penal sums shall remain in full force and shall be undiminished during the effective period of such insurance. Every such insurance policy shall contain a provision whereby every company executing the same shall obligate itself to notify the City Clerk in writing at least thirty (30) days before any alteration, modification or cancellation of such policy is to become effective. No permit shall be issued for the erection of any marquee, canopy, or any other projection extended over the sidewalks or public liability of the City unless and until such bond or liability insurance policy is filed with the City Clerk. 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, Chapter 32. 
Secs. 30-156-30-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPEN SPACE 

Sec. 30-161. - Intent. 
    "Common open space" is any portion of land, within a site, designated with an intent to design for the recreational use or enjoyment of residents and visitors and to assure proper internal buffering of land uses. All common open space shall be improved to the extent necessary to complement the development and may contain compatible and complementary structures. 
Sec. 30-162. - Applicability. 
    This section shall apply to all developments outside of the DMU zoning district. 
Sec. 30-163. - Open space standards. 
(a)  Required minimum open space. 
Table 30-2 Required Minimum Open Space Minimum Percent Required Common Open Space Additional Standards Residential Manufactured Housing Subdivision (RMH-1) 15 Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2) 15 Sec. 30-163(b) Travel Trailer Park in the RMH-2 and T zoning districts Per Chapter 28 Zoning, Article IV Use Table Planned Office Park 30 Sec. 30-163(c) Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) Sec. 30-163(d) Planned Industrial Development (PID) 20 Sec. 30-163(e) Planned Development (PD) 35 Sec. 30-163(f) Regional Mixed-Use (RMU) 20 Sec. 30-163(g) Urban Village (UV) 25 Sec. 30-163(h) Cluster Development and Conservation Subdivision 50 Sec. 30-163(i)  
(b)  Residential Manufactured Housing Park (RMH-2). Common open space areas shall be exclusive of mobile home sites, buffer strips, street right-of-way, storage areas, utility sites, and all nonrecreational service buildings. They shall be easily accessible to all park residents and shall be owned and maintained by the park management. Within one of the common use areas, a clubhouse facility shall be constructed to meet the indoor recreation needs of the residents of the RMH park. 
(c)  Office Professional (OP). The primary purpose of the open space is to assist in maintaining a parklike setting, preserve natural vegetation and assure proper internal buffering of land uses. 
(d)  Highway Industrial Infill (M-3). 
(1)  Open space design landscaped and usable open spaces should be designed as integral parts of the site and building design. The location and configuration of usable open space should be designed to encourage social interaction, maximize its utility and facilitate maintenance. 
a.  Buffers and berms should be incorporated for grade density, separation and noise control. Additionally, pedestrian walkways, bike paths and seating arrangements should be created when feasible and practical. 
b.  Existing natural features including topography and vegetation should be preserved and incorporated into site design. 
c.  Plant materials should be selected with consideration for building design, growth patterns, colors, texture spacing, shade and compatibility with site activity. 
(2)  Greenbelt properties within this district shall be developed with a greenbelt as follows: 
a.  A greenbelt of thirty-five (35) feet along the front setback or abutting the highway and fifteen (15) feet along the remaining perimeter of the site. Larger greenbelts are encouraged. 
(e)  Planned Industrial Development (PID). 
(1)  Common open space: A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total site area, exclusive of rights-of-way, shall be set aside as common open space and dedicated for public use or held in common by the owners of the industrial park, subject to maintenance provisions in deed restrictions approved by the City Council. Said common open space area may include required greenbelts and areas designated for stormwater retention or detention requirements Provided that they are utilized for passive recreation, nature observation or other accessible recreational activity. Regulatory wetlands may be credited for up to a fifty (50) percent credit to the required common open space at a 2:1 ratio. 
(2)  Greenbelt: Within a Planned Industrial Development, a greenbelt shall be required as follows: 
a.  Where the project abuts a major collector or higher classification roadway or nonindustrial/planned industrial land uses - fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Remaining perimeter - twenty-five (25) feet. Improvements within the required greenbelt shall be limited to underground utilities and irrigation systems, required rights-of-way perpendicular to the greenbelt, pedestrian and bicycle paths, stormwater management systems, and passive recreation areas. The required greenbelt, excepting identified wetlands, may be included in calculating the open space required by Section 30-164(f)(1). 
(f)  Planned Development (PD). 
(1)  A five (5) percent credit will be given towards the minimum required common open space requirement if public art or a community feature is provided in a publicly accessible outdoor park or urban plaza. 
(2)  Urban plazas are an improved, landscaped, or paved type of open space which are usually surrounded by streets and buildings, having amenities such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by the public. 
(3)  Common open space includes both passive recreation (e.g. picnic areas or walking trails) and active recreation (e.g. playgrounds or basketball courts) areas. Private waterbodies and stormwater retention or detention areas that are designed to be used for passive recreation (i.e. improved with fountains, benches, and walkways) may be counted towards the common open space minimum requirement. 
(4)  All common open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the master development plan. The developer shall choose one (1) or a combination of the methods of administering common open space set forth per Article I, General provisions, Division 3, Operation and maintenance. 
(5)  All common open space as well as public and recreational facilities, shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures, or the development order will be in default. 
(g)  Regional Mixed-Use (RMU). 
Table 30-3 Regional Mixed-Use Park and Recreation Minimum Required Park and Recreation Use Overall Regional Mixed-Use (RMU) Development Fifteen (15) percent RMU-200 (Residential Tract) Ten (10) percent RMU-300 (Residential Tract) RMU-400 (Residential Tract)  
(1)  Public use and park and recreation uses. 
a.  Public uses. Examples of public uses are public recreation facilities, public schools, public parks, public emergency services, public libraries, and public government offices. 
b.  Park and recreation use. 
1.  Open space. Any unencumbered space, park, or public or private spaces otherwise committed to preservation or recreation (active or passive) but not including areas required for stormwater management (retention or detention) unless expressly permitted herein (Chapter 37, Definitions). The minimum open space for the overall RMU development shall be twenty (20) percent. 
2.  Park and recreation. A space focusing on passive or active outdoor recreation areas and having few structures. The minimum park and recreation for residential in any individual tract within RMU-200, RMU-300 or RMU-400 sub-districts shall be ten (10) percent. The minimum park and recreation for the overall RMU development shall be fifteen (15) percent. 
3.  Examples of active-park and recreation areas include: playgrounds, basketball courts, tennis courts, baseball fields, soccer fields and other similar participatory sports uses. 
4.  Examples of passive-park and recreation areas include: preserved environmentally sensitive areas with walking trails, general walking trails woven through the RMU development, amphitheaters or picnic areas. Walking trail area dedicated to park and recreation use shall be calculated as the actual trail width plus five (5) feet from both trail edges, times the total trail length (see Chapter 33, Development options, Article IV, Regional Mixed-Use, Section 33-45(d), Graphic illustration, for additional information). 
5.  If RMU development is phased, then open space and park and recreation area development shall be phased to meet the requirements of 1. and 2. above in each phase. 
6.  Commercial recreation activities and/or for fee commercial activities shall not be used to meet the required park and recreation uses. 
c.  Public uses shall not be counted toward park and recreation uses. 
(2)  Open space, park and recreation. The minimum open space for the overall RMU development shall be twenty (20) percent. The minimum park and recreation for residential in any individual tract within RMU-200, RMU-300 or RMU-400 sub-districts shall be ten (10) percent. The minimum park and recreation for the overall RMU development shall be fifteen (15) percent. 
(h)  Urban Village. 
(1)  Common open space includes both passive recreation (e.g. picnic area or walking trail) and active recreation (e.g. playground or basketball court) areas, which provide quality recreational amenities such as fountains, benches, and lighting. Stormwater retention areas that are designed to be used for passive recreation, by including three (3) or more park amenities (e.g. benches, gazebos, and fountains), may be counted towards the common open space minimum requirement. 
(2)  Urban plazas are an improved, landscaped, or paved type of open space, which are usually surrounded by streets and buildings, having three (3) or more amenities such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by the public. 
(3)  All common open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the master development plan. The developer shall choose one (1) or a combination of the following methods of administering common open space set forth per Article I, General provisions, Division 3, Operation and maintenance: 
a.  All common open space as well as public and recreational facilities, shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures, or the development order will be in default. 
(i)  Cluster Development and Conservation Subdivision. 
(1)  Open space may consist of wetlands and uplands with not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the set aside total lands, consisting of upland vegetation. 
(2)  As a part of the open space requirement, a thirty-foot buffer of preserved native upland or wetland vegetation along adjacent public roadways and twenty-foot buffer between adjacent parcels shall be required to qualify for the cluster development. The buffer open space area may count towards the fifty (50) percent open space for conservation areas. 
(3)  To the extent possible, the open space area shall be a contiguous parcel in order to preserve the nature habitat for wildlife. 
(4)  The stormwater management: 
a.  Stormwater management system shall be designed to preserve, to the extent practical and possible, the native vegetation and may be located within the fifty (50) percent open space and conservation area in a Cluster Development provided compliance is achieved in accordance with other applicable land development regulations. 
b.  Stormwater management (retention or detention) may not be counted towards the minimum open space requirements in a Conservation Subdivision. 
(5)  The open space area shall be set aside in a conservation easement dedicated for the benefit of the residents of the subdivision or to the public. 
Sec. 30-164. - Dedication procedures. 
    Provisions for the dedication of open space are found in the operation and maintenance standards of this Chapter (Article I, General provisions, Division 3, Operation and maintenance). 
Secs. 30-165-30-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FENCES/WALLS 

Sec. 30-181. - General provisions. 
(a)  Intent. This division is intended to provide minimum standards for fences/walls. The intent is to allow fences/walls where appropriate for security or screening purposes. These regulations will increase public safety and security of personal property. 
(b)  Within the Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use District, fences, walls, and/or screens exceeding thirty (30) inches in height shall be prohibited forward of the front or street side facade of the principal structure. (See Chapter 29, Special Districts and Overlays.) 
(c)  Fences shall be measured on the exterior surface and include any berm, retaining wall, or other manmade improvement which would artificially circumvent the intent of this section. 
(d)  All walls and fences shall be constructed so that all support posts/poles/members are facing the interior of the yard on which the wall/fence is placed. The good side (i.e. side with no bracing or support members) shall be required to face the neighboring property and/or rights-of-way abutting the property where a fence is being erected, except as follows: 
(1)  Abutting conservation or open recreation lands. 
(2)  Abutting bodies of water, including retention ponds. 
(3)  Abutting commercial uses. 
(4)  Abutting public lands. 
(e)  Fences and walls shall be fabricated from wood, aluminum, wrought iron, vinyl, brick or other approved materials manufactured specifically for fences and walls. Non-traditional fence materials such as tires, muffler, hubcaps, galvanized roofing, and corrugated metal, are prohibited. 
(f)  Except as specifically noted in this article, no wall or fence shall be constructed either wholly or in part, of barbed wire, razor wire, electrified wire, glass shards, or other similarly dangerous material. 
(g)  Barbed wire may be used in conjunction with, or accessory to, a permitted agricultural use. 
(h)  No fence shall encroach into a visibility triangle at an intersection or a driveway, as determined by the City. 
(Ord. No. 33-2018, § 2, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 30-182. - Height and location requirements. 
(a)  Single-family residential uses. 
(1)  Front yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required front yard setback shall be four (4) feet. 
(2)  Side or rear yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side or rear yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(3)  Side corner yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side corner yard setback shall be six (6) feet. Within the side corner yard of a corner lot, a fence in excess of four (4) feet in height shall be set back a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the property line to ensure adequate visibility for pedestrian and vehicle traffic. The graphic below illustrates this regulation. Any side corner yard setback abutting a collector or arterial roadway shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) feet within the minimum side corner yard setback established by the zoning district. 

(4)  No high security fence or wall may be permitted with a single-family residential use. 
(b)  Multifamily residential uses. 
(1)  Front yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required front yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(2)  Side or rear yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side or rear yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(3)  Side corner yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side corner yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(4)  No high security fence or wall may be permitted with a multi-family residential use. 
(c)  Commercial uses. 
(1)  Front yard: No fence or wall shall be permitted in any required front yard setback, except as noted in this section. 
(2)  Side or rear yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side or rear yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(3)  Side corner yard: No fence or wall shall be permitted in any required side corner yard setback, except as noted in this section. 
(4)  Where security requirements of a commercial development are determined to exceed the aforementioned provisions of this section, a high security fence or wall may be permitted by the Administrator pursuant to the requirements of Section 30-183 of this article. 
(5)  The following type of fence or wall shall be exempt from the placement requirements: 
a.  Fences that are placed a distance greater than ten (10) feet from a property line. 
b.  Fences that are replacing an existing or part of an existing fence. 
c.  Fences that are installed interior to an existing fence. 
d.  Fences installed to meet screening requirements, when abutting the property line of residential zoning would be installed "good side facing the residential zoning." When a screening fence would be highly visible to a major roadway or street, the Building Official may waive the "good side out" requirement, when there would not be any adverse effect to the residential area. 
e.  Fences facing the Indian River, a lake or pond, or enclosing a retention pond may be installed with the structural supports towards the water. 
(d)  Industrial uses (applicable to the M-1, M-2, and M-3 zoning districts). In the Highway Industrial Infill (M-3) zoning district, the site should be planned to accomplish a smooth transition from adjacent properties that differ in land use and/or design philosophy by the use of site breaks such as screens, berms, fences and walls for aesthetic appearance. 
(1)  Front yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required front yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(2)  Side or rear yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side or rear yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(3)  Side corner yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side corner yard setback shall be six (6) feet. 
(4)  Where security requirements of industrial development are determined to exceed the provisions of this section, a high security fence may be permitted by the Administrator pursuant to the requirements of Section 30-183 of this article. 
(5)  The following type of fence or wall shall be exempt from these placement requirements: 
a.  Fences that are placed a distance greater than ten (10) feet from a property line. 
b.  Fences that are replacing an existing or part of an existing fence. 
c.  Fences that are installed interior to an existing fence. 
d.  Fences installed to meet screening requirements, when abutting the property line of residential zoning would be installed "good side facing the residential zoning." When a screening fence would be highly visible to a major roadway or street, the Building Official may waive the "good side out" requirement, when there would not be any adverse effect to the residential area. 
e.  Fences facing the Indian River, a lake or pond, or enclosing a retention pond may be installed with the structural supports towards the water. 
(e)  Planned Industrial Development (applicable to the PID zoning district). 
(1)  Front yard: No fence or wall shall be permitted in any required front yard setback. 
(2)  Side or rear yard: The maximum height of a fence or wall in any required side or rear yard setback shall be eight (8) feet. 
(3)  Side corner yard: No fence or wall shall be permitted in any required side corner setback. 
(4)  Where security requirements of planned industrial developments are determined to exceed the provisions of this section, an interior high security fence may be permitted by the Administrator pursuant to the requirements of Section 30-183 of this article. There shall be a minimum clear zone of fifteen (15) feet between an exterior fence and any interior high security fence. The use of barbed wire, razor wire, or electric wire is permitted on any interior high security fence; however, if electric wire [is] used, an "electrified fence" sign of at least two (2) square feet shall be posted at least every fifty (50) feet within the clear zone. The interior high security fence shall be illuminated during darkness and over low light hours. The interior high security fence shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, including any barbed wire, razor wire, or other fencing material. 
(5)  The following type of fence or wall shall be exempt from these placement requirements: 
a.  Fences that are placed a distance greater than ten (10) feet from a property line. 
b.  Fences that a replacing an existing or part of an existing fence. 
c.  Fences that are installed interior to an existing fence. 
d.  Fences installed to meet screening requirements, when abutting the property line of residential zoning would be installed "good side facing the residential zoning." When a screening fence would be highly visible to a major roadway or street, the Building Official may waive the "good side out" requirement, when there would be any adverse effect to the residential area. 
e.  Fences facing the Indian River, a lake or pond, or enclosing a retention pond may be installed with the structural supports towards the water. 
(Ord. No. 38-2017, § 2, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 33-2018, § 3, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 30-183. - High security fences. 
(a)  Where security requirements are determined to exceed the provisions of other sections of this article, a high security fence may be permitted by the Administrator. Allowance of these types of fences/walls shall be on a case-by-case basis and allowance of a high security fence/wall at one (1) location shall not be considered as precedence for the allowance of such a fence/wall at any other location. 
(1)  All high security fences/walls shall be subject to review by the City's Site Plan Review Committee and the Community Redevelopment Agency within the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district to ensure compatibility with the surrounding buildings and/or walls. 
(2)  Use of high security fences/walls shall only be considered at locations where the City's Land Development Regulations permit the outdoor storage and display of goods and materials, or as required by a Federal or State regulation or program. Where high security fences/walls are used around outdoor display areas, said fence/wall does not have to be one hundred (100) percent opaque. High security fences/walls used around outdoor storage areas must be one hundred (100) percent opaque. 
(3)  High security fences/walls shall be defined as follows: 
a.  High security fences: A substantially built fence (including any gates in said fence) not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height above grade. Such fence may be chain-link or woven wire fencing materials, with or without slats. There may be three (3) strands of barbed wire on barbed wire arms on top of these fences as long as the barbed wire arms are angled forty-five (45) degrees of the fence, and do not extend beyond the property line. 
b.  High security walls: A constructed barrier of concrete, stone, brick, tile, wood, or similar type of material, not less than six (6) nor more than eight (8) feet in height above grade. Barbed wire may be used in conjunction with a high security wall as long as the barbed wire meets the requirements detailed in Section 30-183(a)(3)a., above. The barbed wire arms must be installed on the property side of the wall. Said walls do not have to be one hundred (100) percent opaque as long as physical access to the attendant property is prevented. 
(4)  Wherever a high security fence/wall is used, the following landscape elements are required. Exceptions to this section may be granted, on a case-by-case basis, by the Administrator, for those properties that do not front on roadways classified by Article III, Improvements, Division 7, Streets, of this article as either a principal or minor arterial roadway. 
a.  All high security fences shall be located in a landscape strip that is ten (10) feet in width. A continuous hedge shall run along the entire length of the fence. Said hedge shall be maintained at a height of at least thirty-six (36) inches. One (1) tree shall be planted every forty (40) feet along the entire length of the fence. Said hedge and trees shall meet the requirements of Division 10, Landscaping, Subdivision 3, Landscape yard of this article of these [Land Development] Regulations. These landscape requirements should be placed along the exterior of the fence but can be located along the interior of fences that are not required to be one hundred (100) percent opaque pursuant to Section 30-183(a)(2) above. 
b.  All high security walls shall be located in a landscape strip that is ten (10) feet in width. A continuous hedge shall run along the entire length of the wall. One (1) tree shall be planted every forty (40) feet along the entire length of the wall. Said hedge and trees shall meet the requirements of Division 10, Landscaping, Subdivision 3, Landscape yard of this article of these regulations. These landscape requirements must be placed along the exterior of the wall. 
(Ord. No. 38-2017, § 3, 11-14-17) 
Secs. 30-184-30-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIGHTING 

Sec. 30-191. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards for site lighting improvements. The intent is to allow lighting within parking lots, secured areas, walkways, and site features while protecting neighboring properties from intrusive lighting projections. These regulations will increase public safety and security for personal property. 
Sec. 30-192. - Site lighting standards. 
(a)  Lighting shall not be directed onto another lot or obscure driver's vision on public streets. All freestanding and building mounted light fixtures shall be down-lit. 
(b)  No lighting fixture shall create more than two (2) footcandles of light density at the property line. 
(c)  No freestanding light fixture shall be higher than forty (40) feet. 
(d)  Off-street parking areas shall be illuminated to a minimum of one (1) footcandle at eye level over the entire surface of the parking area during operating hours. 
Sec. 30-193. - Other site lighting standards. 
(a)  Light timers/cutoff switches are required for all outdoor non-security lighting fixtures. 
(b)  Low voltage, low intensity walkway light (i.e. bollard lighting) are permissible and are not required to be down-lit. 
(c)  The City encourages all developments to utilize low power consumptions fixtures (i.e. LED), in the site's lighting design. All site lighting permit fees will be waived as an incentive for developments to utilize low power consumption fixture lighting designs. Other site fees and all buildings fees applicable to the projects are still enforced. 
(d)  Lighting directed upward may be permitted when directed toward flag poles, fountains, building facades, landscaping or like items and directed away from adjacent properties and/or rights-of-way as approved by the Administrator. 
Sec. 30-194. - Planned Industrial Development (PID) lighting standards. 
(a)  Artificial lighting utilized to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent properties and streets, shining only on the subject site. 
(b)  No free-standing light fixtures shall extend higher than twenty-five (25) feet. Such fixtures shall be approved by the administrator to assure design compatibility with principal buildings and the planned industrial business park. 
(c)  Although parking lot lighting is encouraged for the protection of employees that work after-hours, parking lot lighting is only required if multiple shifts are proposed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. If multiple shifts are not proposed then an after-hours lit parking area may be designated to address employee security. Required lighting should be brought up to code standards if necessitated by a change of use. 
Secs. 30-195-30-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND AQUIFER PROTECTION 
Subdivision 1. - Stormwater Management and Erosion Control 

Sec. 30-201. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to protect and enhance surface and groundwater resources by ensuring that stormwater runoff peak rates and volumes after development are no more than predevelopment conditions; that groundwater tables are not artificially lowered; and that precautions are taken to prevent erosion, sedimentation, flooding and water pollution. It is the further intent of this section to: 
(1)  Provide additional protection for the freshwater resources within, and in the proximity of, the existing and proposed well fields in the City of Titusville. 
(2)  Protect and/or enhance the quality of ground and surface waters including the Indian River Lagoon, St. Johns River, Fox and South Lakes. 
(3)  Ensure that there is no erosion after development. 
(4)  Maintain and enhance groundwater levels and groundwater recharge. 
(5)  Protect the beneficial functioning of wetlands, such as swamps, bogs, marshes, estuaries, sloughs and floodplains, for the natural storage of surface waters and the biological reduction and assimilation of pollutants. 
(6)  Minimize saltwater intrusion by adhering to applicable best management practices. 
(7)  Minimize injury to vegetation, fish and wildlife habitat and otherwise help to attain the objectives of this section. 
Sec. 30-202. - Stormwater management permit. 
(a)  The following activities alter or disrupt existing stormwater runoff patterns or affect aquifer recharge areas and will require a permit prior to the initiation of any project except as exempted in Section 30-203. 
(1)  Filling, clearing and/or drainage of land as an adjunct to construction. 
(2)  Clearing, filling and/or draining of nonagricultural land for agricultural purposes. 
(3)  Converting agricultural lands to nonagricultural uses. 
(4)  Subdividing land. 
(5)  Replatting recorded subdivisions and the development of recorded and unrecorded subdivisions. 
(6)  Changing the use of land and/or the construction of a structure including the construction of parking areas or impervious surfaces or a change in the size of one (1) or more structures. 
(7)  Altering the shoreline or bank of any surface water body. 
(8)  Altering of any ditches, dikes, terraces, berms, swales, or other water management facility. 
(9)  Removal of earth or moving of earth on a parcel. For all activities that require a permit. 
(10)  Construction or size modification of a structure including parking areas or impervious surfaces. 
(11)  Site and subdivision development requiring City approval of all new construction including buildings, parking, new impervious area accessory structures. 
(b)  Site and subdivision development requiring city approval all new construction including buildings, parking, new impervious area accessory structures, etc. 
Sec. 30-203. - Stormwater management permit-Exemptions. 
(a)  The following activities shall be exempt from formal stormwater permitting procedures: 
(1)  Single-family residences, additions and accessory structures, upon determination by the Administrator that such construction will not adversely impact the aquifer or the stormwater management system. 
(2)  Bona fide agricultural pursuits except where an artificial drainage system will be used to increase the flow of surface water from the applicant's land or the land is in the area of critical concern. 
(3)  Maintenance work performed by a public or established private utility on drainage canals for the purpose of public health and welfare. 
(4)  Any construction or improvement to an existing parcel not exceeding one thousand (1,000) cumulative square feet of new impervious area and not changing or affecting the quality, rate, volume or location of stormwater discharge as determined by the Administrator. 
(5)  Repaving or resurfacing of existing impervious surfaces. 
(6)  Any development within a subdivision if each of the following conditions has been met: 
a.  Stormwater management provisions for the subdivision were previously approved and remain valid as part of a final plat. 
b.  The development is conducted in accordance with the stormwater management provisions submitted with the final plat. 
c.  The impervious coverage per lot does not exceed the maximum impervious area as defined in the final plat. If the final plat does not specify the maximum impervious area, these regulations will apply. 
Sec. 30-204. - Stormwater management plan process. 
(a)  The owner/applicant of any project as defined in Section 30-202 shall submit a Stormwater Management Plan as part of the development approval process as set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Subdivision and Article V, Site plan of the Land Development Regulations. 
(b)  Upon receipt, the Administrator shall review said Stormwater Management Plan based upon the criteria and performance standards identified in this article and in accordance with the time provisions for review of projects in accordance with other appropriate sections of the Land Development Regulations. 
Sec. 30-205. - Stormwater management plan, required information and exhibits. 
    A stormwater management plan shall be submitted per the requirement set forth in the Stormwater Management Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-206. - Stormwater management criteria. 
    Stormwater management systems and erosion control measures shall adhere to the criteria set forth in the Stormwater Management Technical Manual. 
Subdivision 2. - Area of Critical Concern 

Sec. 30-207. - Area of critical concern performance. 
(a)  For properties, any portion of which is located within the Area of Critical Concern (See Chapter 29, Special districts and Overlay), no certificate of occupancy, building permit, development permit, clearing permit, site plan approval, or any other permit or development approval shall be issued by the City unless the land use or permit shall comply with the following performance standards in addition to the other requirements of this section. 
(1)  Primary stormwater management facilities are to be designed as dry bottom facilities. 
(2)  Retention and discharge requirements: 
a.  For a development site located above twenty-five (25) feet mean sea level (msl), the post-development runoff volume resulting from the ten-year/twenty-four-hour storm event shall be retained on site. The retention area required for the ten-year/twenty-four-hour storm shall be based on the percentage of impervious surface on the site. The rate of discharge over the retained ten-year/twenty-four-hour storm volume shall be restricted to the predevelopment rate of discharge for a twenty-five-year/twenty-four-hour storm event. One-half (1/2) foot of freeboard shall be required above the overflow elevation. The area needed for the freeboard is extra, above the area calculated above. Engineering calculations, using approved methods, showing that the ten-year, twenty-four-hour storm retention requirements have been met shall be required. 
b.  For development sites below twenty-five (25) feet msl, retention and discharge requirements shall be as provided in Sections 30-206 and 30-210 for developments located outside the area of critical concern. This includes the use of wet detention. 
c.  For development sites having elevations both above and below twenty-five (25) feet msl, those portions of the site which are above twenty-five (25) msl shall conform to the performance in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, and all required retention ponds and improvements shall be located in the areas above twenty-five (25) feet msl. 
(3)  Removal of soil from a development site within the area of critical concern shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Administrator. Importing clean fill on a site for the purpose of creating additional recharge shall be encouraged. 
(4)  Reduction of natural topography shall be minimized. The reduction of natural topography shall be limited eight (8) feet above the seasonal high water table (with the exception of drainage conveyances or retention ponds) or eight (8) feet below existing land surface, whichever is more restrictive. This section shall not apply to excavation beneath a structure for the purpose of providing a basement except that in no case shall such excavation be within eighteen (18) inches of the seasonal high water table. The limitations on the extent of the above cut of the natural topography shall not be construed as an automatic authorization to alter the natural topography. The project shall be designed to minimize the change in natural topography. 
(5)  Within the area of critical concern the total of all impervious surfaces shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total area of a development excluding publicly dedicated right-of-way and jurisdictional wetlands. If pervious concrete pavement is used in the development of the site, a credit for the use of pervious concrete pavement will be as stated in Section 30-208. (See Section 7.6.1.1 of the Stormwater Technical Manual for performance calculations.) 
(6)  For sites adjacent to existing municipal potable water wells total impervious surfaces shall not exceed the following (see Stormwater Technical Manual for performance calculations): 
a.  Twenty (20) percent if the site is within three hundred (300) feet of an active municipal production well site. 
b.  Twenty-five (25) percent if the site is between three hundred (300) feet and seven hundred fifty (750) feet of an active municipal production well site. 
c.  Thirty (30) percent if the site is between seven hundred fifty (750) feet and fifteen hundred (1500) feet of an active municipal production well site. 
(7)  Impervious parking lot requirements may be waived for uses located within the area of critical concern provided that erosion control measures are approved by the Administrator. However, any accessway onto a public right-of-way shall be paved a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet into the property in order to provide for public safety and drainage. 
(8)  Development shall be designed to minimize the reduction of recharge to the surficial aquifer. The groundwater level and fluctuations shall be no worse than under predevelopment conditions. 
(9)  For private wells in excess of two (2) inches in diameter, licensed well drillers installing private wells in the area of critical concern, shall first notify the Administrator and supply information concerning owners name, address, property locations, depth and diameter of well and pumping capacity. 
(10)  Only one (1) black water septic tank permitted per acre, not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) gallon capacity, shall be allowed. 
(11)  Home fuel oil storage tanks are prohibited within the area of critical concern. 
(12)  The minimum lot size for all future single-family developments shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, excluding retention ponds. A conservation subdivision as specified in Chapter 33, Development options, Article VIII, Conservation subdivision design may be utilized to allow lots less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area provided all conditions of the conservation subdivision design are met. 
(13)  Preservation of predevelopment topography, grades, soils and vegetation shall be encouraged. 
(14)  That each site/subdivision must calculate the maximum impervious area for each lot(s). This information must be included on site plan and/or plat. 
(Ord. No. 49-2017, § 1, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 30-208. - Pervious pavement standards in the area of critical concern. 
    Pervious pavement standards in the area of critical concern are set forth in Section 7.7 of the Stormwater Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-209. - Exemptions in the area of critical concern. 
(a)  The following properties located within the area of critical concern shall be exempt from the provisions of this section except for Sections 30-207(a)(9) and (10) to the extent provided herein: 
(1)  All single-family lots in existing platted single-family subdivisions and those for which preliminary plat approval was obtained prior to July 15, 1986 (effective date). 
(2)  Any existing parcel or lot which is one-half (1/2) acre in size or less, regardless of the zoning classification, shall be exempt from the impervious surface limitations prescribed in Section 30-207(a)(5). To be entitled to this exemption, the property in question must have been deeded, subdivided or otherwise created prior to July 15, 1986 (effective date). 
Subdivision 3. - Hydraulic, Maintenance and Enforcement 

Sec. 30-210. - Hydraulic design criteria stormwater conveyance system. 
    This section of the City of Titusville's Stormwater Design Criteria Manual shall be utilized in the design of the collection and conveyance portion of any stormwater management facility to be constructed and to be maintained by the City and shall be designed per City of Titusville Specifications. 
Sec. 30-211. - Conflicts with other ordinances and codes. 
    In case of conflict between this article or any part thereof, and the whole part of any other existing or future ordinance or code, the most restricted in each case shall apply. 
Sec. 30-212. - Review fees. 
    Review fees shall be in accordance with Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IX, Fees of the Code. 
Sec. 30-213. - Maintenance and inspections. 
(a)  The installed system(s) required by this article shall be maintained by the owner. 
(b)  The owner shall maintain the installed system(s) required by this article. 
(c)  At the time of issuance of a development order the city can inspect all erosion control measures to ensure effective control. 
(d)  Inspection fee(s) shall be paid at the time of issuance of a stormwater construction permit. The applicant shall schedule with the Administrator the following inspections: 
(1)  Erosion and sediment control inspections: As necessary to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation. 
(2)  Burial inspections: Prior to the burial of any underground drainage structure. 
(3)  Final inspection: Upon completion of work, the Enforcement Officer shall either approve the completed work or notify the applicant in writing in that there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the approved permit. 
Sec. 30-214. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  When work for which a permit is required by this article is commenced prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be double but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in the Land Development Regulations. 
(b)  The applicant shall be required to adhere strictly to the plan as permitted. Any changes or amendments to the plan must be approved by the Administrator. Enforcement officials shall be granted inspection rights and right-of-way privileges in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  If the Enforcement Official determines that the project is not being carried out in accordance with the approved plan or if any project is being carried out without a permit, he is authorized to: 
(1)  Issue written notice to the applicant specifying the nature and location of the alleged noncompliance; with a description of the remedial actions necessary to bring the project into compliance within three (3) working days. 
(2)  Issue a stop-work order directing the applicant or persons in possession to cease and desist all or any portion of the work which violates the provisions of this article, if the remedial work is not completed within the specified time. The applicant shall then bring the project into compliance or be subject to immediate revocation of their permit and penalties. 
(3)  The person(s) named in (1) or (2) above may request, in writing, a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of such action. Any order issued in (1) or (2) above shall, remain in effect until a final decision of the Board. 
(d)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provision of this article or permits any such violation or fails to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other remedies, whether civil or criminal, the violation of this article may be restrained by injunction, including a mandatory injunction, and otherwise abated in any manner provided by law. 
(e)  All persons and entities shall maintain private stormwater management systems in full compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. Any person or entity that fails to maintain the stormwater management systems shall be considered as a violation of this code and enforcement action may be initiated and enforced through the Municipal Code Enforcement Board. Fines and liens may be imposed as authorized by Chapter 162, Florida Statutes (as amended from time to time) and applicable codes and ordinances. If any entity has been dissolved or no longer owns said private stormwater management systems, then, in that event, the property owners utilizing said stormwater management systems or properties that are benefited by said stormwater management systems shall be financially responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of said stormwater management systems. For example, if stormwater management systems are to be owned and maintained by a homeowners association and the homeowners association has been dissolved, and is no longer active or functioning then, in that event, the lot owners utilizing said stormwater management systems or benefited by said systems shall be pro rata responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of said systems. The City may initiate an action through the Municipal Code Enforcement Board for said violation and appropriate fines and liens may be imposed and recorded against benefited properties. The liens may be foreclosed and collected in the same manner as code liens including the City's costs and a reasonable attorney's fees. 
Sec. 30-215. - Emergency exemption. 
(a)  This section shall not be construed to prevent the doing of any act necessary to prevent material harm to or destruction of real or personal property as a result of a present emergency, including, but not limited to, fire, infestation by pests, or hazards resulting from violent storms or hurricanes or when the property is in imminent peril and the necessity of obtaining a permit is impractical and would cause undue hardship in the protection of the property. 
(b)  A report of any such emergency action shall be made to the Administrator by the owner or person in control of the property upon which emergency action was taken as soon as practical, but no more than thirty (30) days following such action. Remedial action may be required by the Administrator subject to appeal to the City Council in the event of dispute. 
Sec. 30-216. - Vested rights. 
    Any existing previously approved preliminary plat, plat, site plan, planned unit development or other project that has secured approval or possess a building permit shall be entitled to develop and continue to be developed in accordance with the existing development approval. Failure to develop in accordance with the previous approved development permit or a substantial deviation shall cause the project to lose any vested rights to the previous approval and shall be required to develop in accordance with this article. 
Secs. 30-217-30-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - STREETS/SIDEWALKS/BIKES 

Sec. 30-226. - Access to arterial streets. 
(a)  Whenever a development or subdivision that involves the creation of one (1) or more new streets borders or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, no direct driveway access may be provided from the lots within said development or subdivision onto said arterial street. 
(b)  Back-out parking shall not be allowed onto any arterial street; however, this section shall not apply to those lots platted at the time of the effective date of this subsection, where said lots abut the said arterial streets and which must, by design, utilize back-out parking. 
(c)  No person shall subdivide any parcel fronting on an arterial street without making adequate provision for frontage roads or marginal access roads. The City may deny a permit for development if this provision is violated where possible, the distance between curb cuts on large parcels fronting arterial streets shall be six hundred and sixty (660) feet. 
Sec. 30-227. - Street entrances. 
(a)  All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles shall be able to enter and exit from the lot in question without posing any substantial danger to themselves, pedestrians, or vehicles traveling in abutting streets. 
(2)  Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in abutting or surrounding streets shall be minimized. 
(b)  Projects for which a site plan is required shall be considered on an individual basis and may deviate from these requirements in the interest of traffic safety, as approved by the Administrator. 
(c)  Cross access between adjacent nonresidential parcels is required for arterial street locations to minimize potential conflicts and preserve the level of service unless waived by the Administrator with just cause. Examples of just causes are site constraints such as redevelopment or inability to physically connect to adjacent sites. A cross access easement agreement may be required for site plan approval. 
Sec. 30-228. - Coordination with surrounding streets. 
(a)  When there is no street shown in the roadway classification map or future traffic circulation map for the area to be developed or subdivided, the arrangement of streets in said development or subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission which responds to a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
Sec. 30-229. - Relationship of streets to topography and site conditions. 
(a)  Streets shall be designed to facilitate drainage and storm water runoff and street grades shall conform as closely as practicable to the original topography. 
(b)  Streets shall be constructed with grades which conform to standards set forth in the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(c)  In no case may streets be constructed with grades that, in the professional opinion of the Administrator create a substantial danger to the public safety. 
(d)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to all official plans and shall be considered in their relation to the following: 
(1)  Pattern of existing and planned streets. 
(2)  Topographical conditions. 
(3)  Public convenience and safety. 
(4)  Proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
(5)  Minimization of encroachment on woodlands, wetlands, and groundwater recharge areas. 
Sec. 30-230. - Attention to handicapped in street construction. 
(a)  When curb and gutter construction is used on public and private streets, wheelchair ramps and depressed curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the FDOT Standard Index - latest addition. 
(b)  In unsubdivided developments, sidewalk construction for the handicapped shall conform to the requirements of the Architectural Barriers Act, 42 U.S.C. 451-4157, as well as Section 336.045, Florida Statutes, and the ANSI "Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to, and Usable by, Physically Handicapped People." 
Sec. 30-231. - Utilities. 
    Utilities installed in public rights-of-way or along private roads shall conform to the requirements set forth in Division 7, Utilities of this chapter. 
Sec. 30-232. - Street width and drainage requirements in subdivisions. 
    Street rights-of-way are designed and developed to serve several objectives: 
(a)  To carry motor vehicle traffic, and in some cases allow on-street parking; 
(b)  To provide a safe and convenient passageway for pedestrian and bicycle traffic; and 
(c)  To serve as an important link in the City's drainage system. 
    In order to fulfill these objectives, all public and private streets shall be constructed to meet the standards set forth in the following subsections and specified in Section 9.5, Roadway Requirements of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-233. - General layout of streets. 
(a)  The general layout of streets are set forth in Section 9.6 of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(b)  No existing platted or dedicated cul-de-sacs or platted lots or flag lots shall be utilized as access for a new subdivision or public street without the express concurrence and permission of the City Council of the City of Titusville. That it is the intention and purpose of this provision to protect existing cul-de-sacs and not have said existing lots be utilized as access for future subdivisions and future public streets without the express permission of the City Council of the City of Titusville. The City Council shall consider the street design criteria as set forth in the Land Development Regulations, traffic safety and engineering, and the public health, safety and general welfare of the City in approving new public streets or subdivisions. 
Sec. 30-234. - Street intersections. 
    Street intersections are set forth in [Section] 9.9 of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-235. - Street alignment and curvature. 
(a)  Horizontal curvature. Horizontal curvature is set forth in [Section] 9.10, Street Alignment of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(b)  Tangents. As set forth in [Section] 9.10, Street Alignment of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-236. - Construction standards and specifications. 
    Construction, design standards and specifications for streets, sidewalks, and curbs and gutters are administrative regulation and adopted by reference, in the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-237. - Public streets and private roads in subdivisions. 
(a)  In all districts, except residential districts (R-districts), no building or structure shall be erected on a parcel of land which does not abut a public street a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet. The use of an easement for purposes of abutting a lot with a public street shall not comply with this regulation. 
(b)  In all residential districts (R-districts) no dwelling, except those located in a Planned Development or in an approved lot split or small-scale plat, shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one (1) public street for at least fifty (50) feet, except that a minimum street abutment distance of twenty-five (25) feet shall apply to properties of an irregular shape provided that a minimum building line width of fifty (50) feet is met at the required front yard setback line, measured from the street right-of-way line. A single-family dwelling may be erected on a flag lot as defined herein and permitted within the lot split and small-scale plat process, Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Subdivisions, Division 2, Lot split and Division 4, Small-scale plat where the width of such lot does not entirely abut a dedicated public street. The use of an easement for purposes of abutting a lot with a public street shall not comply with this requirement. 
(c)  Residential development may be developed with private roads that meet the private street standards of this chapter so long as: 
(1)  The proposed development having direct access onto a private street shall be connected to a public street and such private road shall be improved to public local street standards at a minimum. 
(2)  No road intended to be private is planned to be extended to serve property outside that development. 
(3)  The standards set forth in Sections 30-226 thru 30-230 are complied with. 
(4)  The subdivider demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council that the private roads will be properly maintained. At a minimum, a provision for same shall be incorporated in the articles of the maintenance association. (See [Article I, Division 3,] Operating and Maintenance of this chapter.) 
(5)  No final plat that shows lots served by private streets may be recorded unless the final plat contains the following notations: 
a.  "Further subdivision of any lot shown on this plat as served by a private street shall be prohibited." 
b.  "All owners of land included by this plat shall be subject to any assessment of costs required to correct deficiencies caused by substandard construction and hold the City of Titusville harmless for any accident or injury to persons or property that may result therefrom." 
(6)  The recorded plat of any subdivision that includes a private road shall clearly state that such road is a private road. Further, the initial purchaser of a newly created lot served by a private road shall be furnished by the seller with a disclosure statement outlining the maintenance responsibilities for the road. 
(d)  The following general requirements shall apply to all subdivision streets within the corporate limits of the City: 
(1)  Paving. Road base and paving shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and standards set forth in the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. The developer shall be responsible for all construction costs for all streets within and abutting the proposed subdivision necessitated by said subdivision. 
(2)  Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be installed in all streets in accordance with the Transportation Infrastructure Technical manual. 
(f)  Streets within apartments, townhouses, etc., may be private provided they meet the construction standards adopted by Section 30-236. 
Sec. 30-238. - Road and sidewalk requirements. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be constructed along any lot or parcel of ground abutting any public or private street, on which a permit for new construction is granted, except as provided herein. Such sidewalks shall be of concrete and shall be inspected by the City. No building permits shall be issued by the Administrator, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued unless such sidewalk(s) are shown, with elevations, on the plans for construction, unless the requirement for sidewalks is specifically waived by the Administrator, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  There are future plans for widening or improving the abutting road right-of-way within five (5) years and the construction of the sidewalk would be currently imprudent. 
(2)  The lot or parcel is located on a local street within an existing unplatted/platted subdivision, where over seventy-five (75) percent of the lots are developed and no sidewalks exist adjoining the developed lots. 
(3)  When the construction of the required sidewalk is programmed within the proposed capital improvements program or funds have been appropriated for its construction through an assessment program or other funding mechanisms. 
(4)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Administrator until required sidewalks are constructed or the requirements for sidewalks are waived or delayed as provided herein. When the requirements for sidewalks are deemed by the Administrator to be "not practical", monetary contributions to the sidewalk trust fund shall be made required as described in paragraph (c) below, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The provision of payment into the sidewalk trust fund shall not be eligible for a variance before the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(b)  Sidewalk standards as set forth per the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(c)  Sidewalk trust fund. 
(1)  There is hereby established a sidewalk trust fund to be used for the deposit, maintenance and distribution of all monetary contributions made in lieu of constructing a sidewalk pursuant to Section 30-238 of this Code, or a trail pursuant to Section 30-239 of this Code. The sidewalk trust fund shall be administered by the City's Public Works Department and shall be appropriated within the City's Roads and Streets Capital Improvement Fund and approved by the City Council annually, or as contributions are made to the trust fund. All contributions made pursuant to Sections 30-238 and 30-239 of this Code shall be monetary payments into the sidewalk trust fund. All contributions made to and interest derived from the sidewalk trust fund shall be used solely for the purpose of constructing, upgrading, or improving sidewalks along or on public streets within the City limits. 
(2)  If a sidewalk is required by this Code, but the construction of the sidewalk is determined to be not practical, then the property owner or permit applicant shall make a contribution to the sidewalk trust fund. 
(3)  The Administrator shall make the decision as to whether the construction of a sidewalk is "not practical." The following factors shall be utilized in making such a decision: 
a.  The project does not meet the waiver requirements in paragraph (b) above; 
b.  There is no connectivity for the required sidewalk; and 
c.  The required sidewalk will provide functional pedestrian access when connectivity is created. 
(4)  The sidewalk trust fund fee shall be established by City Council resolution. The fees shall be set on per linear foot of street frontage basis and shall be calculated as one hundred (100) percent of the average of the sidewalk construction costs on a per linear foot of street frontage basis as established by the City. 
(d)  Appeals. Appeals of the Administrator's determination as to the practicality of installing required sidewalks shall be processed as described in Section 34-248(b). If the appeal is granted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the applicant shall make the required payment into the City's Sidewalk Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 11-2017, § 3, 2-28-17) 
Sec. 30-239. - Bicycle facilities. 
(a)  All developments are required to construct those bicycle facilities designated in the Titusville Trailways Plan that abut their project. In lieu of construction, developments may complete all engineering and site work to construct the bicycle facility, including dedication of the required easement to the City of Titusville if necessary, and make a monetary contribution to the sidewalk trust fund equivalent to a sidewalk, as described in Section 30-238(c) of this Code. All facilities shall, at a minimum, meet the standards adopted by FDOT for bicycle facilities and the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. The provision of payment into the sidewalk trust fund shall not be eligible for a variance before the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(b)  If it is contemplated that state controlled roads will provide bicycle paths within the road pavement area then pedestrian sidewalks only will be required. The Administrator shall make the final determination. 
(c)  Lighting, curbouts, slope, vertical clearance as set forth per the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(Ord. No. 11-2017, § 3, 2-28-17) 
Sec. 30-240. - Street names and house numbers. 
(a)  Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the assigned name of the existing street. In no other case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. New street names within a subdivision are named as part of the plat approval process. Renaming of existing streets shall require the approval of the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall comply with the provisions below. 
(1)  Street renaming. A proposed street renaming may be initiated by either the City on its own initiative, or by the filing of a complete application with the City in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. All street name changes shall be for the entire length of the street. However, a segment of a street may be renamed if that segment is created by the intersection of a collector or arterial street. 
a.  Application. To be deemed complete, an application for a street renaming shall include the following information in addition to any other information that the Administrator may generally require for a street renaming application: 
1.  A signed, notarized consent to change street name form executed by at least seventy (70) percent of the owners of those properties abutting the segment of the street to be renamed. The consent to change street name form shall be in a format provided by the city. No consent shall be valid if it is executed more than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the date of submission of the application. The applicant shall submit a complete list of all owners of property abutting the street to be renamed. This requirement shall not apply to a City initiated application. 
2.  Any request to rename a street for a person shall include a biography and explanation of the person's importance or relevance to the street, City, region, state or nation. Any request for any other street name change shall include information and an explanation of the importance or relevance of the proposed name to the street. 
3.  Letters from Brevard County E911 Administration Address Assignment, the Titusville Public Works Department and the Titusville Fire Department indicating their recommendations/concerns regarding the street renaming request shall be included. 
4.  No application shall be processed unless the application is complete, all documentation required by this subsection is provided, and the application fee is paid. 
b.  Review process. 
1.  The City shall hold two (2) public meetings on the street renaming proposal. One (1) public meeting shall be before the Planning and Zoning Commission and one (1) public meeting before the City Council. A courtesy notice of the public meetings shall be sent by City staff to all owners of property abutting the street to be renamed. The courtesy notice shall be mailed to those owners listed on the latest ad valorem tax rolls prepared by the county at the time of mailing at the address listed thereon. The notification shall be sent at least ten (10) days prior to the first public meeting and shall include a description of the street to be renamed, the proposed name change and the dates for the public meetings. Notice shall be deemed to have been given when the courtesy notice is deposited in the U.S. mail. 
2.  The street renaming application shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review and recommendation to the City Council. 
3.  Naming guidelines. In addition to any other information deemed appropriate by Council, the following information, as applicable, shall serve as guidelines in consideration of a street renaming application: 
(A)  Recognized geographic names. 
(B)  Natural historic features. 
(C)  Significant historic contributions to the City, State, or United States. 
(D)  Persons of historic service to the City. 
(E)  Persons of outstanding civic service to the City. 
(F)  Documented community support for the name. 
(G)  Emergency 911 and public safety considerations. 
(H)  The cost that the renaming will have on the City or any other person that is or could be materially affected by the name change. 
4.  The naming/renaming of streets is a legislative action of the City Council and shall be determined in the Council's sole and absolute discretion. Nothing herein shall be construed as a delegation of any authority to name a street to any other person or entity, or to otherwise infringe upon Council's legislative authority in this regard. 
c.  Honorary street naming. 
1.  In lieu of renaming a street, the Council may consider any application submitted pursuant to this section as an application for designation of an honorary street name, authorizing an honorary street designation and the appropriate memorial marker to be placed along a street or segment thereof, in order to honor a distinguished person, place or event. 
2.  Streets carrying an honorary designation are not officially renamed, but carry a honorary name. 
(b)  Uniform numbering system adopted. 
(1)  A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings as shown on the map known as the "Property Numbering Map, Titusville, Florida," and filed in the office of the Administrator, and all explanatory matters on said map are hereby adopted and incorporated herein. 
(2)  In order to promote more responsive public safety and postal services, the following uniform system of assigning street names shall apply: 
a.  "Avenue" shall be assigned to linear streets aligned on a north/south axis. 
b.  "Street" shall be assigned to linear streets aligned on an east/west axis. 
c.  "Road" shall be assigned to linear streets aligned on a diagonal axis. 
d.  "Drive" shall be assigned to curvilinear streets. 
e.  "Boulevard" shall be assigned to streets on which a vegetated median exists on at least fifty (50) percent of its length. 
f.  "Court" shall be assigned to streets which terminate in a cul-de-sac. 
g.  "Circle" shall be assigned to streets which form a connected loop. 
h.  "Way" or "lane" shall be assigned to marginal access streets. 
(c)  Assignment of numbers. 
(1)  All properties, parcels of land and principal buildings within the corporate limits of the City of Titusville, Florida, shall be identified and numbered by the owners and occupants thereof in conformity with the uniform numbering system adopted in (b) above, provided that all owners and occupants of properties, parcels of land and buildings that are not numbered in conformity with said system shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of these regulations in which to conform. 
(2)  Each principal building shall exhibit its assigned number on the frontage in which the front entrance of said building is located. If a principal building is a multiple-family structure comprised of four (4) or more dwelling units, the principal building shall bear a separate number and each dwelling unit therein shall affix a letter suffix or "apartment number" suffix to the building number. 
(3)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such buildings shall be posted in a manner as to be clearly visible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Such numerals shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in height and one-half (1/2) inch in width and of a contrasting color with the building. 
(d)  Enforcement, generally. If the owner or occupant of any building required to be numbered by this article shall neglect for the period of thirty (30) days to duly attach and maintain the proper number on such building, the building inspector shall serve upon him a notice requiring such owner or occupant to properly number same, and if he neglects to do so for ten (10) days after the service of such notice, he shall be deemed to have violated this article. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 30-241. - Street requirements. 
    Street design requirements are set forth in Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual, Section 9.2. 
Sec. 30-242. - Required Access Points. 
    A residential development shall have one (1) or more means of access as described below. The design of the collector or arterial roadway(s) providing access to the subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Florida Greenbook), as determined by the City. 
Number of Households (lots or units) Number of Access Routes 1-100 One (1) 101-200 Two (2) except as described below 201-600 Two (2) 601 + Three (3) except as described below  
    Residential developments between one hundred one (101) and two hundred (200) households (lots or units) may be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ, defined as the Fire Chief or designee) with only one (1) point of access, if, in the opinion of the AHJ, equivalent safety measures consistent with NFPA Standards are implemented. 
    Subdivisions with six hundred one (601) or more lots or units shall have three (3) means of egress and ingress, unless, in the opinion of the AHJ, equivalent safety measures consistent with NFPA Standards are implemented. 
Secs. 30-243-30-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - UTILITIES 
Subdivision 1. - Utility Requirements 

Sec. 30-251. - Utility ownership and easement rights. 
(a)  In any case in which a developer installs or causes the installation of water, sewer, electrical power, telephone, or cable television facilities and intends that such facilities shall be owned, operated or maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the developer, the developer shall transfer to such utility or entity the necessary ownership or easement rights to enable the utility or entity to operate and maintain such facilities. 
(b)  Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Utility easement, not less than twenty (20) feet in total width, centered on rear or side lot lines where deemed necessary by the City. 
(2)  Contingency easements centered on side lot lines of every lot, at least ten (10) feet in width. Contingency easements shall be for the purpose of repair, extension or maintenance of public facilities and utilities by public agencies and may be shown on the plat by note. 
(c)  Storm drainage, sanitary sewer, and water distribution systems shall be designed by an engineer, installed by the developer or subdivider and approved by the City, prior to formal acceptance of ownership by the City. 
Code of Ordinances Reference- Connection to the sewage disposal system, § 21-79. 
Sec. 30-252. - Sewage disposal/water supply facilities required. 
(a)  The cost of trunk line extensions for either water or sewer, when required for the development of a site or a subdivision shall be paid by the developer thereof. In the event the Council should determine in its sole discretion that the extension of a water or sewer trunk line shall be for the common good of various areas or lands abutting thereon or capable of being served thereby, and it shall be determined by Council that the extension provides specific benefit to said lands, areas or lots to be served, the economic cost of providing said extension shall be shared on an equal basis by all of such properties receiving said benefits. In no event shall the City be required to extend any such trunk line or pay the cost thereof, except upon its own volition and after appropriate action of the Council. 
(b)  Sanitary sewer and water distribution systems shall be designed by an engineer, installed by the developer or subdivider and approved by the City. 
(c)  The City shall have the sole and absolute discretion to determine if the distribution shall be owned by the City or maintained by the developer. 
Sec. 30-253. - Electric power. 
    Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a source of electric power adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and lot within such subdivision. 
Sec. 30-254. - Telephone service. 
    Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision must have available to it a telephone service cable adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such subdivision. 
Sec. 30-255. - Underground utilities. 
    All utility lines (telephone, cable T.V., power) shall be placed underground with the exception of major transmission corridors. 
Sec. 30-256. - Utilities to be consistent with internal and external development. 
(a)  Whenever it can reasonably be anticipated that utility facilities constructed in one (1) development will be extended to serve other adjacent or nearby developments, such utility facilities (e.g., water or sewer lines) shall be located and constructed so that extensions can be made conveniently and without undue burden or expense or unnecessary duplication of service. 
(b)  All utility facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to minimize interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to facilitate maintenance without undue damage to improvements or facilities located within the development. 
Sec. 30-257. - As-built drawings required. 
    Whenever a developer installs or causes to be installed any utility line in any public right-of-way, the developer shall, as soon as practicable after installation is complete, and before acceptance of any water or sewer line, furnish the City with a reproducible drawing that shows the exact location of such utility lines. Such drawings must be verified as accurate by the utility service provider. Compliance with this requirement shall be a condition of the continued validity of the permit authorizing such development. 
Sec. 30-258. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  The number and location of fire hydrants shall be approved by the City and shall meet the requirements of fire insurance underwriters or similar formula. 
(b)  The following amendments to the Standard Fire Code are hereby adopted: 
(1)  Section 603.1.3 of the Standard Fire Code is herein repealed and replaced with the following: 
"Fire hydrants shall be installed and operational prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a building for all development, including single-family subdivisions, multifamily subdivisions, townhouses, condominiums, apartments, office complexes, shopping centers, industrial development, marinas, mobile home parks and subdivisions, and other similar development. This requirement shall be deemed to be satisfied when an operational fire hydrant capable of delivering the necessary flow is located within the prescribed distance measured along a paved right-of-way or inspected and approved private road or driveway. The prescribed distance for fire hydrant spacing is two hundred fifty (250) feet between hydrants in compact commercial, industrial and multifamily areas and not more than five hundred (500) feet in detached single-family district. Maximum dead-end distance shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet." 
(2)  A new subsection is herein added to Section 603.1.2(b) which reads: 
"Fire department connections shall be sited at the discretion of a fire official. All plans and specifications for any fire suppression system shall be designed and sealed by a Florida Registered Engineer or approval [approved] factory built systems. Permits for these systems will only be issued for a Florida licensed contractor in accordance with state statutes. The fees for permits shall be based on valuation of the installation of the system in accordance with Appendix K of the Standard Building Code and the administrative fee outlined in the fee schedule for construction permits. No installation of fire suppression systems, including underground piping from the municipal water supply, stand pipes and sprinkler systems can be contacted [contracted] or subcontracted to any company or individual not licensed in accordance with applicable statutes." 
Code of Ordinances Reference- Fire code adopted, § 9-1. 
Sec. 30-259. - Screening of dumpsters. 
    Refuse facilities shall be located only in the side yards or rear yards except when such yard is adjacent to a collector/arterial street as designated in the City's Roadway Classification Map. Such facilities must be constructed of an architectural surface similar to that of the principal building(s) and screened from view. 
Secs. 30-260-30-165. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 2. - Water and Sewers 

Sec. 30-266. - Sewage; sewer connections compulsory; connection required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner or agent of all improved property located within the City upon which property there is situated a building or structure from which liquid human sewage may be generated and there is an available City sanitary sewer line to connect to City sewer system. 
(b)  For purposes of this regulation [subdivision], "available" shall mean: 
(1)  The City sewage system is not under a moratorium; 
(2)  The City sewage system has adequate hydraulic capacity to accept the quantity of sewage to be generated by the proposed establishment; 
(3)  For all single-family residences or for establishments with estimated sewage flows of six hundred (600) or less gallons per day, a sewerage system shall be considered available if a sewer line exists in a public easement or right-of-way which abuts the property, and if gravity flow can be maintained from the building drain to the sewer line; 
(4)  For estimated sewage flows exceeding six hundred (600) gallons per day, with the exception of single-family residences a sewerage system shall be considered available if a sewer line, force main, or lift station exists in a public easement or right-of-way which abuts the property or within one hundred (100) feet of the property as accessed via rights-of-way or easements. 
(5)  For areas zoned or used for industrial or manufacturing purposes or its equivalent, a sewer line existing within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the development as accessed via easements or rights-of-way shall be considered available. For repair or modification purposes, an available sewer is any sewer line within five hundred (500) feet of the building sewer stub out as accessed via rights-of-way or easements. 
(c)  In the event the owner or agent has failed to connect to the sewer line after notification that a City sewer line is available, the City shall charge and collect a sewer service charge, even though the building or structure is not connected to the City sanitary sewer line, in the total amount established in Chapter 21 of the Code [of Ordinances]. 
(d)  Every building or structure from which human waste may be generated is hereby required to have a sanitary water closet connected with the City sanitary sewage system where a City sanitary sewage system is available and if none is available, the owner or agent of said building or structure shall have a sanitary method of human waste disposal, namely, have an approved type of septic tank or a sanitary privy and obtain a permit therefor from the County Health Department or such other applicable agency. 
(e)  The City of Titusville hereby encourages the conservation of energy and resource and hereby authorizes the owner or agents of residential property to install a gray water system which is defined as a sewage system which retains waste from showers, bathtubs, laundries, lavatories, clothes washers, laundry tubs and bar sinks on-site in a drain field or in a recirculating retention tank or other approved type of disposal system approved by the Brevard County Health Department. Other waste generated from toilets, dishwashers, floor drains, kitchen sinks, latrines, etc., would continue to be disposed through the City sanitary sewage system. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to industrial, business, commercial, office buildings or other nonresidential users. 
(f)  Every new subdivision regardless of distance shall be required to connect to the City sewage system unless expressly waived as provided in the subdivision regulations. 
(g)  Any existing improved property upon which there is a building or structure from which liquid human sewage may be generated and not currently connected to the City sewage system shall be required to connect to the City sewage system within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of notification that a sewer line is available as defined above and located within a public easement or right-of-way which abuts the property and pay all applicable fees. 
(1)  Any existing building or structure which applies for a plumbing permit or increases its sewage flow because of modification or expansion of said building or structure, shall be required to connect to the City sewage system if the building or structure meets the "available" criteria specified in Subsection (3) above. 
(h)  In the event any new development is required to connect to the City sewage system, and the City does not have currently available plan capacity or line capacity, or currently is under a moratorium prohibiting the issuance of additional wetline sewage connection system permits or building permits, then in that event, the City will process a dry line permit in accordance with Section 39-132 of the Land Development Regulations and application FDER Regulations, provided the new development complies with all applicable City codes and regulations and Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services Regulations applicable to on-site sewage disposal system. If an on-site sewage disposal system permit is granted, the new development shall be required to install all of the necessary dry lines and associated equipment to connect to the City system when the City system is available at the time of the development. 
(1)  The City shall, within forty-five (45) days, connect the development to the City sewage system after written notification to the owner that the City system is available. 
(2)  The City shall require any new development receiving an on-site sewage disposal system permit to escrow such funds or monies with the City to cover the cost of connection of said system to the City sewage system and applicable connection and tap-on fees. 
Sec. 30-267. - Water and sewer utility construction, site plan review, and permit review fees. 
    Water resources, utility construction, site plan review and permit review service fees may be imposed by the City and shall be included with the Land Development Regulations and permit review fees of the Code of Ordinances. 
Secs. 30-268-30-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PARKING/LOADING/STORAGE 
Subdivision 1. - General Requirements 

Sec. 30-271. - Purpose. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, all developments shall adhere to the parking and dimensional standards set forth in the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-272. - Number of parking spaces required. 
    The number of parking spaces are set forth in Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual, Number of Parking Spaces Required, Section 9.16. 
Sec. 30-273. - Credit for required parking spaces. 
(a)  For industrial and office purposes only, a reduction may be given to the number of required parking spaces provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Applicant must submit a transportation plan for their operation detailing how employees will be utilizing different modes of transportation to and from work. 
(2)  Applicant must demonstrate a reasonable number of their employees will be utilizing bus service, ride share, van pooling, or any combination thereof. 
(3)  Applicant must submit a site plan which will maintain sufficient land available to reinstate all required parking if applicant's transportation plan should not be implemented or subsequently terminated. 
Sec. 30-274. - Parking space dimensions. 
    The parking space dimensions are set forth in Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual, Parking Design Standards, Section 9.17. 
Sec. 30-275. - Required widths of parking area aisles and driveways. 
    Parking drive aisle and driveway widths are set forth in Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual, Parking Design Standards, Section 9.17. 
Sec. 30-276. - General design requirements. 
(a)  Unless no other practical alternative is available, vehicle accommodation areas shall be designed so that, without resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit such areas without backing onto a public street. The requirement does not apply to parking areas consisting of driveways that serve one (1) dwelling unit, although backing onto highway, major arterial or minor arterial streets is not allowed. 
(b)  Vehicle accommodation areas of all development shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such developments without the necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements. 
(c)  Every vehicle accommodation area shall be designed so that vehicles cannot extend beyond the perimeter of such area onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas shall also be designed so that vehicles do not extend over sidewalks or tend to bump against or damage any wall, vegetation, or other obstruction. 
(d)  Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles and without interfering with parking areas. 
(e)  Impervious parking lot requirements in the area of critical concern as set forth per Division 6, Stormwater, Section 30-207, Area of critical concern performance standards. 
Sec. 30-277. - Joint use of required parking spaces. 
(a)  To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking spaces operate at different times, the same spaces may be credited to both uses. In order to be eligible for this credit, a parking analysis of the uses included must be provided to and accepted by the Administrator. 
(b)  If the joint use of the same parking spaces by two (2) or more principal uses involves satellite parking spaces, then the provisions of Section 30-278 are also applicable. 
Sec. 30-278. - Satellite parking. 
(a)  If the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot where the principal use associated with these parking spaces is located, then spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby lots in accordance with the provisions of this section. These off-site spaces are referred to in this section as satellite parking spaces. 
(b)  All such satellite parking spaces must be located within four hundred (400) feet of a public entrance of a principal building housing the use associated with such parking, or within four hundred (400) feet of the lot on which the use associated with such parking is located if the use is not housed within any principal building. Such satellite spaces shall be utilized or assigned to employees of the building served. 
(c)  The developer wishing to take advantage of the provisions of this section must present satisfactory written evidence of ownership or lease for at least ten (10) years. The developer must also sign an acknowledgment that the continuing validity of his permit depends upon his continuing ability to provide the requisite number of parking spaces. 
Sec. 30-279. - Curbing. 
    Curbing requirements are set forth per Section 9.19, Parking Lot Curbing and Tire Stops of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-280. - Loading and unloading areas. 
(a)  The general application of this section requires that whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with this section to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner. Loading and unloading area requirements are set forth per Section 9.20 Loading and Unloading Areas of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(b)  Whenever (i) there exists a lot with one (1) or more structures on it constructed before the effective date of this chapter, and (ii) a change in use that does not involve any enlargement of a structure is proposed for such lot, and (iii) the loading area requirements of this section cannot be satisfied because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can practically be used for loading and unloading, then the developer need only comply with this section to the extent reasonably possible. 
Sec. 30-281. - Excessive parking. 
    Required off-street parking areas for all uses shall be required to have all spaces covered in an impervious all-weather hard surface with the remainder to be in a clearly defined, approved, stabilized area to accommodate overflow parking; shall be marked to indicate driving lanes, parking spaces, and, if appropriate, direction of vehicular movement; and shall be maintained in good condition and clearly marked at all times. Impervious parking in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of that required by this section shall be prohibited unless approved by the Administrator. 
Sec. 30-282. - On-street parking regulations. 
    On-street parking regulations, including the travel trailers, campers or boat trailers, wrecker trucks, emergency parking of disabled vehicles and construction related parking are set forth per Chapter 20, Traffic and Motor Vehicles of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 30-283. - On-street parking credit. 
(a)  The following zoning districts may utilize on-street parking allowance parking strategy located in Section 9.21.3.8 of the Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual: 
(1)  Downtown Mixed Use (DMU). 
(2)  Urban Mixed Use (UMU). 
(Ord. No. 37-2017, § 33, 11-14-17) 
Secs. 30-284-30-290. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 2. - Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Parking Requirements 

Sec. 30-291. - Parking standards in the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to provide parking requirements for any and all areas covered by the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district guidelines. The purpose of these regulations is to provide flexibility within the DMU zoning district and create a pedestrian oriented core within the City. 
(b)  Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district (DMU) are the same as the boundaries of the Downtown Community Redevelopment Area, with the exception of the Residential Historic Preservation Zoning District (see Chapter 28, Zoning, Article III, Downtown Mixed-Use Smart Code). 
(c)  Parking requirements, including the number of spaces required, aisle and space dimensions, loading requirements, queuing for drive-through facilities, visibility and access to off-street parking, are set forth per in Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual, Downtown Mixed-Use Parking Requirements, Section 9.21. 
Secs. 30-292-30-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - LANDSCAPING 
Subdivision 1. - Landscaping Requirements 

Sec. 30-301. - Intent. 
    The intent of this section is to establish standards that enhance the City's appearance and encourage sustainable practices. This section establishes sustainable landscaping practices that will maintain a healthy landscape for a prolonged period of time with extremely low water usage and low/minimal maintenance requirements. 
Sec. 30-302. - Applicability. 
    The standards set forth herein prescribe the regulations applicable to all development in the City. Additional standards applicable to the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning are specified in Subdivision 8 of this division. Where there is a conflict the most restrictive regulation shall apply. 
Sec. 30-303. - Standards. 
(a)  Landscape areas include buffers (Subdivision 3, Buffers and screening), streetscape landscaping (Subdivision 4, Streetscape landscaping), building landscaping (Subdivision 5, Building landscaping), and parking lot landscaping (Subdivision 7, Parking lot landscaping) of this article. This article applies to the applications described in the applicability of standards table. To ensure that the landscaping provided is adequate to meet the intent of this article, the following items shall be addressed with labels and notation on the landscaping plan where appropriate: 
(1)  Native vegetation is preferred and encouraged to be drought tolerant. Newly installed plant materials are encouraged to be drought tolerant species. Areas to be preserved in their natural state shall meet the requirements of the regulations for other areas. A listing of said species is available for reference in the Landscape Technical Manual. 
(2)  All other areas. All property, except for land utilized for principal structures, accessory structures, off-street parking areas, other vehicular use areas and required landscaped areas shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, shrubs, or trees. Other areas. 
(3)  Clearing. Clearing of development sites, shall not be allowed prior to the issuance of a site clearing permit and shall be consistent with these regulations. Within the area of critical concern (see Chapter 29, Special districts and overlays, Article X, Area of critical concern overlay), an approved phased clearing plan, showing cut and fill quantities to be moved on-site, is required. 
(4)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner and according to accepted good planting practice (including mulched areas around appropriate species so as to protect and present a finished appearance) with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described. A qualified representative of the City of Titusville or designated qualified agent shall inspect all landscaping and no certificates of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements provided herein. 
(5)  Materials (Subdivision 2, of this division). 
(6)  Yards (Subdivision 3, of this division). 
(7)  Streetscape where applicable (Subdivision 4, [of this division]). 
(8)  Building landscaping (Subdivision 5, of this division). 
(9)  Maintenance (Subdivision 6, of this division). 
(10)  Parking area landscaping (Subdivision 7, of this division). 
Table 30-4 Applicability of Standards Type of Development Greenspace Areas 
Subdivision 1 Landscape Materials 
Subdivision 2 Landscape Yard (Buffer, Screening) 
Subdivision 3 Streetscape Landscaping 
Subdivision 4 Building Landscaping 
Subdivision 5 Plant Area Maintenance 
Subdivision 6 Parking Lot landscaping 
Subdivision 7 Single-Family Residential Subdivision (SFR) x x x x 2 2 Multifamily Residential (MFR) x x x x x x Commercial Development (CD) x x x x x x Industrial Development (ID) x x x x x x Arterial Buffer (Exhibit A) 3 3 3 I-95 buffer (Exhibit A) 3 3  
1 Nonresidential buildings within a subdivision must meet the criterion set forth in this article. 
2 Additional requirements for major arterials and Interstate 95 per Exhibit A of Division 3, Landscape yard, (buffer/screening). 
Sec. 30-304. - Maintenance and inspections. 
(a)  The health and viability of all required landscape materials on the site, whether preserved or newly planted, must be maintained through proper care or replacement in perpetuity after issuance of the certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion, or restoration as may be required to resolve a code violation. 
(b)  For multifamily, residential subdivisions, commercial, institutional, public and industrial projects, failure to have viable landscape materials or preserved areas consistent with the approved landscape plan after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall constitute a violation. Failure to remove nonnative invasive plants and control re-growth prior to the final landscaping inspection is a violation and shall be enforced. The city reserves the right to enter property to make the necessary inspections. 
(c)  An on-site inspection shall be conducted prior to the approval of the land clearing permit. 
Sec. 30-305. - Continuing maintenance required. 
(a)  Any person owning or occupying the site shall have the continuing duty and obligation to maintain or cause the maintenance of all landscaping required pursuant to this article by the approved site plan, landscape plan, or this Code in compliance with the following minimum maintenance standards: 
(1)  All landscaping and landscape areas shall be maintained so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. 
(2)  All dead plant material shall be promptly replaced with plant material meeting the requirements of the approved site plan and landscape plan. 
(3)  Trees and palms that are removed, excessively pruned, dead, or beyond recovery shall be replaced. 
Sec. 30-306. - Redevelopment. 
    All property where there is redevelopment proposed or where an addition or an increase in impervious surface to an existing development is proposed shall be required to comply with this division to the greatest extent possible as determined by the Administrator. The Administrator shall also utilize the criteria specified in Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Administrative exceptions, Section 30-3, Standards for administrative exceptions when addressing the redevelopment provision of this section. 
Sec. 30-307. - Interpretation of terms. 
    Where necessary to interpret the precise meaning of technical landscaping terms used in this division, reference shall be made to Chapter 37, Definitions. 
Sec. 30-308. - Landscape plan. 
(a)  All developments shall have a landscaping plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect or certified nursery professional and shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this article and shall include: 
(1)  Location and size of each landscape yard (public, private and service areas). 
(2)  A table that includes the landscape materials. The table should include the following: 
•  Genus, species and common name of plants, 
•  Number of each plant type existing and size, 
•  Number of each plant type removed and size, 
•  Number of each plant type installed and size, 
•  Species of each plant removed or installed, 
•  Locations of each plant type and size, and 
•  Type of sod, groundcover, shrub, and trees. 
(3)  An irrigation plan with the identification of water-use zones including building perimeter, yards, buffers, screens, parking and streetscape, where applicable. 
a.  High or oasis water-use zones: areas requiring regular watering. This zone is highly visible, high maintenance areas of the landscape, such as the area closest to the property structure where plants are watered regularly in the absence of rainfall. 
b.  Moderate or drought-tolerant water-use zones: landscape areas requiring occasional watering. Plants established in this zone requires watering only when they wilt or show other symptoms of moisture stress. 
c.  Low or "tolerant" water-use zones water-use zones: landscape areas requiring low or natural (rainfall) watering and would not require irrigation. 
(4)  Location and size of areas to be preserved in a natural state. 
Sec. 30-309. - Landscaping and screening. 
    Landscaping and screening standards are set forth per Subdivision 3, Landscape yard (buffer/screening) of this division. 
Secs. 30-310-30-320. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 2. - Landscape Materials 

Sec. 30-321. - Plant materials. 
(a)  Quality: Plant material used in conformance with the provisions of this article shall be good, healthy and sturdy plants. All plant material shall be Florida #1 grade or better. Plant materials which are known to be intolerant of paving environments or whose physical characteristics may be injurious to the public or which produce a quantity and/or quality of debris so as to present maintenance difficulties shall not be specified for use under this article. 
(b)  Native vegetation: The applicant is encouraged to utilize plant material native to Brevard County in meeting these landscaping requirements. The existing vegetation that is native to Brevard County with the exception of that listed in Section 30-4(d) shall be preserved and utilized except when removal is justified and determined to be acceptable by the enforcement official (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(c)  Ground cover: Ground covers, other than grass, shall be planted in such a manner so as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within six (6) months after planting (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(d)  Lawn grass: Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Brevard County. Seeding and sprigging may be used if grass cover is complete within six (6) months, or sodding will be required (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(e)  Hedges: Hedges, where required, shall be planted in sufficient number and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid screen within a maximum of six (6) months after time of planting (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(f)  Synthetic plants prohibited: Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines or artificial turf shall not be used in lieu of the plant requirements in this section. 
(g)  [Overstory trees:] Overstory trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of greater than twenty (20) feet and reach a mature height of at least sixty (60) feet, and having a trunk which can be maintained in a clean condition with over five (5) feet of clear wood (no branches). Trees, including palms, having an average mature spread of crown less than twenty (20) feet may be arranged in groupings so as to create the equivalent of twenty-foot crown spread and shall count as one (1) required tree. Invasives shall not be used to fulfill the requirements of this article (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(h)  Caliper: Plant materials required by this section shall comply with the minimum size requirements of Table 30-5, Minimum landscape planting specifications at the time of installation. Plant height shall be measured from the average grade level of the immediate planting area to the top horizontal plane of the shrub at planting; for single-trunk trees, the measurement shall be taken six (6) inches above grade level; for multitrunk trees, the tree shall be measured from the average grade level of the immediate planting area. 
(i)  Planting areas and shrubs: Planting areas shall consist of permeable surface areas only. The permeable surface areas for shrubs may be included with permeable surface areas required for trees. 
(j)  Pavement edges: Each overstory, coniferous, understory [tree] or shrub shall be planted at least twelve (12) inches from the edge of any paved surface. 
(k)  Irrigation: Irrigation must be indicated on the landscape plan. Any landscape area must be shown by water tolerant usage area. 
Sec. 30-322. - Minimum size of plantings/grading of planting. 
(a)  In the case of multi-story buildings, tree caliper shall increase at twenty-five (25) percent per floor up to four (4) floors above ground level. 
(b)  In the event a site plan layout does not have adequate open space to accommodate required plant quantities, such quantities per species can be combined into less quantities per species, provided total required height or caliper is maintained and approved by the Administrator. 
(c)  All newly installed plants shall meet the requirements established in Table 30-5, Minimum landscape planting specifications and Table 30-6, Acceptable palm tree substitutions below: 
Table 30-5: Minimum Landscape Planting Specifications Landscape Feature Minimum Caliper at the Time of Planting Minimum Height at the Time of Planting Overstory 3 inch caliper 12 feet high Coniferous 2 1/2 inch caliper 10 feet high Understory 1 2 1/2 inch caliper 8 feet high Shrubs Three (3) gallon 18 inches high minimum 1 Palm trees may be substituted for Understory trees per table 30-6 below.  
  
Table 30-6: Acceptable Palm Tree Substitutions Number of Palms Type of Palm Equals Minimum Clear Trunk Three (3) palms Cabbage Palm (Sabal Palmetto) One tree Minimum clear trunk will vary by species but in no case shall be less than four (4) feet in height. Two (2) palms Washington Palm (Washingtonia Robusta), 
Queen Palm (Syagrus Romanzoffiana), 
Paurotis Palm (Acoelokrhaphe Wrightti), 
Pindo Palm (Butia Capita), 
Pygmy Date Palm (Phoenix Roebelinii), 
Senegal Date Palm (Phoenix Relinata), 
Chinese Fan Palm (Livistona Chinensis), 
European Fan Palm (Chamaerops Humilis One (1) palm Canary Island Date Palm (Phoenix Canariensis)  
Sec. 30-323. - Existing vegetation. 
    All open areas of any site not occupied by building, parking, storage, or required landscape plant materials shall be retained as a natural vegetated area or (sodded) grass or ground cover. The developer shall make a good faith effort to incorporate existing vegetation in the landscaping throughout the property. 
Sec. 30-324. - Landscape. 
(a)  Residential development: 
(1)  All single-family residential lots or developments shall preserve an area of approved low and moderate tolerant water usage mixed vegetation (native trees and shrubs are preferred) equal to at least ten (10) percent of the total lot or development area. In the event there is no approved low and moderate tolerant water usage mixed vegetation on a lot or development, the applicant shall be required to establish an area of approved low and moderate tolerant water usage mixed vegetation equal to ten (10) percent of the lot or development. Required landscaping may be credited as established in the Landscape Credits Table, 30-7 of this section. 
(2)  At a minimum, fifty (50) percent of newly installed vegetation must be shrubs. 
(3)  The front yard tree requirement may be waived by the Administrator if the residential lot(s) preserves trees and underlying vegetation in the front yard setback area. 
(b)  Commercial development: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent of the required landscape area for a commercial development shall utilize low and moderate tolerant water usage mixed vegetation (native trees and shrubs are preferred). The City can supply the applicant with a list of approved mixed low and moderate tolerant water usage vegetation upon request (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(c)  Industrial development: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent of the required landscape area for an industrial development shall utilize low and moderate tolerant water usage mixed vegetation (native trees and shrubs are preferred). The City can supply the applicant with a list of approved mixed low and moderate tolerant water usage vegetation upon request (see Landscape Technical Manual). 
(2)  Industrial development may consolidate all required landscaping between the public right-of-way and the building. For example, the required planting materials in a building perimeter landscape strip for the entire perimeter of the proposed structure may be consolidated along the front edge of the building. As the minimum plant materials will be consolidated along the front of the building, the remainder of the perimeter will not require a building perimeter landscape strip. This consolidation can be applied to required building perimeter landscape strips, and required landscape yards except as noted below. This regulation shall not be construed to not require landscaping between the building and any public right-of-way. 
(3)  Required landscape yards may only be consolidated between the building and public right-of-way for property lines that abut other industrial development or zoning districts. Industrial development that abuts non-industrial development or zoning districts shall provide the required buffer along those property lines abutting non-industrial development or zoning districts. 
(4)  Industrial development which is adjacent to two (2) public rights-of-way (ex: a corner lot) may consolidate the required landscaping between the building and the two (2) rights-of-way. 
[(d)]  [Reserved.] 
(e)  Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district. The DMU landscape standards can be found in Division 7 of this chapter. 
(f)  Required landscaping may be credited as established in the landscape credits table below. 
Table 30-7: Landscape Credits Plant Material Minimum size Equivalency Preserved tree Minimum 4-inch caliper Equals 200 square feet of approved mixed vegetation Newly installed tree Minimum 21/2-3-inch caliper Equals 200 square feet of approved mixed vegetation Existing or newly installed shrub Minimum 18 inches in height Equals nine (9) square feet of approved mixed vegetation  
Note- Irregular shaped lots - It is the intent that by following the above-outlined performance standards, each newly planted tree (palms not included) will have an average two hundred (200) square foot rooting area. If a conflict occurs between newly planted trees, trees preserved, and the number of trees required because of lot size, the Administrator may make the determination to ensure the required rooting area of two hundred (200) square feet for each tree. 
Secs. 30-325-30-330. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 3. - Landscape Yard (Buffer/Screen) 

Sec. 30-331. - Applicability. 
(a)  This section applies to any of the following: 
(1)  Provides landscaped separation between land-use intensities where appropriate; 
(2)  Screens from view certain land uses that may create visual clutter and distraction; and 
(3)  Provides for increases in the width and opacity of the landscape buffer yard as the land-use intensity of the new or expanded development increases. 
(b)  Landscape yard: Landscaped area measured from the property line to a depth as prescribed in the code. The term includes landscape strip, landscape buffer, buffer yard, and landscape screen. In a platted subdivision, the required landscape yard shall be located in a separate tract or common area to be maintained by the Homeowners Association. 
(c)  This section applies to any construction or erection of any new building or structure for which a development approval is required. 
(Ord. No. 54-2018, § 1, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 30-332. - Required landscape yards. 
(a)  Required landscape yard type establishes when a landscape yard is required for differing land use intensities. Only the proposed development or redevelopment shall be required to provide the buffer. In a platted subdivision, the required landscape yard shall be located in a separate tract or common area to be maintained by the Homeowners Association. The applicant shall install the type of landscape yard indicated in the Required Landscape Yard Type Table. 
Table 30-8 Required Landscape Yard Type 
(See Landscape Yard Standards Table 30-9) Existing Development SFR MFR CD ID Arterial Buffer I-95 Buffer Public R.O.W. 2 Proposed 
Development 1 SFR B B B C D E B MFR B B B B D E B CD A A A A D E B ID A A A A D E B 1 SFR = Single-Family Residential Subdivision; MFR = Multifamily Residential; CD = Commercial Development; ID = Industrial Development; Arterial Buffer (per Exhibit A); I-95 Buffer (per Exhibit A)  
(1)  If adjacent property is vacant, the current zoning designation shall be used to determine the minimum landscaping requirements along that property line. 
(2)  Section 28-07 allows a ten-foot landscape yard in the Downtown Mixed-Use Comprehensive Plan Land Use category as set forth per Chapter 27, General provisions, Article IV, Future Land Use/Zoning Matrix Standards and Chapter 29, Special districts and overlays, Article VIII, Special land use standards, Division 3, Downtown Mixed-Use future land use. 
(b)  Note: Additional standards applicable to the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district are specified in Division 7 of this chapter. Where there is a conflict the most restrictive regulation shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 54-2018, § 2, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 30-333. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The requirements of Subdivision 3, Landscape yards of this division do not apply to the following situations: 
(1)  Accessory structures. 
(2)  Agricultural uses. 
(3)  The reconstruction of an existing building of which fifty (50) percent or less of the floor area was destroyed or ruined by flooding, fire, wind storm, or act of God. This exemption shall apply only where reconstruction of that building will not result in an increase in building size or paving area of the parking facilities to be provided. 
(4)  Interior finish work or remodeling in a portion of a building unless the work results in an increase in the paving area of the parking facilities within the street yard or in an enlargement of the exterior dimensions of an existing building. 
(5)  Any use, building, or structure for which only a change of use is requested and which requires no structural modifications that increase its volume or scale. 
(6)  Single-family dwellings located on an existing lot of record. 
(7)  Residential lots. All residential lots shall provide a minimum of one (1) boulevard tree (planted between the curb and lot line) and one (1) front yard tree (planted between the lot line and the front building line). 
(Ord. No. 54-2018, § 3, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 30-334. - Reduction in required landscape yards. 
    Any landscape areas reduced in size shall be offset by an equal amount in another area of the site. 
Sec. 30-335. - Description of landscape yards. 
(a)  There are five (5) types of landscape yards. The landscape yard standards table illustrates a typical landscape yard and shows the minimum width and number of trees and/or plants required per two hundred (200) linear feet for each landscape yard. Each landscape yard type provides several plant material options. The applicant may either plant new trees or plants or preserve existing trees or plants within the required buffer that meet the requirement of this section. 
Table 30-9: Landscape Yard Standards Type Minimum Width (Feet) Minimum Plant Materials (feet) Overstory Coniferous Understory Understory shrub A 10 4/200' 2/200' 1/200' 1/15' B 20 4/200' 2/200' 1/200' 1/15' C 30 4/200' 2/200' 1/200' 1/15' D 1 
Arterial buffer 30 4/200' 2/200' 1/200' 1/15' E 2 I-95 Buffer 50 4/200' 2/200' 1/200' 1/15' 1 Substitution Reduce to 20' width minimum of 6' decorative masonry wall. 2 Substitution Reduce to 20' width minimum of 10' decorative masonry wall. F = Fence W = Wall B = Berm 
Fences, Walls, or Berms shall meet the criteria for visual buffer and screening requirements in Section 30-15.  
(b)  Note: Standards applicable to the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning are specified in Division 8. Where there is a conflict the most restrictive regulation shall apply. 
(c)  Exhibit A: Buffers 

Sec. 30-336. - Landscaping required for all site development. 
(a)  For sites already disturbed/cleared or where little or no approved low and moderate tolerant water usage mixed vegetation already exists, the same buffers shall be required and the site shall be reforested with approved low and moderate tolerant water usage trees and shrubs suitable for the existing soils and topography. In addition, sites adjacent to the roadways identified in Exhibit "A" shall comply with the Required Landscape Yard Type Table 30-8. 
(b)  A landscape plan will be required for all landscape yards and shall be reviewed under the criteria established for non-residential projects in Section 30-332. 
(c)  Landscape areas may be less than ten (10) feet in depth required in the required landscape yard type table to provide safe access and clear zones. 
(d)  Necessary accessways from the public or private right-of-way through all such landscaping shall be permitted to service the parking or other vehicular use areas. 
Sec. 30-337. - Permitted uses within the landscape buffer yard. 
(a)  No active recreation area, storage of materials, parking, or structures, except for necessary utility boxes and equipment, shall be located within the landscape buffer yard. 
(b)  Landscape yards shall not be included as drainage, right-of-way, utility or other easements unless otherwise approved by the administrator, providing that the original intent and purpose of this section is met and there are unusual circumstances provided to the administrator. 
(c)  The landscape buffer yard for development, other than platted subdivisions, may be included in the required building setback. 
(d)  The landscape buffer yard may be included in the required open space (see Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open space of this chapter). 
(e)  Landscape buffer yards may be used as greenways (see Development Options Chapter, Article II, Planned Industrial District). 
(f)  In a platted subdivision, the required landscape yard shall be located in a separate tract or common area to be maintained by the Homeowners Association. 
(Ord. No. 54-2018, § 4, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 30-338. - Natural buffer yards. 
    Existing vegetation with native vegetation may be used to meet any of the buffer yard requirements if the criteria of the required landscape yard type table are met. The applicant shall retain as much of the existing native vegetation towards the buffer or landscape yard requirement. 
Sec. 30-339. - Visual buffer and screening requirements. 
(a)  A screen refers to a visual barrier designed to separate differing land use intensities and to remove service bays, outdoor storage and handling areas, and trash receptacles from public view. 
(1)  A screen shall be a continuous hedge, or a solid wood or masonry wall fence. An earth berm may be used in concert to achieve a portion of the required height. 
(2)  Said screen shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. (In the case of a hedge it must reach the required height and provide a continuous one hundred (100) percent opaque screen within six (6) months from installation.) 
Note: Said hedge shall not be credited against the requirements established in the landscape yard standards table. 
(b)  Fences and walls used for visual buffer and screening shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Fences and walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
(2)  Fences and walls shall be solid and one hundred (100) percent opaque. 
(3)  Fence materials shall be a minimum of a one-half-inch thick and shall be made of wood, precast concrete, or other similar materials. 
(4)  Corrugated and/or galvanized steel or metal sheets are not permitted. 
(5)  Walls may be concreted, concrete block with stucco finish, masonry, stone, or a combination of these materials. 
(6)  Support posts shall be placed on and face toward the inside of the developing property so that the surface of the wall or fence is smooth on the abutting property side. 
(c)  Berms used for visual buffer and screening shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Berms shall have a slope not greater than the slope created in three (3) horizontal feet with a one (1) foot vertical rise. 
(2)  The surface of the berm that is not planted with trees and shrubs shall be covered with grass, perennial ground cover, vines, and woody and herbaceous perennials, with mulch. 
(3)  Grass or other coverings shall be maintained in conformance with applicable City of Titusville codes. 
(d)  Parking stalls shall be screened from the view of neighboring uses and from the street. Screening for parking stalls shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The screen shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in height. 
(2)  The screen shall be an architecturally compatible solid masonry wall, earth berm, or shrubbery hedge planted three (3) feet on center, or any combination thereof. 
(3)  If shrubbery is used, it shall meet the minimum height within six (6) months, and the shrubbery shall not be credited towards any other required landscaping. 
(e)  Dumpster enclosures shall be required to meet the following standards: 
(1)  Dumpsters shall be screened with a fence or wall that meet the standards of subsection (b) above. 
(2)  Enclosures shall have a perimeter landscape strip clear of all doors and accessways, five (5) feet wide, and shall be planted with shrubs three (3) feet on center grass and/or ground cover. 
(3)  Dumpster enclosures shall be oriented such that the opening is not exposed to public view or shall be screened as provided for above. 
(f)  Off-street loading spaces, refuse and outdoor storage areas, antennas, satellite dishes, and mechanical equipment shall be screened from all public streets. The screening shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height or a height sufficient to obscure the area or equipment requiring the screening, whichever is less. The screening may be provided by plants, a fence or wall that meets the standards in Section 30-15(b), or a combination of walls and plants. The height of plants shall be based on reaching their size of maturity within five (5) growing seasons. 
(g)  Planned Industrial Development (PID): In addition to the requirements of Section 30-15, no off-street loading area shall be located in a required front yard or within ten (10) feet of a side or rear property line. Such loading facilities that are visible only to another lot shall be screened to fifty (50) percent opaqueness using a combination of berms, shrubs, trees, fencing and/or architectural design. 
Sec. 30-340. - Utilities. 
    Utility companies shall provide landscape yards for electrical substations, water pumping/storage sites, and wastewater treatment plants. The buffer shall comply with the requirements for a Public R.O.W. per Exhibit A described in the required landscape yard type table. 
Secs. 30-341-30-350. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 4. - Streetscape. 

Sec. 30-351. - Streetscape. 
(a)  Streets classified as boulevards shall have boulevard trees planted at an interval of at least one (1) per one hundred (100) feet between the edge of pavement and the property line. These trees shall not be credited to the required minimum landscaping under Section 30-322(c), Minimum landscape planting specifications table. 
(b)  Chapter 30-240(b)(2)(e), Uniform numbering system adopted, states that boulevards are defined as streets on which a vegetated median exists on a least fifty (50) percent of its length. 
Secs. 30-352-30-360. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 5. - Building Landscaping 

Sec. 30-361. - Applicability. 
    This section applies to any commercial, industrial, mixed-use or multi-family structure that has a building footprint that exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
Sec. 30-362. - Standards. 
(a)  Building landscaping shall abut the building and shall be used or installed in such a manner as to screen mechanical equipment attached to or adjacent to the building, provide direction to and enhance entrances, and enhance walkways and provide visual breaks along blank building facades. Building landscaping is required on all building sides except those sides facing an alley, openings for overhead or loading-area doors, motor vehicle bays or entrances to the building, or the perimeter of attached or detached canopies. Landscaping, buffering, and screening for loading areas, vehicle bays, service areas are set forth in Section 30-340, Visual buffer and screening requirements. 
(b)  All development except residential: All buildings shall have a five-foot wide perimeter landscape strip adjacent to the building, clear of all doors and accessways. 
(c)  This area shall be planted with shrubs three (3) feet on center, grass and/or ground cover. 
(d)  Variations to this requirement may be approved by the Administrator, providing that the original intent and purpose of this section is met and there are unusual circumstances provided to the Administrator. At a minimum an equal area shall be set aside within the development for any building perimeter landscape reduction. 
(e)  NOTE: Native vegetation is preferred and encouraged to be drought tolerant. A listing of said species is available for reference in the Landscape Technical Manual, as updated regularly by the Administrator. (See Section 30-6(k), Irrigation.) 
Secs. 30-363-30-370. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 6. - Plant Area Maintenance 

Sec. 30-371. - Maintenance. 
    The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping, which shall be maintained to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. The property owner, tenant, or their agent shall provide weeding, mowing of grass, irrigation, fertilization, prevention of pests, pruning, and other maintenance of all plantings as needed. The pruning of trees shall be to establish a central leader (except for multi-trunk species) and minimize co-dominant stem growth. All landscape material shall be maintained so as to provide for access for utilities, emergency services and vehicles. Maintenance shall include the immediate replacement of all dead plant material. The maintenance area also includes adjacent public and/or private streets and rights-of-way. This section shall also apply to all existing landscaped non-residential areas throughout the City. 
Sec. 30-372. - Planting standards. 
(a)  Plant areas must be protected from vehicular traffic through the use of concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent barriers. Each large tree, small tree, or large shrub shall be planted at least twelve (12) inches from the edge of any paved surface. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than twelve (12) feet to such public works. 
(b)  Soil in all planting areas is to be of suitable quality with adequate pH value and no large aggregates so as to support healthy plant life. 
(c)  Trees. All newly planted trees shall be planted in a mulched area of at least twenty-five (25) square feet with the minimum dimensions of five (5) feet. 
(d)  Landscape islands are to be free of base material or pavement. Hardpan material should be removed to a depth of four (4) feet. 
Sec. 30-373. - Irrigation. 
(a)  Irrigation: A hose bib or other source of irrigation shall be provided within one hundred (100) feet of any landscaped area. All proposed commercial, industrial and multi-family developments shall provide an irrigation plan as part of the site plan review process outlined in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article V, Site plan of these regulations. This plan shall detail the layout, head type, coverage area, pipe size and water source for the irrigation system. The system shall be controlled by an automatic timer with a rain sensor. The high, moderate and low water-use zones be labeled on the on the greenspace (landscape) plan for irrigation purposes. This requirement may be waived by the Administrator for areas utilizing low water tolerant mixed vegetation. 
(b)  In the Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning district, underground irrigation shall be required for all front yards, corner side yards, and rear yards if adjacent, to S.R. 405, U.S. #1 or Grissom Parkway; or any collector/arterial street as designated in the City's Future Traffic Circulation Map. Such irrigation shall extend to include the public boulevard and into general parking islands, except natural areas to be preserved. See development options for development standards, Chapter 33, Article II. 
Sec. 30-374. - Overhead power lines. 
    Large species trees shall not be planted under or within fifteen (15) feet of overhead power lines. Where existing or proposed overhead electric lines conflict with tree canopies, required overstory trees may be placed elsewhere within the development to avoid overhead infrastructure. 
Secs. 30-375-30-380. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 7. - Parking Area Landscaping 

Sec. 30-381. - Applicability. 
(a)  Shading is required for any parking area (excluding driveways or garages). Overstory trees, as identified on the approved plant list, shall provide shade for parking areas. A "parking lot" does not include an area used exclusively for the display of motor vehicles for sale as part of an automobile dealership. 
(b)  These regulations shall apply to any construction of a new parking lot or expansion of an existing parking lot. 
Sec. 30-382. - Design. 
(a)  Landscape island. Landscape islands shall be required to break up long continuous rows of parking spaces. Landscape islands shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Landscape islands shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width. 
(2)  Landscape islands shall be a minimum of two hundred seventy (270) square feet in total area. 
(3)  In no instance shall a parking bay contain more than fifteen (15) continuous parking spaces or extend more than one hundred fifty (150) feet, whichever is more restrictive, without being broken up by a landscape island. 
(4)  These landscape islands must have one (1) overstory tree with a minimum diameter of three (3) inches caliper, twelve (12) feet high at the time of planting. 
(5)  The remaining landscape island shall contain ten (10) shrubs and/or ground cover and be completely covered within six (6) months. 
(6)  The required landscaping in these areas shall not be counted towards any other landscaping required by these regulations. Landscape islands which do not form a peninsula from other landscaped areas shall be planted with trees, shrubs and/or ground cover. The use of grass in these isolated islands is discouraged unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Administrator's satisfaction that adequate maintenance thereof can be provided. 
(7)  Sites containing two (2) acres or less may be given consideration for the reduction of the above requirements in (a) and (b) by the Administrator. In no case shall landscaping area be less than ten (10) feet wide and one hundred eighty (180) square feet. 
(b)  Terminal island. Terminal islands shall be required for each row of interior parking spaces to terminate the row of parking. Terminal islands shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Terminal islands shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width. 
(2)  Terminal islands shall be a minimum of two hundred forty (240) square feet. 
(3)  Terminal islands must have one (1) tree of a minimum diameter of three (3) inches caliper, twelve (12) feet high at time of planting. 
(4)  No shrubs or other landscaping material shall block the visual access between thirty (30) inches and eight (8) feet and shall be maintained as such. 
(5)  Landscaping areas that terminate two (2) rows of parking in a corner or angle formation shall be required to provide a minimum twenty (20) feet × twenty (20) feet area. 
(6)  The required landscaping in these areas shall not be counted towards any other landscaping required by these regulations. 
(7)  Sites containing two (2) acres or less may be given consideration for the reduction of the above requirements in (a) and (b) by the Administrator. In no case shall a landscape area be less than ten (10) feet wide and one hundred eighty (180) square feet. 
(c)  Wherever a row of parking spaces does not face another row of parking spaces or a required landscape area, then a landscape strip shall be provided. Said landscape strip shall have a minimum depth of five (5) feet and shall form a continuous strip between landscape islands, and meet the requirements in Section 30-15(d). 
(d)  An optional landscape area to separate two (2) rows of head-on parking may be provided. In cases where parking stalls are allowed to overhang optional landscape islands the Administrator may approve a reduction in the required minimum parking stall length dimension, not to exceed a minimum dimension of eighteen (18) feet. 

Secs. 30-383-30-390. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 8. - Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Landscape Standards 

Sec. 30-391. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to provide guidelines for the installation of landscape plant material on any and all development and redevelopment sites within the downtown community redevelopment area (DCRA) and covered by the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district guidelines (DMU). The design of plantings and irrigation shall be done with the intent of minimizing the use of potable or well water for irrigation. Landscape plans submitted for projects within the DCRA shall be prepared by a Landscape Architect or a Certified Nursery Professional registered to practice in the State of Florida. 
(b)  Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district (DMU) are the same as the boundaries of the downtown community redevelopment area, with the exception of the Residential Historic Preservation zoning district (See Chapter 28, Zoning, Article III, Downtown Mixed Use Smart Code). 
(c)  Plant material shall be selected based on its appropriateness for use on and around the property. A percentage of the total cumulative landscape plant material used to meet the provisions of this section shall be "moderately" or "very" drought tolerant, as classified and listed in the most recent edition of Waterwise Florida Landscapes published by Florida's water management districts and as amended as shown in Table 30-10, Landscape Requirements. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, open space and landscape areas shall be defined as follows and as specified in Division 3, Open space of this chapter. 
(1)  Open space: Any area of a development site not covered with buildings or vehicular use areas. Utility equipment pads and other "nonaccessible" spaces outside of a building shall not be considered open space. Areas of a site partially covered by trellises, loggias, pergolas, or other commonly used outdoor structures may be counted as open space. 
(e)  The following table governs landscape requirements for developments within the DMU: 
Table 30-10: Landscape Requirements in the DMU Subdistrict Trees (Overstory and Understory) Hedge/Shrubs Ground Cover Minimum Planting Areas as Percentage of Total Site Area (unless otherwise noted) 1 Open Space Requirements as Percentage of Total Site Area Irrigation Special Conditions Waivers Allowed Xeriscape Materials Civic waterfront Equivalent of 2 overstory trees per 100 lineal feet of entire property; 6 understory trees per 100 lineal feet of entire property Shall not be higher than 3 feet for visibility Y 25% 30% Y Y Y 80% Uptown Equivalent of 3 overstory trees per 50 lineal feet of entire property; 6 understory trees per 100 lineal feet of entire property Shall not be higher than 3 feet for visibility Y 20% 30% Y Y Y 75% Downtown Decorative planters, sidewalk cut-outs, or window boxes shall be used to provide landscaping and beautification, since all of the buildings will be at the edge of the sidewalk NA NA 5% of front building face, planters apply to this requirement NA NA NA Only where the distance between the building and roadway is less than 5 feet in width NA Mid-Town Equivalent of 2 overstory trees per 50 feet of entire property; 6 understory trees per 100 lineal feet of entire property Shall not be higher than 3 feet for visibility Y 10% 10% Y Y Y 50% Miscellaneous Standards for all Landscaping Parking lot landscaping Where on-site parking is required to be installed by an applicant, owner, or through a change of use, there shall be 1 landscaped island for every 20 parking spaces to include minimum of 1 overstory tree a minimum of 12 feet in height at the time of planting, surrounded by hedge materials and ground cover. The landscape island shall be a minimum of 8 feet in any direction (measured from back of curb) and contain a minimum of 125 square feet. Other vehicular use area planting areas shall have a minimum dimension of 3 feet in any direction. These areas shall be planted with any combination of plant material. Turf planting is not permitted in vehicular use areas. In sites where an island cannot be placed for topographic or other environmental reasons only, an alternative of adding 2 additional trees to the front or perimeter landscaping requirements may be permitted by the DRC and/or CRA. Tree preservation When feasible, existing specimen trees should be preserved in place or relocated on site. Use of tree wells, as well as adaptation and variations of siting in order to conserve native vegetation, is encouraged. Crime prevention through environmental design principles (CPTED) CPTED design principles shall be used to assure safety, visibility, clear zones and well-lighted spaces. Perimeter area guidelines Where required, perimeter planting areas shall be a minimum of 7 feet in any direction (measured from back of curb) and shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements above. Streetscape area guidelines The required landscaping may take the form of sidewalk cut-outs where possible, or through the use freestanding pots, window boxes, or raised planters. Where possible, sidewalk cut-outs should be a minimum of 16 square feet (4 feet × 4 feet generally) and should contain 1 street tree or palm. The location of any sidewalk cut-out or freestanding planter shall be located so as to not obstruct the pedestrianway along the street. A minimum 8-foot wide pedestrianway should be maintained between any building and the street or parking area where possible. Planter requirements Where planters are used, a minimum requirement of 1 planter on each side of the entryway must be met. The planters must be at least 10" wide and 10" in depth and constructed in concrete, ceramic, clay, or like material and should be designed to compliment the building colors and architecture. Tree credits Per Section 5.7.4. Notes: 
1 All landscaped areas shall be within required open space areas.  
Sec. 30-392. - Spacing requirements. 
(a)  Plantings are measured as equivalent to the number per linear feet. However, plantings are required to be clustered, rather than placed in a right-of-way. Tree and plant spacing and size specifications shall be as follows: 
(1)  Overstory trees: Clusters are to be spaced no less than twenty-five (25) feet and no more than fifty (50) feet apart. Overstory trees shall constitute at least fifty (50) percent of the required trees. 
(2)  Palm trees: Palms shall be clustered in groups of at least three (3) and spaced no less than eight (8) feet apart and no more than fifteen (15) feet apart. Palm clusters may count as one (1) overstory tree. 
(3)  Understory trees: No less than eight (8) feet and no more than fifty (50) feet between trees or groups of trees. 
(4)  Shrubs/understory grasses: Planted on twenty-four (24) to thirty (30) inch centers. 
(5)  Ground cover: Shall be planted at spacing appropriate to achieve full coverage within six (6) months of planting. 
(6)  Turf: Use of turf is discouraged; however, where it is used, it shall be located to facilitate efficient irrigation with a minimum dimension of four (4) feet in any one direction. Turf may not be used in vehicular use areas. 
(b)  Required distances from walls, buildings, or sidewalk for in-ground plantings: 

Sec. 30-393. - Landscape material size requirements (at time of planting). 
(a)  Landscape material size requirements: 
Table 30-11: Landscape Material Size Requirements (at Time of Planting) Full Spread Overstory Trees: 12 feet in overall height 3-inch diameter at 0.5 feet above grade 4.5-foot crown spread Narrow Upright Overstory Trees: 12 feet in overall height 2-inch diameter at 0.5 feet above grade 3.5-foot crown spread at 3 feet above ground level Understory Trees: 6 feet in overall height 1.5-foot diameter at 0.5 feet above grade Shrubs: Min. 3 gallon size - 18 -inch high minimum Ground Cover: Min. 1 gallon size - full  
(b)  Multi-trunk understory trees shall have a combined one and one-half-inch-caliper for all trunks at six (6) inches above grade. Palm trees used as understory trees shall have an overall height of four (4) feet and may not comprise more than one-third (?) of the total understory tree requirement. 

(c)  Note: Specimen palms such as Canary Island, Bismarck, or Sylvester with a clear trunk of at least three (3) feet and an overall height of at least twelve (12) feet may count as one (1) overstory tree. Such a palm may count as two (2) overstory trees if it has a clear trunk of at least eight (8) feet and an overall height of at least eighteen (18) feet. Specimen palms may comprise no more than fifty (50) percent of the total overstory tree requirement on a site. 
Sec. 30-394. - Tree preservation credits. 
    Existing trees preserved or relocated on site that have been determined to be in good health by a certified arborist or by qualified City staff may be credited towards the minimum tree planting requirements. Existing palm trees or those proposed to satisfy these requirements shall count as a ratio of two (2) palms = one (1) tree, unless otherwise noted in Section 30-393. 
Table 30-12: Tree Preservation Credits Existing Tree DBH Credit 3-6 inches 2 overstory trees 7-12 inches 4 overstory trees 13-19 inches 6 overstory trees 20+ inches 8 overstory trees  
Sec. 30-395. - Irrigation. 
    Permanent underground irrigation systems shall be provided for all new landscape areas required by the code, except preserved areas of existing vegetation. Irrigation system design and installation shall follow the principles associated with Florida Green Industries June 2002, Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida, Florida Friendly yards and Low Impact Development, as amended. 
Secs. 30-396-30-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - SITE SUSTAINABILITY 

Sec. 30-401. - Sustainability, alternative energy, and green programs. 
    The City encourages the use of alternative energy design measures in all sign design, incorporating energy efficient lighting, solar energy for energy sources, recycled materials for cabinetry, [and] other appropriate technologies and techniques. The City may utilize and create an incentive program which would allow for enhanced sizes, heights, coverage areas, off-premises, or nontypical signage systems when an applicant proposes to incorporate such practices. 
Secs. 30-402-30-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONCURRENCY 

Sec. 30-411. - Development orders, approval and conditional approval. 
(a)  Rezoning applications and annexation requests may be approved; however, such approval shall be conditional in nature and shall not entitle the applicant to proceed with the development unless the public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development as provided in the City's Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(b)  Preliminary plats, preliminary plans, and nonresidential site plans may be conditionally approved; however, such approval shall be conditional in nature and shall not entitle the applicant to proceed with the development unless the public facilities are available concurrent with the impact of development as provided in the City's Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
(c)  Building permits, and final plats may be approved if a deficient public facility is scheduled for improvement in the annual capital improvements budget, or is under construction or is under contract for construction or is a part of a binding developers agreement requiring the construction of the public facility concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development, and the improvements will provide a level of service sufficient to accommodate the potential impact of the proposed development as set forth in the Titusville Comprehensive Plan as further provided in the City's Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual. 
Sec. 30-412. - Levels of service-Minimum levels of service established. 
    Level of service used from concurrency reviews are adopted for traffic circulations, potable water, sanitary sewer, recreation and open space, solid waste, stormwater/drainage, law enforcement and fire protection in the capital improvements element of the City of Titusville Comprehensive Plan. The minimum levels of service requirements and calculation methodologies are contained in Section 10 of the City's Concurrency Technical Design Manual. 
Sec. 30-413. - Annual concurrency report. 
(a)  At least once per year during the initiation of the capital improvement program/budget process, a concurrency management report will be drafted by the Administrator and forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission (acting as the Local Planning Agency) and the City Council. The report will serve as a summary of the current status of the concurrency management system and the capital improvement program, and provide for recommendations from the LPA and policy direction from the City Council. At a minimum the report shall contain: 
(1)  Update of capacities, demands, and existing levels of service for the public facilities and services set forth in the City's Transportation Infrastructure Technical Manual of these regulations. 
(2)  Summary and projections of expected development activities and their impact on capital improvement needs. 
(3)  The fiscal resources to be utilized to support identified needs and the feasibility of implementing new sources. 
(4)  Recommended changes, modifications or amendments to the schedule of improvements in the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan and the Capital Improvements Program of the City. 
Sec. 30-414. - City of Titusville Proportionate Fair-Share Program. 
    Impacts of development on transportation facilities may be mitigated through the proportionate share program. The intent, methodology, submittal requirements, and review and approval procedures are in Section 10 of the City's Concurrency Technical Design Manual. The process and procedures in the Technical Design Manual can be used to apply for the proportionate fair-share program. 
Secs. 30-415-30-420. - Reserved. 
Chapter 31 - AGENCIES AND BOARDS 
ARTICLE I. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 31-1. - Composition and authority. 
    The City Council of the City of Titusville is composed of a Mayor and four (4) councilmen and is the legislative body of the City and has the authority to adopt the comprehensive plan, future land use map, future traffic circulation map and amendments thereto. The City Council also has the authority to approve annexations, enact zoning changes, approve site plans and conditional uses as set forth therein. The City Council also has the authority to designate Boards and Commission as required by federal, state or other law and local need, including the Local Planning Agency (LPA). The City Council reserves all powers unless specifically delegated. 
Sec. 31-2. - Legislative powers and duties. 
    The City Council, when considering proposed changes in the text of these regulations, or in amending future land use map, the future traffic circulation map or the zoning map, or rezoning property or changing land use designation, acts in the legislative capacity and will proceed in accordance with the requirements of Section 163.3184 and Section 166.041, Florida Statutes (F.S.) (whichever is applicable) and Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Site plans, and Article V, Variances and appeals, Division 2, Appeals to the Board of Adjustment, and Article VI, Nonconforming uses/structures and vested rights of these [Land Development] Regulations. All actions of the Council shall be deemed fairly debatable and the burden of proof shall be on those challenging the actions of the Council. 
Sec. 31-3. - Judicial powers and duties. 
    The City Council acts in a quasi-judicial capacity during public hearings where variances, appeals, conditional use permits, site-specific zoning changes, or other site-specific development orders are considered. Quasi-judicial does not include comprehensive rezoning or any Comprehensive Plan changes of any size. 
Sec. 31-4. - Special powers and duties. 
    Pursuant to Florida Statutes Section 163.357 (1989), the City Council is designated as the Community Redevelopment Agency for the City of Titusville. The Community Redevelopment Agency shall have all powers and duties as authorized by Sections 163.330-163.450, Florida Statutes. This provision hereby ratifies and reaffirms that previous Ordinance No. 2-1986. 
Sec. 31-5. - Ad hoc and advisory committees. 
(a)  The City Council may from time to time, based upon a majority vote of the membership, establish ad hoc committees to assist the Council in carrying out its responsibility. Said Ad Hoc Committee shall be limited to a particular subject area, and serve only in that capacity for a specific period of time. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the City Council from establishing independent temporary, or ad hoc advisory groups, committees, or commissions to make recommendations on any issue directly to City Council. 
Sec. 31-6. - Appeal of Council decisions. 
    All decisions of the City Council whether zoning, annexation, conditional use, CPA or other approvals required by these [Land Development] Regulations shall be presumed correct and shall be final. Any substantially effected person may appeal the decision of the City Council to the Circuit Court in and for Brevard County, Florida. All appeals must be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision is rendered. All appeals shall be based upon the record before the City Council and not a trial de novo. All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for appeals from the County Court to the Circuit Court. 
Secs. 31-7-31-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATOR/ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 31-16. - The Administrator. 
    The Administrator of these [Land Development] Regulations shall be the City Manager or his designee. 
Sec. 31-17. - The Enforcement Officer. 
    The Enforcement Officer and Administrator may be the same individual or the Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Inspector may be such other member of City staff as designated by the Administrator. 
Sec. 31-18. - City staff, consultants. 
    In addition to the above powers and duties, the Administrator is responsible for allocation of City staff resources to the Boards and Commissions required by these [Land Development] Regulations, any necessary research (data and analysis), comprehensive planning, current planning, land use review, regulatory reviews and other administrative services related to development orders and the enforcement thereof. 
Sec. 31-19. - Administrative powers and duties. 
    Specific duties of the Administrator are normally performed by the Community Development Department or such other department that may be designated by the City Manager. Such duties include the processing and recommendations related to the following: 
(a)  The Comprehensive Plan; 
(b)  Land Development Regulations and codes including: 
(1)  The zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Zoning map changes; 
(3)  Subdivision plats; 
(4)  Site plans; 
(5)  Conditional land use requests; 
(6)  Engineering improvements; 
(7)  Concurrency management; 
(c)  Capital improvements program; 
(d)  Engineering inspections; 
(e)  Building inspections; 
(f)  Code compliance inspections; 
(g)  Occupational license inspections; 
(h)  Issuance of development orders; 
(i)  Issuance of building permits; 
(j)  Issuance of certificates of occupancy; 
(k)  Issuance of engineering permits; 
(l)  Administration of development fees and violation fines; 
(m)  Administration of city construction projects; 
(n)  Coordination of development activities with other agencies; 
(o)  Other projects as assigned by the Administrator. 
Secs. 31-20-31-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 31-31. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to City Council in all matters affecting the Comprehensive Plan and serve as the Local Planning Agency (LPA) pursuant to Section 163.3174, Florida Statutes, the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act. 
(b)  The Commission shall recommend the study of resources and possibilities, and needs of the City, and shall review and recommend to City Council plans and maps for the systematic future development and betterment of the City and recommend such change(s) as are deemed advisable; and may recommend to the City Council the division of the City into districts or zones or the preparation of maps and plans of same, specifying and governing the height, area and manner of construction of buildings to be erected, altered or reconstructed in such zones. 
(c)  Before any new street is opened, or any existing street extended, widened, relocated, closed or vacated, or corrected within the corporate limits or planning jurisdiction of the City or before any new subdivision within the corporate limits of the City for residence, business or industrial uses is made, the person opening such street or proposing such new subdivision for residence, business, or industrial purposes, shall submit a detailed plan with blueprints and other necessary data to the Commission. It shall be the duty of the Commission to examine carefully the plans for such subdivision as regards their nature and purpose, the number, width, character and location of streets and alleys, and the size, material and manner of laying of water and sewer lines, and shall transmit such application with all data to the City Council with its recommendations in writing. 
(d)  The Commission shall have the duty of recommending the purposes for which buildings and premises therein may be used, and establishing rules governing building lines, and shall submit same to the City Council for its approval, approval with condition, or denial. 
(e)  Other duties that may be assigned by the City Council in furtherance of its legislative powers and in Chapter 34, Procedures of these [Land Development] Regulations and the specific needs of the City, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review, recommend amendments to and monitor the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Evaluate land development regulations and codes; 
(3)  Review and update the land use and zoning designations in the City, including interpretation of boundary lines and applicable areas; 
(4)  Evaluate rezoning requests and requests for changes in the future land use map/future traffic circulation map; 
(5)  Review proposed subdivisions; 
(6)  Interpretation of uses permitted; 
(7)  Review proposed Master Plans; 
(8)  Review plans that affect the shoreline district, the conservation district, the areas of critical concern, the flood plain areas, as provided for in these [Land Development] Regulations; and 
(9)  Hear site plan appeals. 
(f)  In addition to the above, it shall be the duty of each member of the Commission, if funds are made available by the City Council, to: 
(1)  Attend one (2) local, regional, or state planning conference during each two (2) years served; 
(2)  Attend one (1) staff sponsored field trip within the first year of each term served; 
(3)  Join a planning organization; 
(4)  Attend one (1) City Council meeting every three (3) months (regardless of funds); 
(5)  Attend workshop session conducted by the City staff for orientation of new members and other such workshops that may be called as necessary; and 
(6)  Familiarize themselves with the Comprehensive Plan and these Land Development Regulations and other sections of the City Code applicable to the Commission. 
(g)  None of the powers, duties or prerogatives of the Commission shall be construed to be in any way a limitation upon the duties, powers and prerogatives of the City Council, but in every case shall be subordinate and subject to the approval of the City Council. 
Sec. 31-32. - Appointment and terms of office. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be composed of seven (7) regular members and two (2) alternates, each of which shall be a resident of the City of Titusville appointed by City Council. In addition to the Council appointments, one (1) non-voting member shall be appointed by the Brevard County School Board. Four (4) regular members and one (1) alternate member shall be appointed at the last regular meeting of the City Council in January of each even-numbered year, and three (3) regular members and one (1) alternate member shall be appointed at the last regular meeting of City Council in January of each odd-numbered year. 
(b)  The terms of all members appointed shall commence on January 31 and shall be for a period of two (2) years. The City Council shall fill any vacancy occurring on the Commission by appointment and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the vacancy. Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of office of the non-voting member shall be filled by appointment of the Brevard County School Board for the remainder of the term. Members may be appointed to successive terms without limitations. All members shall be residents of the City of Titusville for at least one (1) year, shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and a registered voter in the City. 
(c)  Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be removed by majority vote of the City Council. 
(d)  Members of the Commission shall be appointed by City Council and whenever possible shall represent a well-balanced cross section of community interests. Members shall be appointed to represent environmental development and general public interests based upon education and/or experience in these areas. 
(e)  During the month of February of each year, the Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary from among its membership. 
Sec. 31-33. - Standing committees. 
    The Commission may establish a standing committee from its membership for environmental issues and such other issues or concerns that the Commission deems necessary. 
Sec. 31-34. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  The Commission shall meet twice a month on the Wednesday proceeding the second and fourth Tuesday of the given month when there is business to conduct. The Chairman may, with due notice, cancel any meeting due to a lack of business. 
(b)  The Commission shall prescribe such rules of procedure and adopt such bylaws as may be necessary to carry into effect the duties and powers hereby granted, and may prescribe penalties for the non-attendance or disorderly conduct of its members and enforce the same. 
(c)  A majority of the Commission or standing committee (i.e. four (4) members) shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. In the event more than seven (7) members (regular member and alternates) attend the meeting, no more than seven (7) members may sit and act on items presented to the Commission. The Chairman will determine which alternate members shall fill in for an absent regular member or when a regular member abstains from voting on an item due to a conflict of interest. The non-voting member may participate in discussions; however, non-voting members shall not make motions and may not be used to constitute a quorum. 
(d)  The affirmative vote of a majority of the sitting Commission at a meeting shall be required to pass any action of the Commission. If a majority vote in the affirmative is not made, the action shall be deemed to be denied. 
(e)  Minutes shall be kept of all Commission meetings. 
(f)  All Commission meetings, as well as the Commission members individually, shall be subject to the requirement of Chapter 286 F.S., the "Open Meeting or Sunshine Law." 
(g)  Agendas for each meeting shall be available to the public at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to any meeting of the Commission. 
(h)  Whenever the Commission is called upon to make recommendations concerning an annexation, a Comprehensive Plan Amendment (CPA), conditional-use permit, or a zoning amendment, the planning staff shall send written notice to adjoining property owners consistent with state law, but in any case no less than five hundred (500) feet from the subject property. The applicant shall be required to provide the names and addresses of all such property owners on mailing labels, most recently listed in the Brevard County Tax Rolls. Staff shall also place a conspicuous sign on said property stating the action requested and the date of the public hearing. Failure of a property owner within five hundred (500) feet to receive written notice shall not invalidate the action of the Commission or Council. 
(i)  Any standing committee created pursuant to Section 31-33 shall meet prior to the Commission meeting, in order to expedite the review and recommendation to the Commission on matters charged to said Committee. 
(j)  Members of the Commission may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
Secs. 31-35-31-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Code of Ordinances Reference- Enforcement of the standard code for the elimination or repair of unsafe buildings by the board of adjustments and appeals, § 6-117. 

Sec. 31-51. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals of any decision, order, requirement or an interpretation of an administrative official of these [Land Development] Regulations, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Zoning of land and water use (Chapter 28, Zoning); 
(2)  Subdivision regulations (Chapter 34, Procedures); 
(3)  Protection of potable water well fields, the regulation of areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding, drainage and stormwater management and the protection of environmentally sensitive lands (Chapter 30, Development standards); 
(4)  Signage; 
(5)  The provision of public facilities and service concurrent with the impacts of development, and; 
(6)  The provision of safe and convenient on-site traffic flow, including vehicle parking (Chapter 30, Development standards). 
(b)  The Board shall also hear and decide appeals and variances regarding the following: 
(1)  Building code, electrical code, fire prevention code, gas code, housing code, mechanical code, motion picture theaters ordinance, plumbing code, streets regulations, swimming pool regulation, as provided for in the Code of Ordinances, Volumes I, and II. 
(2)  Hear and decide requests for variance from these regulations in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 34, Article V of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(3)  Hear and decide conflicts between the minimum building code and minimum safety code as authorized by Section 553.73, Florida Statutes (1989), including any conflicts between the local building official and local fire official concerning the application or interpretation of the minimum building code and minimum safety code. 
(c)  Appeals, variances and interpretations, shall not extend to decisions of an administrative official relating to public projects; or public policy decisions made by the City Council. 
Sec. 31-52. - Appointment and terms of office. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall be composed of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternates. All members shall be residents of the City of Titusville for at least one (1) year and be a registered voter. Members of the Board shall consist of the following: 
(1)  At least three (3) of the regular members of the Board shall be persons with the following expertise/experience in at least one of the following disciplines: 
a.  A licensed architect, engineer, landscape architect or surveyor; 
b.  A general or building contractor; 
c.  A person associated with the building trades industries; 
d.  A person having an education degree (bachelor or master degree) in urban planning or with a current American Institute of Certified Planner certification; 
e.  A person with a minimum of ten (10) years' experience in land development or urban planning field. 
(2)  The other two (2) remaining members of the Board and the two (2) alternates may be appointed from the City citizenship at large. 
(b)  All five (5) regular members and the two (2) alternates of the Board shall be appointed by the City Council for two-year terms. There shall be appointed at the second regular meeting in July of each odd-numbered year three (3) regular members and one alternate for two-year terms, and in each even-numbered year, two (2) regular members and one alternate for two-year terms. The term of the members appointed shall commence on August 1, and shall be for a period of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  The City Council shall fill any vacancy occurring on the Board, and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the vacancy. The alternate members may serve on the Board in lieu of a regular member when said regular member is unable to attend an official meeting of the Board or when a regular member has a conflict of interest on any item, and said alternate shall serve for the entire meeting. 
(d)  Members of the Board may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
(e)  Members of the Board may be removed at the discretion of the City Council. If any member of the Board is convicted of a felony his position on the Board shall be forfeited immediately and his seat vacated. The seat of any member who is absent from three (3) or more meetings during any period of six (6) successive months shall be vacated, unless such absences are officially excused by a majority of the Board members. 
Sec. 31-53. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  The Board shall establish rules and regulations of its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these Land Development Regulations. The Board shall meet on the fourth Wednesday of every month or in any event frequent enough so that business of the Board may be expeditiously completed. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all Board meetings. 
(c)  The Board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Articles V, Variances and Appeals, Division 1, Variances and Division 2, Appeals to the Board of Adjustment of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(d)  All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and the agenda for same shall be available to the public at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. 
(e)  Board members shall be subject to Chapter 286, Florida Statutes, the "Open Meetings Law." 
(f)  Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any of the provisions of any City ordinance or in modifying any order of any administrative City official, concurring votes of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary. If four (4) concurring votes cannot be reached, the subject matter before the Board shall be considered denied. 
(g)  The procedure for a member to withdraw, abstain or be excused from voting is in accordance with Section 112.3143, Florida Statutes. 
Sec. 31-54. - Board of Adjustments and Appeals officers and staff. 
(a)  At its first regular meeting in August, the Board shall, by majority vote of its membership (excluding vacant seats) elect one (1) of its members to serve as Chairman and preside over the Board's meetings and one (1) member to serve as Vice-Chairman who shall preside in the absence or withdrawal of the Chairman. 
(b)  The Chairman shall sign all correspondence for the Board and shall sign all opinions of the Board. 
(c)  The Chairman or any member temporarily acting as Chairman may administer oaths to witnesses coming before the Board. 
(d)  The Chairman and Vice-Chairman may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. 
(e)  An official in the employ of the City shall be appointed by the Administrator to act as secretary to the Board and shall be responsible to supply the Board with the proper facilities, agendas, minutes, evidence and information which the Board may request in the performance of their duties. Said secretary shall receive and schedule for hearings all appeals filed, notify the Board of same and coordinate the advertisement of the Board's agenda with the City Clerk, as required, in a locally circulated newspaper. 
(f)  The Board, with the prior approval of the City Council, is authorized and empowered to employ such clerks and subordinates, including technical and expert advisors, and to incur such expenses as in its judgment may be necessary, provided that the total expense shall not exceed the amount set apart in the budget of the City for such purpose. 
(g)  The Board may, if it is deemed necessary, call upon any City official in the employ of the City or upon other appointed City board(s) for technical advice, information, or recommendations prior to acting on any appeal which may be brought before it. 
Sec. 31-55. - Appeal to decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
    Any person substantially effected (as defined in Florida Statutes) by the decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of Brevard County, Florida. Said decision must be appealed within thirty (30) days after rendered. The decision shall be presumed correct and the appeal shall be a review of the record before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The appeal shall not be a trial de novo. The Clerk shall prepare the record in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. The time periods set forth in the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for processing appeals from the County Court to the Circuit Court shall govern appeals from the Board of Adjustments and Appeals to the Circuit Court. 
Secs. 31-56-31-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code of Ordinances References- Enforcement of the building standards, § 6-102; enforcement of the standard code for the elimination or repair of unsafe buildings by the board of adjustments and appeals, § 6-117; enforcement of the occupation license tax requirements, § 11-57; enforcement of the convenience store regulations, § 11-308; enforcement of litter provisions, § 13-29; enforcement of restrictions on landscape irrigation by the code enforcement board, § 21-48; enforcement of mandatory connections and provisions on prohibition against obstructions in the sewer disposal system, § 21-79. 

Sec. 31-66. - Powers and duties. 
    The Code Enforcement Board shall have such duties, responsibilities and powers as set forth in and shall be governed in all respects by Florida Statutes, Chapter 162, as presently enacted and as amended form time to time by the State Legislature. 
Sec. 31-67. - Appointments and terms of office. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Board shall consist of seven (7) regular members and two (2) alternates appointed by the City Council. 
(b)  Members of the Board shall be registered voters and residents of the City of Titusville for at least one (1) year, and whenever possible, include an architect, a business person, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a realtor. The two (2) alternates may be appointed by the City Council from the citizenship at large. 
(c)  Appointments to the Board shall be made for a term of three (3) years. Each member may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. The City Council shall fill any vacancy occurring on the Board and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
(d)  Members of the Board may be removed at the discretion of the City Council. If any member of the Board is convicted of a felony his position on the Board shall be forfeited immediately and his seat vacated. The seat of any member who is absent from three (3) or more meetings during any period of six (6) successive months shall be vacated, unless such absences are officially excused by a majority of the Board members. 
(e)  During the January meeting of the Board and on a biannual basis beginning January of 1987, the Board shall by majority vote of the membership elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. 
(f)  The conduct of the hearing and the enforcement procedure shall be in accordance with Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
Sec. 31-68. - Organization and hearings. 
(a)  The Board shall meet on the second Monday of each month. Additionally, if the Code Inspector has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the Code Inspector with concurrence of the Administrator, may immediately notify the Enforcement Board and request a hearing. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all hearings and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The City Council shall provide clerical staff, administrative personnel and legal counsel, as may be reasonably required by the Code Enforcement Board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(c)  All notices required by this chapter shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by the Sheriff or other Law Enforcement Officer, Code Inspector, or other person designated by the local governing body, or by leaving the notice at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of such notice. At the option of the Code Enforcement Board, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting. 
(d)  All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Enforcement Board shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusion of law and shall issue an order. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by said date. 
(f)  If the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the Code Inspector, the case may be presented to the Enforcement Board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the Board rehearing, and the notice shall so state. 
Sec. 31-69. - Administrative fines and liens. 
(a)  The Enforcement Board, upon notification by the Code Inspector that an order of the board has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine. 
(b)  The order of the Board may require the violator to pay a fine, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day, for each day that the violation continues past the date set in the order for compliance. In the case of a repeat violation the Board may order the repeat violator to pay a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) a day, for each day the repeat violation continues past the date of notice to the violator of the repeat violation. If a finding of violation or repeat violation has been made, then a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of an order imposing the fine. A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records of Brevard County, Florida; and once recorded, it shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the violation was found to exist, and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator, and upon petition to the Circuit Court it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the Sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed otherwise to be a judgment of the Court except for enforcement purposes. The lien shall be superior to all other liens or encumbrances, including prior recorded mortgages or judgments and only inferior to liens for taxes. A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose the lien, whichever occurs first. After three (3) months from the filing of any such unpaid lien, the Board may authorize the City Attorney to foreclose upon the lien. The duration and effect in such lien shall be consistent with Florida law, which is a period of twenty (20) years. 
(1)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the Enforcement Board shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation; 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(2)  The Enforcement Board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(c)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. 
(1)  A fine imposed pursuant to this chapter shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgement is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the Enforcement Board may authorize the local governing body attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Article X of the State Constitution. 
(3)  The lien shall be superior to all other liens or encumbrances, including prior recorded mortgages or judgments and only inferior to liens for taxes. 
(d)  Duration of lien. No lien shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee that it incurs in the foreclosure. 
(e)  The lien may be enforced as authorized by Chapter 162, Florida Statutes (1989), as amended. 
(f)  An aggrieved party, including the City Council, may appeal a final administrative Order of the Code Enforcement Board to the Circuit Court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the Code Enforcement Board. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
Secs. 31-70-31-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION BOARD 

Sec. 31-81. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Board shall prepare, update, and maintain an appropriate plan of protection for the historic sites and districts in the City. The Board shall also determine and recommend to the City Council the appropriateness of historical sites, historical architectural features of any new building or the modification of existing buildings within the City of a historical nature. Such sites and districts should be eligible for listing by the National Trust for Historic Preservation or the Florida Inventory of Historical Sites, or be considered potentially eligible for such listing. All such nominations for listing on the National Register of Historic Places shall be reviewed by this Board. 
(b)  The Board shall serve in a design review capacity on all exterior changes to existing sites and structures, and new developments within designated districts. The Board is responsible for approving or denying all application for certificates of appropriateness with an appeal to Council. 
Sec. 31-82. - Appointment and terms of office. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a Historic Preservation Board. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, and two (2) alternates. Whenever possible, members of the Board shall be residents of the City of Titusville for at least one (1) year. However, to meet state Certified Local Government Guidelines, up to three (3) of the seven (7) regular members shall not be required to meet the residency requirements as outlined in Section 2-51. 
(b)  The members shall be appointed by the City Council. All members will be encouraged to attend Historic Preservation conferences and seminars to improve/augment their decision making abilities. Such professional development will better enable members to participate in the local survey and planning process which is complementary to the State Historic Preservation Office's efforts. 
(c)  City Council shall appoint members to the Board that have an interest or experience in Historic Preservation. Whenever possible, City Council shall appoint members from the following organizations, professions, or groups: 
(1)  Local historian, and/or architectural or art historian; 
(2)  Architect; 
(3)  Urban and Regional Planner; 
(4)  Landscape Architect; 
(5)  Lawyer; 
(6)  Engineer and/or building contractor; 
(7)  Realtor and/or Property Appraiser; 
(8)  Interested Residents of City Historic Districts; and 
(9)  Brevard County Historic Preservation Commission. 
They will have the ability and desire to act in the public interest and represent, insofar as possible, the various special personal and professional interests required to make informed and equitable decisions concerning the preservation, conservation and protection of historic districts and structures. 
(d)  Terms of office. 
(1)  The initial terms of three (3) of the members shall be one (1) year from the day the board is formally established while the initial terms of the remaining four (4) members shall last two (2) years. Thereafter, the terms of all members will be two (2) years. 
(2)  Vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days of the meeting at which the resignation (vacancy) is accepted. Resumes of new members shall be forwarded to the state Historic Preservation Office within thirty (30) days of their acceptance on this Board. The state Historic Preservation Office shall be notified of any change in Board membership within thirty (30) calendar days. 
Sec. 31-83. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  An organizational meeting of the Board shall be held as soon as practical after the creation thereby [by] the City Council. A Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary shall be elected for terms of one (1) year by the Board from its membership. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules of procedures to govern the conduct of its business and the holding of hearings. 
(b)  All meetings shall be open to the public, announced in advance, and shall provide for public inspection of prepared agendas in advance of all meetings. The State Historic Preservation Office shall be given at least thirty (30) days' notice of all regular meetings and subsequently provided with all minutes and list of Board attendance and public attendees thereof within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  A majority of the Board (i.e., four (4) members) shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and the majority shall be members that meet the residency requirements of Section 2-51. In the event more than seven (7) members (regular members and alternates) attend the meeting, no more than seven (7) members may sit and act on items presented to the Board. The Chairman shall determine which alternate members shall fill in for an absent regular member or when a regular member abstains from voting on an item due to a conflict of interest. 
Sec. 31-84. - Administration. 
    The Historic Preservation Board is hereby designated as the agency which shall administer the provisions of this article. The Administrator or his designee shall provide all necessary clerical, technical and consulting services (including any needed contractual services) required by the Board. 
Secs. 31-85-31-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE 

Sec. 31-91. - Powers and Duties. 
    A Development Review Committee (DRC) is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 163, Florida Statutes and amendments thereto. The purpose of the DRC is to review and approve all aspects of exterior architecture, signage (excluding sign content), landscape, streetscape or hardscape improvements for aesthetic appropriateness and conformance to the adopted Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district code and design guidelines for any development located in the DMU district; and to provide waivers to certain technical requirements as noted in the City's adopted technical manuals where alternative standards may promote flexibility and environmental soundness in layout and design where justified by need, hardship, physical constraint, or to improve the overall layout and design of a development in the City. The DRC shall hear requests for waivers from the City's Technical Manuals and requirements of the DMU zoning district related regulations based on the criteria noted in Chapter 34, Division 5, Waivers to Technical Manuals, and Division 6, Waivers to the Downtown Mixed-Use Zoning District. 
Sec. 31-92. - Appointments. 
    The DRC shall consist of five (5) voting members. The following City employees or their designees shall constitute the committee: Building Official, City Engineer, Fire Marshal, Planning Manager and Water Resources Director. City staff can serve as advisors to the committee due to an area of expertise. 
Sec. 31-93. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  Rules. The DRC shall adopt rules for transaction of its business. 
(b)  Records and minutes. The DRC shall keep minutes of its transactions, findings and determinations. 
(c)  Meetings. Meetings shall be held on an as needed basis. Notice of meetings shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting, which shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three (3) members for design review and waivers from the DMU code and for waivers from the City's technical manuals. 
(e)  A minimum of three (3) members shall be required for waiver requests from the City's adopted technical manuals. 
(f)  The following three (3) members shall be required for design review and waivers pertaining to the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district: Building Official, City Engineer and Planning Manager. City staff can serve as advisors to the committee due to an area of expertise. 
Secs. 31-94-31-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AD HOC (TEMPORARY) COMMITTEE 

Sec. 31-111. - Ad hoc committees. 
    Any other committee appointed by the City Council for the purpose of reviewing, analyzing or recommending land development policies or actions, shall be temporary or ad hoc in nature. It is the intent of this provision that the bodies contained in this section of the Land Development Regulations be the primary agencies of review, recommendations, adoptions and adjustment or amendment to the planning and regulation of land development activities in the City of Titusville. 
Sec. 31-112. - Time limits assigned. 
    Any advisory, temporary or ad hoc committee created under this section shall have a time limit of six (6) months in which to complete its charge or task. Said time limit may be extended for one (1) additional six-month period for good cause. At the end of the initial period or extended period, if so granted by the City Council, said ad hoc committee will terminate, regardless if the task assigned has been completed or not. 
Secs. 31-113-31-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TITUSVILLE ENVIRONMENTAL/WATER RESOURCES COMMISSION 

Sec. 31-121. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Goals and objectives: The Titusville Environmental/Water Resources Commission shall study general environmental conditions in and surrounding the City of Titusville and make specific recommendations to the City Council regarding the environmental effects of existing conditions, future public and private development projects, subjects of particular environmental/water resource concern, and issues regarding environmental sustainability in order to improve information available to the City Council in their decision making role. 
    The Commission may study any subject of environmental/water resources interest or concern and report its finding and recommendations to the City Council, City staff, Titusville Planning and Zoning Commission, or any other duly authorized City committee. The Commission may also devote its efforts to encouraging the public toward conservation of resources and any aspect that affects the Titusville citizens' ability to safe, pleasant and productive use of the environment. The Titusville Environmental/Water Resources Commission strategies are available for review in the Planning Department and are subject to annual revisions and review by the City Council. 
(b)  Specific responsibilities: 
(1)  To respond to requests for comments on subjects of environmental/water resources and environmental sustainability issues from the City Council, City Manager, or other appropriate City committees. 
(2)  To review and make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council on environmental/water resources and environmental sustainability issues pertaining to the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Titusville. 
(3)  To review waterfront issues throughout the City, and make recommendations to the City Council, Community Redevelopment Agency, City Manager, and appropriate City committees. 
(4)  To review environmental/water resources issues as selected by staff and submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission as a part of applications for rezoning, conditional use permits, etc., and make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission on said environmental issues. 
(5)  To review and make recommendations to the City Council on issues of environmental sustainability such as: 
i.  Identifying affordable strategies associated with conservation, renewable energy, and energy efficiency; 
ii.  Recommending incentives for residents, businesses, developers and organizations to practice environmental conservation and sustainable building practices; 
iii.  Provide recommendations on the adoption, prioritization and implementation of initiatives, actions, policies and programs to support and promote all aspects of environmental sustainability. 
(6)  Establish Titusville as a "Tree City, USA" and act as the Tree Board. It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and update annually, and administer a plan for the care preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in all other public areas. 
(7)  The Titusville Environmental/Water Resources Commission may conduct public hearings, to implement the duties specified above. Public hearings shall be provided by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Titusville at least seven (7) days prior to said hearing. 
(8)  The City Council reserves the right to determine the projects or issues to be reviewed by the Titusville Environmental/Water Resources Commission. 
(9)  The failure of any project to be reviewed by the TEC will not void any approvals issued by the City Council, Community Redevelopment Agency or the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 31-2018, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 31-122. - Appointment and terms of office. 
(a)  The Titusville Environmental Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members, appointed by the City Council of the City of Titusville. In making appointments, Council will give preference to those residents whose applications demonstrate an educational background or professional experience in environmental or sustainability issues. To be eligible for appointment, each member must be a registered voter and resident of the City of Titusville for a period of one (1) year immediately prior to his appointment. To the extent the City Council is unable to appoint members that meet the above qualifications, the City Council may appoint up to three (3) non-residents of the City who reside within the boundaries of North Brevard District I, who are registered voters and whose application demonstrates an educational background or professional experience in environmental or sustainability issues. At least one (1) of the members of the commission shall currently be a member of the City of Titusville Planning and Zoning Commission. The Titusville Environmental Commission may designate a member to serve as an alternate to the Titusville Environmental Commission member that is the current member of the Planning and Zoning Commission. In addition to the seven (7) members, the council may appoint two (2) alternate members who may serve in the absence of a regular member. The alternate members may serve on the commission in lieu of a regular member when said regular member is unable to attend an official meeting of the commission; or, when a regular member has a conflict of interest on any item, said alternate member shall serve for the entire meeting or for the particular item that is the subject matter of the said conflict and be entitled to participate and vote as a regular member. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. The alternate members authorized to be appointed pursuant to section (a), above shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(c)  The terms of the members appointed shall commence in January. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that three (3) members are appointed in November of the first and second consecutive year after the effective date of this section [April 27, 1999], and one (1) member is appointed on the third consecutive year after the effective date of this section. 
(d)  One (1) alternate member shall be appointed each year, as stated above. 
(e)  Members may be appointed and reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
(Ord. No. 31-2018, § 2, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 31-123. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  The Commission, as soon as practicable after its appointment and annually thereafter, shall meet and organize by electing a Chair and a Vice-Chair who shall be members of such Commission and shall meet thereafter at some designated place upon some designated date in each month for the transaction of its business and more often if deemed necessary by the Commission. The Commission shall prescribe such rules of procedure and adopt such bylaws as may be necessary to carry into effect and operation its duties and powers hereby granted. The Administrator of the City of Titusville shall be a nonvoting ex officio member of the Commission. 
(b)  Four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum in taking any official action while exercising the powers hereby delegated to the Commission, the concurring votes of a majority of the members of the Commission present and voting shall be required; provided, however in no event shall any action be taken by the Commission without the concurring vote of at least four (4) members. 
(c)  Minutes shall be kept of all Commission meetings. 
(d)  All Commission members, as well as all Commission meetings shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 286, Florida Statutes, the Open Meeting or "Sunshine Law." 
(e)  Agendas for each meeting shall be available to the public at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to any meeting of the Commission. 
Chapter 32 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32-1. - Purpose of regulations; scope. 
    The purpose of these regulations concerning signs is to protect and preserve the character and appearance of the City of Titusville, Florida. These standards are designed to protect and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public in a manner consistent with the following objectives: 
(1)  Protect and maintain the visual integrity of roadway corridors within the City by establishing a maximum amount of signage on any one (1) site to reduce visual clutter. 
(2)  Establish locations and setbacks for signage which are designed to protect motorists from distractions, obstructions and hazards and avoid visual blight. 
(3)  Encourage signs compatible to the area in which they are located and consistent with the category of use to which they pertain. 
(4)  Ensure signs serve the use being conducted on the premises. 
(5)  Provide for signage which satisfies the needs of the local business community for visibility, identification and communication. 
(6)  Establish procedures for removal of nonconforming existing signs and consideration of variances and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 35-2018, § 1, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of administration, interpretation and enforcement of this section, and unless otherwise stated herein, the following words, and those defined in Chapter 37, Definitions, shall have the meanings as indicated herein: 
    Abandoned sign. Any sign shall be considered abandoned if the business identified on said sign has not been conducting business at the site on which the sign is located or at the location noted on the sign for a period greater than ninety (90) days from the occupational license transfer or expiration date or the sign has not been maintained. An abandoned sign includes the advertising area and support structure. 
    Animated sign. Any sign of which all or any part thereof revolves or moves in any fashion whatsoever, and any sign which contains or uses for illustration any light, lights or lighting device or devices which change color, flash or alternate, shows movement or motion, or changes the appearance of said sign or any part thereof automatically, including wind-operated devices. Animated signs shall include flashing signs and/or beacon lights. For the purpose of these regulations, time and temperature signs shall not be construed to be animated or flashing signs. 
    Awning/canopy. An awning sign is a permanent sign affixed to, printed on or otherwise part of an ornamental, roof-like structure supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid or light-weight matter sheathing except for the supporting framework. 
    Back-to-back sign. A sign consisting of two (2) parallel sign facings oriented in opposite directions upon a single sign structure, with the faces separated by no more than forty-eight (48) inches. 
    Balloon sign. Any inflated device or display which is designed to advertise, inform, identify or attract attention. 
    Banner sign. Any sign made of paper, cloth, fabric or other non-rigid material of any kind having only such material for a backing. Banners may have frames as part of their structure. Banners may or may not have characters, letters, logos, illustrations or ornamentations applied thereto. National flags and flags of political jurisdictions, including flags of states and municipalities, shall not be considered to be banners. 
    Beacon light. Any light with one (1) or more beams, capable of being directed in any direction or directions or capable of being revolved automatically. 
    Bench sign. A sign which is attached or printed onto the back of a bench which is placed within a public right-of-way. 
    Billboard. A freestanding sign erected and maintained by an advertising business or service, upon which advertising or messages are displayed. Chapter 28 - Zoning establishes additional regulations for Billboards. 
    Building signs. A structure which by its architectural character resembles a product being sold or an image being conveyed. (i.e. an ice cream parlor shaped to resemble an ice cream cone.) 
    Building face. The elevation of a building (front, side or rear) as measured from the ground level to the beginning of the roofline and between the corners of said building. For the purpose of these regulations the roof area of a building or parapet with an angle greater than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be considered in determining maximum allowable size of wall sign. 
    Bus bench. A seat designed for seating two (2) or more persons that is placed along a regular bus route at transit stops. 
    Bus shelter. A structure with a roof and a minimum of two (2) side panels with seating for two (2) or more persons that is placed at a designated bus stop deemed appropriate by the City for benches or shelters. 
    Current value. The current value of a sign shall be the value of the sign as stated on the original City of Titusville permit to allow the sign, as adjusted for inflation. A City permit noting the value of the sign shall be required to be provided in order to use this definition. For the purpose of these regulations the consumer price index shall be used to determine the adjusted inflation rate. 
    Designated bus stop. A location along a Space Coast Area Transit (SCAT) bus route marked by a bus stop sign and listed on a public bus route schedule or other schedule sanctioned by SCAT. This would not include a "flag stop" whereby a passenger may stop a bus anywhere along the route where it is safe for the bus to stop. 
    Directional sign. A sign erected for the convenience of the public, such as for directing traffic movement, parking or identifying restrooms, public telephones, walkways and other similar features or facilities. 
    Double-faced sign. A sign of one (1) of the following three (3) configurations: 
(1)  A sign structure with two (2) adjacent faces oriented in the same direction. For the purposes of these regulations, this configuration is defined as "side-by-side". 
(2)  A sign structure having two (2) faces placed back-to-back. For the purposes of these regulations, this configuration is defined as "back-to-back". 
(3)  A sign structure having two (2) faces and constructed in the form of a "V" when viewed from above. For the purposes of these regulations, this configuration is defined as "V-type". 
    Dynamic or variable message sign. A sign containing display that can be changed by electrical, electronic or computerized process. See Section 32-13 of this chapter for requirements regarding dynamic message signs. 
    Embellishments. Irregularly shaped portions of a billboard consisting of all or a portion of any picture, symbol, design, figure or caricature, either on a flat surface or in bas relief, which extends beyond the normal borders of a billboard sign, but which does not contain any written advertising copy. 
    Facade. See definition of "building face". 
    Face or facing. That portion of a sign upon which advertising is affixed or painted and visible in one (1) direction at a time. 
    Fence sign. A fence sign is flush-mounted directly to the fence surface area or painted on the face of a fence. 
    Fin signs. A vertically oriented projecting signs that are uniquely situated and customized for high visibility. 
    Marquee. Marquee comes from the French term, marquise, meaning a roof-like structure, often bearing a signboard, projecting over an entrance, as to a theater or hotel. Marquee signs refer to about a half dozen sign types. The general public and business owners often call storefront and entrance signs a marquee sign. 
    Menu board signs. A temporary accessory signs which display information about the goods and services of adjacent businesses that customarily have frequent walk-in traffic, such as eating and drinking establishments and light retail businesses. 
    Flag. A piece of fabric with a color or pattern which represents flags of the United States of America, the state, the City, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body. 
    Freestanding sign. A ground sign. 
    Ground sign. A sign on, or with supports in or upon the ground, independent of support of any building, including monument and pole signs. 
    High rise sign. A ground sign that is permitted only within the Interstate Access Zone with a height greater then thirty-five (35) feet and no higher than seventy-five (75) feet from grade. Said sign are intended to advertise to and attract the motoring public off I-95. One (1) high rise sign may be permitted per lot on commercial property with a minimum of fifty (50) feet of frontage on an existing improved (i.e. paved street) public/private ROW and located within the interstate access zone. 
    Illegal sign. A sign that at the time of placement was installed without City approval and/or against or not authorized by City signage regulations. 
    Immoral display. A sign that displays any statement, word, character or illustration of an obscene nature, as defined by Chapter 847, Florida Statutes. 
    Incidental sign. A sign attached to a ground sign structure or to a building wall, but may not be attached perpendicular to the wall. Such signs are restricted to trading stamps, credit cards accepted, and official notices of services required by law or trade affiliations. 
    Internal directional sign. A ground of building mounted sign for aiding navigation within a development. These signs are intended to be used by pedestrians to assist in navigating and locating facilities within a master planned development. Internal directional signs shall be pedestrian in scale and match the development in terms of materials, colors, and aesthetic style. 
    Interstate access zones. Interstate access zones are designated where a state highway permits direct access to I-95 (i.e. SR50 and SR405). The interstate access zone shall extend one-quarter (1/4) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) measured lineally from the intersection of the state highway and the centerline of the I-95 right-of-way. 
    Lighted sign. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper. This will include reflected lighting, neon, fiber optics, incandescent lighting and back lighting. 
    Manual changeable copy signs. A sign or portion thereof designed to accommodate changes composed of characters, letters, or illustrations and that can be changed or rearranged manual without altering the face or surface of such sign. 
    Monument sign. A ground sign that is erected directly upon the existing grade or artificially created landscaped berm and designed such that all means of support are concealed in a totally enclosed base that is the same width as the sign. A monument sign shall not include a sign in which support structure(s) (pole) is wrapped and/or concealed with a skirt. If a monument sign is placed on an artificially created landscape berm, the berm height shall be included in measuring/determining the maximum height of the sign. 
    Multiple-faced sign. A type of billboard sign comprised of sections which rotate to display a series of advertisements, each advertisement being displayed for at least six (6) seconds continuously without movement; the duration of movement of sections between advertisements not exceeding two (2) seconds. 
    Multi-tenant directory sign. A ground or wall sign identifying the building name, building address, tenant name and/or tenant unit number. Multi-tenant directory signs shall include all tenants in the building. 
    Mural. A wall decoration that depicts a scene, picture, illustration or design with no written message, word, insignia or logo. Murals are wall decorations that depict a scene, picture, illustration or design with no written commercial message, word, insignia or logo on which the mural is to be placed. 
    Nit. A unit of illuminative brightness equal to one (1) candle per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays of the source. 
    Nonconforming signs. A sign lawfully existing on the effective date of an ordinance, or amendment thereto, which renders such sign nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended ordinance. In addition, to this definition the requirements of Chapter 37, Definitions and Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VII, Nonconforming uses, structures shall also apply to nonconforming signs. In the event there is a conflict between these regulations the more restrictive shall apply. 
    The definition of nonconforming situations as noted in Chapter 37, Definitions is: A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of these regulations, an existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one (1) or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum size requirements, because structures exceed maximum height limitations, because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with these regulations, or because land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by these regulations. Also includes signs that are in nonconformity with these regulations. 
    Official sign. A sign erected by a governmental agency or its designee, setting forth information pursuant to law. 
    Pennant sign. Any string of geometric shape(s) of fabric, cloth, paper or plastic fabrication, without characters, letters or ornamentation, not to include the flag of any federal, state, local or foreign national government and shapes not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in length. 
    Permanent sign. Any sign which is made of materials intended for long-term use, permanently affixed or attached to the ground or a structure or which cannot be removed without special handling and meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code under which the sign was permitted. 
    Pole sign. A ground sign that is a detached freestanding sign supported by one (1) or more poles. 
    Portable sign. Any sign that is readily moveable and not affixed to a structure or imbedded in the ground. 
    Projecting sign. A sign which projects more than twelve (12) inches from a wall of a building and is solely supported by said wall. 
    Reader board. Any sign made of durable material in which the face can be easily changed. Aluminum frames with glass or Plexiglas covering is included in this definition. For computation of sign size, the entire frame is considered the area of the sign. A reader board may be either a wall or a ground sign. 
    Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed or maintained above the roof of any building, except for the purposes of this section, roof surfaces constructed at an angle of seventy-five (75) degrees or more from horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. 
    Sandwich sign. Includes "portable signs," double or single faced, which are portable and may readily be moved from place to place. 
    Side-by-side sign. A billboard sign with two (2) adjacent faces oriented in the same direction. 
    Sign. The term "sign" shall mean any surface, fabric, device or display which bears lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter, including forms shaped to resemble any human, animal or product designed to convey information to the public and is visible from an abutting property, from a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or from a body of water. The term "sign" shall include all structural members. A sign shall be construed to form a single unit. In cases where matter is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without organized relationship of the components, each such component shall be considered a single sign. The term "sign" shall not include: artwork, holiday or seasonal decorations, cemetery markers, or machinery or equipment signs. 
    Sign, flashing. A flashing sign which includes a flashing, changing, revolving, or flickering light source or change of light intensity, whether internally or indirectly illuminated. A flashing sign is considered an animated sign (see definition for animated sign). For the purpose of these regulations, time and temperature signs shall not be considered to be a flashing sign. 
    Sign, time and temperature. A time and temperature sign is a sign conveying lighted messages indicating only the time, temperature, tide change, barometric pressure, or wind speed and direction, by means of illuminated letters or numbers with change intervals. For the purpose of these regulations, time and temperature signs shall not be construed to be animated or flashing signs and shall not be used as a message board or display of any advertisement. Time and temperature signs shall be included in the sign computation area. 
    Single-faced sign. A sign with one (1) face which can be viewed from one (1) direction only. 
    Snipe sign. Any sign constructed of nonpermanent materials, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, wood and metal or mounted in a temporary manner such as attached to a utility pole, tree, fence post or similar object or inserted into the ground. This definition also includes any sign installed without permission of the owner of the property where the sign is placed. 
    Special event sign. A temporary sign designed and intended to promote or advertise grand openings, going out of business, festivals, holidays and similar events. 
    Temporary sign. The term "temporary sign" shall mean any sign that is not a permanent sign, and shall include a sign formerly or commonly known as a temporary election sign, a temporary political sign, a temporary real estate sign, a temporary directional sign, a temporary construction sign, a temporary grand opening sign, or any other temporary sign unless otherwise provided herein. The term "temporary sign" shall not include any substitution of message on an existing lawful sign or sign structure. 
    Triangular sign or tri-faced sign. A sign with three (3) faces forming a triangle when viewed from above. 
    Under canopy signs. Signs that are attached to the underside of a canopy. 
    V-type sign. A sign structure which is constructed in the form of a V, of which the internal angle of the apex does not exceed forty-five (45) degrees and the backs of the faces are not separated by more than thirty-six (36) inches at the apex of the V. 
    Vehicular sign. A sign attached to or painted on the normal surface area of an operable, licensed vehicle advertising the business for which the vehicle is used. Signage required pursuant to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Titusville and Section 489.521(7)(a)(b), Florida Statutes, shall not be considered as vehicular signage. 
    Wall sign. An on-premises sign which is painted on, attached to or erected flush against the exterior wall of a building and is supported by the building. A wall sign shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from the building or structure. Signs attached to that portion of a roof surface constructed at an angle of seventy-five (75) degrees or more from horizontal are considered to be wall signs. 
    Window sign. Any sign painted on, attached to or hung on the exterior of any window or glass door of any building to communicate information about activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service and is visible from the exterior of the window. Window signs do not include displays of merchandise. (See section 32-4(a) of this chapter.) 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 10-10-17; Ord. No. 35-2018, § 2, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 32-3. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, paint, repair, replace, or erect any sign without having first obtained a permit therefor, except as excluded by Section 32-4 of this chapter. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for renovation or repainting of a sign face (excluding a change in the message being conveyed) or repainting of a structure, cleaning and other normal maintenance of a permitted sign as required in paragraph (e) below. A new permit shall be required for any sign when the structural configuration or electrical components are altered or added or when the sign is relocated. 
(b)  Procedures to obtain permit. In order to obtain a permit to erect any sign within the corporate area of the City of Titusville, Florida, an applicant shall submit the following information to the Building Official: 
(1)  A completed permit application; 
(2)  An accurate scaled drawing which shows the dimensions, material to be displayed and colors of the proposed sign (two (2) sets); 
(3)  Construction details (two (2) sets); 
(4)  Electrical plans, if applicable (two (2) sets); 
(5)  An accurate, scaled drawing showing the location of the proposed sign on the site or building, including dimensions to property lines and/or buildings on the site (two (2) sets); 
(6)  The location, type and dimension of other signs on the same site. 
(c)  Compliance with the Standard Building Code. The Standard Building Code, Signs, and Outdoor Displays, as adopted by Volume I [Titusville Code of Ordinances] of these regulations becomes a part of this article and structural specifications must be met or exceeded as set out in said chapter. Other specifications in said chapter are also in force as to general sign placement, structural requirement and all items enumerated therein. Any ground signs exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet and/or more than eight (8) feet above grade shall be required to have sealed engineering drawings. 
(d)  Liability insurance. No permit shall be issued for any sign overhanging the public right-of-way in accordance with this provision unless such applicant posts a bond or public liability insurance policy in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per person, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for any accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any property damage. Such bond or liability insurance shall remain in effect at all times while such sign overhangs the public right-of-way. The public liability insurance may be waived if the applicant elects to have the City of Titusville install the sign over the public right-of-way. The City is in no way obligated to provide this service. 
(e)  Maintenance. All signs including their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and/or shall be repainted periodically to prevent distraction, unsightliness and unreadability. 
(f)  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the Building Official, who is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this article within thirty (30) days after notification in writing by the Building Official. 
(g)  Enforcement. Any sign or sign structure which is constructed, erected, operated, used, maintained, posted or displayed in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public and private nuisance by virtue of the fact that the sign endangers the public health, safety and welfare and is manifestly injurious to the aesthetics of the community and shall be forthwith removed by the Building Official, and for that purpose, its agents or authorized representatives may enter upon private property without incurring any liability therefor. 
Sec. 32-4. - Signs not requiring a permit. 
(a)  The following are exempt from the permitting requirements of this Article: 
(1)  Signage not exceeding an aggregate area of six (6) square feet, and meeting the following requirements shall be exempt from permitting: 
a.  Minimum front yard sign setback shall be five (5) feet. 
b.  Minimum side yard sign setback shall be ten (10) feet. 
c.  Minimum spacing between signs shall be at least ten (10) feet. 
d.  This signage shall not be illuminated. 
(2)  Signs not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) square feet in area and having only property numbers, post office numbers and names of occupants of any private premises, for identification purposes only. 
(3)  Legal notices posted by authorized persons of a public body. 
(4)  Public information, traffic control, regulatory and directional signs erected by a public body. 
(5)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or structures, but excluding letters, numbers, trademarks, insignia and any moving parts or lights. 
(6)  Signs directing or instructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic and parking on private property, providing such sign bears no more than twenty (20) percent advertising matter per sign face and does not exceed three (3) square feet in area. This twenty (20) percent area shall be computed by including the entire area of advertising within a single, continuous perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display used to differentiate the advertising sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
(7)  Signs attached temporarily to the interior of a building window or glass door. Such signs, individually or collectively, may not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the surface area of the transparent portion of the window or door to which they are attached. For the purpose of these regulations, an individual glass pane of a window or glass door is not calculated, rather the aggregate total of a window opening or glass door opening shall be used. 
(8)  Words, letters or logos printed on an umbrella attached to a permanent table where the use at which the table is located is lawfully allowed. 
(9)  Occupational signs denoting the name and profession of an occupant in a professional, commercial or public institutional building and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(10)  Signs required by federal, state, or local law. 
(11)  Temporary signs as described in Section 32-5. 
(b)  On the occasion that a sign is not specifically excluded nor included within these regulations, it shall be the decision of the Building Official to determine if any sign shall be required to be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 35-2018, § 3, 10-9-18) 
Editor's note- Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 35-2018, adopted Oct. 9, 2018, amended § 32-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 32-4 pertained to exempt signs and derived from the original codification. 
Sec. 32-5. - Temporary sign regulations. 
(a)  Scope. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the City's Land Development Code or in any other ordinance or code provision of the City, the provisions of this Section 32-5 shall govern the regulation of temporary signs, and take precedence over any other provisions that pertain to temporary signs unless specifically exempted or excepted herein. 
(b)  Findings of Fact. The City Council finds that the location and maintenance of temporary signs affects the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of this community, and that in order to preserve and enhance the City as a desirable community in which to live and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The City Council further finds that the regulation of temporary signs within the City is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end, and that uncontrolled and unlimited temporary signs would degrade the aesthetic attractiveness of the natural and manmade attributes of the community and thereby undermine the economic value of tourism, visitation and permanent economic growth. 
(c)  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this subchapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through reasonable, consistent and non-discriminatory standards for temporary signs. The temporary sign regulations in this section are not intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate the secondary effects of speech, and especially insofar as those secondary effects may adversely affect aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. It is the intent of the City Council that the temporary sign regulations shall provide uniform sign criteria which regulate the size, height, number and placement of signs in a manner that is compatible to the residential, coastal and historic scale and character of the City, and which place the fewest possible restrictions on personal liberties, property rights, commerce, and the free exercise of Constitutional rights while achieving the City's goal of creating a healthy, safe and attractive environment that does not contain excessive clutter and visual distraction in rights-of-way and adjacent properties, the surrounding natural environment, historic district and residential neighborhoods. These sign regulations have been prepared with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of the City and promoting its continued well-being, consistent with the most recent pronouncements by the United States Supreme Court regarding the regulation of temporary signage, and are further intended to: 
(1)  Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all zoning districts of the City; 
(2)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  Minimize the possible adverse impact of temporary signs on nearby public and private property; 
(5)  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of temporary signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(6)  Allow temporary signs that are compatible with their surroundings, while precluding the placement of temporary signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs; 
(7)  Encourage and allow temporary signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located; 
(8)  Regulate temporary signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(9)  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City; 
(10)  Protect property values by precluding to the maximum extent possible temporary signs that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; and 
(11)  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these temporary sign regulations. 
(d)  Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to Section 32-5. 
(1)  Temporary sign. The term "temporary sign" shall mean any sign that is not a permanent sign, and shall include a sign formerly or commonly known as a temporary election sign, a temporary political sign, a temporary real estate sign, a temporary directional sign, a temporary construction sign, a temporary grand opening sign, or any other temporary sign unless otherwise provided herein. The term "temporary sign" shall not include any substitution of message on an existing lawful sign or sign structure. 
(e)  Temporary sign standards. The standards for temporary signs are set forth in Table 32-5 - Temporary Sign Standards below. A temporary sign is unlawful if it does not meet the criteria established for the use of the property on which the sign is located. Temporary signs located in mixed-use districts shall adhere to regulations established for the use in the area which the sign is located. 
Table 32-5 - Temporary Sign Standards Property Use Single-Family Residential Multifamily Residential Nonresidential Uses Maximum number of signs per property 1 1 1 Maximum sign size (area per sign) 3 sf. 16 sf. 32 sf. Maximum sign height 5 ft. 5 ft. 6 ft.* Minimum front yard sign setback 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Minimum side yard sign setback 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. Minimum spacing between signs 10 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. Allowed on public right-of-way No No No Allowed in sight visibility triangle No No No Illumination allowed No No No For A-frame, sandwich board, or menu-board sign regulations, see subsection 32-5(m), below. For temporary banner sign regulations see subsection 32-5(n), below. * Temporary Banner Signs are exempt from the maximum height limitations established above  
(f)  Display of temporary sign requires permission of real property owner. A temporary sign on any parcel shall not be maintained if the placement of the same does not have the permission of the owner of the real property. 
(g)  A temporary sign may not display any lighting and must remain static. A temporary sign shall not display any lighting or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color. 
(h)  A temporary sign may not incorporate reflective materials or cause distraction. A temporary sign shall not incorporate reflective materials or printing or utilize other materials which may create a distraction or hazard for pedestrians or motorists. 
(i)  A temporary sign may not obstruct a permanent sign or the vision between pedestrians and vehicles. A temporary sign shall not obstruct the view of a permanent sign as viewed from any public road, street or highway or any public sidewalk, and may not obstruct sight-lines between pedestrians and vehicles using the public right-of-way. 
(j)  Display of multiple messages. A temporary sign may display multiple independent messages on any portion of the sign surface. 
(k)  Permitting. A temporary sign does not require a permit from the City. 
(l)  Prohibition of temporary signs on public property. Except where allowed by these regulations, temporary signs are prohibited on public property and rights-of-way. Private signs on public property or public rights-of-way may be removed by the City or its agents without notice to the sign owner. 
(m)  [Standards for A-frame, sandwich board and menu-board signs.] A-frame, sandwich board, and menu-board signs shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Sign shall not be located in parking areas or vehicular circulation areas. 
(2)  Signs located on a public or private sidewalks or walkways shall be on that walkway that is immediately adjacent and within fifteen (15) feet of the building exterior. 
(3)  The sign shall not exceed the following dimensions: 
a.  Three (3) feet by three (3) feet in area (per side). 
b.  Four (4) feet six (6) inches [in] height. 
c.  A minimum five (5) feet of clear space shall remain on the sidewalk with the sign in place. 
(4)  Sign shall be removed during non-business hours. 
(5)  There shall not be more than one (1) sign per business on any property. 
(6)  Signs shall only be allowed for uses with an active Business Tax Receipt issued by the City, and the business must be licensed at the location where the sign is placed. 
(7)  Sign shall not be placed in safe sight triangle per Transportation Technical Manual, Street Intersections. 
(8)  A-frame, sandwich board, and menu-board signs shall be exempt from the maximum duration per calendar year established in Table 32-5, above. 
(n)  Temporary banner signs. Temporary banner signs shall be limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days per calendar year, per business, per site. The maximum size of any single banner sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, nor shall any lot, site, or property exceed four hundred (400) square feet of total area of banner signs. 
    Temporary banner signs are exempt from the maximum height limitations established in Table 32-5, above. 
(o)  Maintenance of temporary signs. Should any sign be in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the City Manager, or designee, the owner thereof, or person maintaining the sign, shall, upon receipt of notification from the City Manager, or designee, immediately secure the sign, cause it to be placed in good repair or remove the sign. 
(p)  Temporary signs and wind advisories. All temporary signs, including, but not limited to, banner signs and A-frame, sandwich board, and menu-board signs shall be removed and placed in a secure location when a wind advisory is issued by the National Weather Service. 
(q)  Additional signs during elections. Additional temporary signage shall be allowed for the sixty (60) days prior to and seven (7) calendar days following any Federal, State of Florida, Brevard County, or City election, not to exceed: 
(1)  One (1) additional sign a maximum of three (3) square feet for single-family residential uses; 
(2)  One (1) additional sign a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet for multifamily residential uses; 
(3)  One (1) additional sign a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet for non-residential uses; 
(4)  In all other respects, these signs must comply with Table 32-5 - Temporary Sign Standards. 
(s)  Balloon-type signs. The following regulations shall apply to all temporary balloon-type signs: 
(1)  The placement of balloon-type signs shall not cause a sight obstruction to motorists or pedestrians. 
(2)  The balloon itself shall be no higher than thirty-five (35) feet from base to top and no more than thirty-five (35) feet in width. 
(3)  Balloons shall not be placed on top of any buildings. 
(4)  Balloons shall be anchored or secured to prevent excess movement due to weather conditions. 
(5)  Hot air, helium or other gaseous elements other than forced air balloon signs are prohibited. Balloons with a diameter of twenty-four (24) inches or less are exempt from these regulations. 
(6)  No parcel or development shall be issued more than three (3) permits in any calendar year. The maximum duration of any permit shall be for ten (10) days. 
(7)  Balloons shall not be located in any required parking space area. 
(8)  No balloon shall be allowed in any right-of-way. 
(9)  A copy of the following shall be provided to the Building Official for processing the special permit application: 
a.  Address of location or legal description. 
b.  Written permission of the property owner or the owner's designated agent. 
c.  Evidence of the installer's liability and property damage insurance. 
d.  A copy of a survey or site plan accurate to scale showing the location of the balloon, building/structures all property lines, abutting ROW's, parking, circulation area and the property's ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 35-2018, § 4, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 32-6. - Number of signs. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign. 
(b)  A two-sided or multi-sided sign shall be regarded as one (1) sign so long as: 
(1)  Said sign is a "V-type sign" as described in the definition Section 32-2 of this chapter. 
(2)  Said sign is a "Back-to-back sign" as described in the definition Section 32-2 of this chapter. 
(3)  The copy on all sides is identical, except for billboards, which shall be permitted to display a different advertising message on each face. 
Sec. 32-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 5 of Ord No. 35-2018, adopted Oct. 9, 2018, deleted § 32-7 in its entirety. Former § 32-7 pertained to political signs and derived from the original codification. 
DIVISION 2. - DISPLAY OF SIGNS 

Sec. 32-8. - Sign display provisions. 
(a)  Public rights-of-way. No signs such as banner signs or similar type signs will be allowed to be placed over the street rights-of-way or suspended across any public property, except by public or semi-public bodies as may be approved by the City Manager and/or his designee as per Section 32-21, and with such conditions as the City Manager and/or his designee may impose. Banner signs over state and/or federal routes shall also comply with requirements of the Florida Department of Transportation and be no less than eighteen (18) feet above the road surface. 
(b)  Banner signs. Each banner sign approved as provided for above or on private property shall be permitted for a maximum of thirty (30) days per calendar year, per business, per site. The maximum size of any single banner sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, nor shall any lot, site, premises or business exceed four hundred (400) square feet of total area of banner signs. 
(c)  Beacon lights. No spot, beacon, flashing or flood light shall be permitted in any area within the City, except where such light is non-revolving and in a fixed position, and when said light shines only on the owner's premises or signs and away from any street or roadway or residential area. This shall not include beacon lights such as those required by Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
(d)  Billboards. See Section 32-26 of this chapter; Bench signs, bus benches, bus shelters, and billboards. 
(e)  Pennants. "Pennants" as defined in Section 32-2 of this chapter shall be allowed in RC zoned districts and in conjunction with permitted outside sales and display areas in CC zoned districts provided that the total lineal feet of said pennants does not exceed the street frontage of the lot upon which they are displayed and the pennant does not exceed eighteen (18) inches in length. 
(f)  Computation of area. 
(1)  Wall signs. 
a.  Wall signs consisting of individual letters, emblems, etc., whether painted on or erected flush against the exterior wall of a building, shall be computed by including the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
b.  Wall signs utilizing a removable surface or a holding cabinet shall be computed the same as ground signs. 
c.  Gas station and convenience store canopy signs. 
1.  For the purpose of these regulations, canopy signs for gas station and convenience stores, over their gasoline pump islands only, shall be considered a wall sign. 
2.  The facade/face of the canopy shall not be included in the area for calculating the maximum area of a wall sign. 
3.  Signage size/area on a canopy shall be based upon the facade/building face as noted in Section 32-10(a) of this chapter. No more than fifty (50) percent of permitted wall sign area shall be allowed on a canopy. 
4.  A second canopy sign shall only be permitted per the criteria noted in Section 32-10(a)(2) of this chapter. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
a.  The copy area of a ground sign shall be computed by including the entire area of the sign surface, including the removable surface, advertising surface area and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the holding cabinet or support structure. 
(3)  Monument and mural signs. 
a.  Mural signs, as defined in Section 32-2 of this chapter, may encompass the entire building face to which it is being applied onto. Request for mural signs on more than one (1) building face shall be subject to additional review up to and including City Council approval. 
b.  Monument signs shall be computed as follows: 
1.  The copy area of a monument sign shall be calculated by using the entire surface area of the monument sign structures minus a[n] eighteen-inch border along the top and side and minus a twenty-four-inch border along the bottom. 
(4)  Changeable copy signs. 
a.  No more than fifty (50) percent of the sign surface area of any permanent sign shall be a changeable copy sign. The primary wall and ground or monument signs for theaters, churches and community based non-profit organizations shall be exempt from this changeable copy area limitation. Additional/secondary wall and ground or monument signs for theaters, churches and community based non-profit organizations shall not be exempt from the changeable copy area limitations. 
(g)  Placement of ground or monument signs. 
(1)  No ground and/or monument sign shall be placed within the safe sign triangle area as defined in the Transportation Technical Manual, Street Intersections. 
(2)  See Section 32-9 of this chapter for additional placement restrictions for monument signs. 
(h)  Additional signage regulations for individual zoning districts and land use designations. 
(1)  Planned Industrial District (PID). 
a.  Within the PID zoning district, signage issues concerning entrance sign, ground sign, wall sign and other signs (i.e. real estate signs, building safety, address occupant identification and traffic signs) shall be regulated by the PID zoning signage criteria as noted in Section 32-45 of this chapter. 
b.  All other signage issues not addressed in Section 32-9 of this chapter shall be governed by the signage regulation as noted in Article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 35-2018, § 6, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 32-9. - Ground sign regulations. 
(a)  Surface area. The total aggregate area of all ground or monument signs (including directory of occupant signs), for a development shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per first acre, or fraction thereof. Sites exceeding one (1) acre shall be permitted additional signage surface area calculated at a rate of thirty-two (32) square feet per acre to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per sign and four hundred fifty (450) square feet per development; or 
(b)  The maximum area of ground or monument signs (including directory of occupant signs) for a development shall be based upon street frontage on a ROW as listed below: 
25 feet-100 feet 32 square feet 101 feet-300 feet 64 square feet 301 feet-500 feet 96 square feet 501 feet and over 150 square feet  
(c)  When determining the size/surface area of ground or monument sign either the requirements of Section 32-9(a) or 32-9(b) of this chapter shall be used. In no case shall a combination or mixing of these two (2) criteria be allowed. Any change of signage shall follow the same criteria. If the sign area criteria are changed, then all other signage on the site shall be required to be changes to the same criteria. 
(d)  Monument signs may be granted an additional surface area credit of twenty-five (25) percent subject to all of the following criteria being met: 
(1)  A monument sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet. 
(2)  Required to be a true monument sign with entire base upon the ground, not a pole with a skirt around it to make the sign appear to be a monument sign. 
(3)  The maximum size/surface area of a monument sign, even with twenty-five (25) percent surface area credit, shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
(4)  In order to insure that monument signs are installed in a safe manner in regard to vehicular and pedestrian safety, a safe sight triangle area of ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet (ten (10) feet; along driveway by fifty (50) feet along the ROW) shall be required from all drive ways or access points. This ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet placement criteria may be reduced by the Administrator on lots with access from rights-of-way with a one-way traffic flow only when it can be unquestionably demonstrated by the applicant that such placement will pose no line of sight obstruction and unquestionably demonstrated by the applicant that such placement will create no traffic/pedestrian safety problems. Such administrative action shall only be when a sign is placed in a manner that is not in conflict with the one-way traffic flow and line-of-sight. The Administrator is in no way required and/or obligated to grant such reduction. 
(5)  The sight distance criteria as noted in the Transportation Technical Manual shall be required to be met. 
(e)  Number of signs. Except as authorized by this section, no development may have more than one (1) ground sign. 
(1)  Corner lots with a roadway classification of collector or higher (a lot bounded on more than one (1) side by paved street/ROW) may have signage on each street frontage according to paragraph (a) or (b) above. Corner lots within the Central Business District zoning designation shall be exempt to the roadway classification restriction. 
(2)  If a development is located on a lot that is bordered by two (2) public streets that do not intersect at the lot's boundaries (double front lot), with a roadway classification of collector or higher, then the development may have one (1) ground sign on each side of the development bordered by such streets according to paragraph (a) or (b) above. Double front lots within the Central Business District zoning designation shall be exempt to the roadway classification restriction. 
(f)  Location of ground signs. 
(1)  Ground signs shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property lines in a landscaped area at least equal in square footage of said sign. Setback shall be measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
(2)  Sites within the Downtown Mixed-Use land use designation as noted on the City's Future Land Use Map shall have no setback criteria from a property line subject to line-of-site (safe sight triangle/visibility criteria) being met and subject to no portion of the sign intruding into the ROW/past the property line. 
(g)  Height of ground signs. All ground sign[s] shall be measured from existing grade. 
(1)  No ground sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height for properties fronting arterial roadways. 
(2)  No ground sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height for properties fronting all other road classifications. 
(3)  Per the requirements of Section 32-44(2) of this chapter, the maximum height of ground signs in the Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use Designation shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(h)  Interstate access zones: Interstate access zones are designated where a state highway permits direct access to I-95. The Interstate access zone shall extend one-quarter (1/4) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) measured lineally from the intersection of the state highway and the centerline of the I-95 right-of-way. Commercial property with a minimum of fifty (50) feet of frontage on an existing improved (i.e. paved street) public/private ROW and located within the interstate access zone shall be allowed the following signage: 
(1)  Except as noted specifically in this subsection all other signage requirements of this chapter shall be required to be met. 
(2)  One (1) high rise ground sign may be permitted on a lot in the interstate access zone as follows: 
a.  Maximum height. 
State Highway No. (above existing grade) SR 406 75 feet SR 50 75 feet  
b.  Surface area. The size of a high rise sign for a development shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet per first acre, or fraction thereof. Sites exceeding one (1) acre shall be permitted additional signage surface area calculated at a rate of sixty-four (64) square feet per acre to a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) square [feet]; or 
c.  A sign surface area of two (2) square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the front lot line/road-right-of-way line shall be allowed (front lot line as noted in the definition of setback [front setback] in Section 27-11 of these [Land Development] Regulations shall be used). Maximum allowable area per sign shall not exceed of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
1.  Only that portion of the building under air facing the front lot line/road-right-of-way line shall be used. All other building frontage/elevations shall not be used to calculate sign area. Building embellishments, appendages, screening walls, etc., shall not be used to calculate sign area. 
2.  Only that portion of the building frontage running nearest to parallel to the front lot line/road-right-of-way line shall be used. In no instance shall more than one (1) building frontage/elevation be used to calculate sign area. 
3.  In the event the front lot line/road-right-of-way line distance is less than the building frontage the length of the front lot line/road-right-of-way line shall be used. 
4.  High rise sign shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines. This setback shall be required to be increased to one hundred (100) feet when abutting residential zoning and/or use. 
5.  Application for high rise signs shall include calculations, by a registered engineer, noting that the fall radius (i.e. break point) will allow the entire sign to collapses entirely upon the site it is erected upon. 
6.  Permit applications submitted pursuant to this subsection shall include a site plan with elevations. 
7.  In no instance shall a billboard be permitted as a high rise sign. 
8.  Variance to the maximum permitted height or size of a high rise sign shall not be permitted. 
d.  When determining the size/surface area of high rise sign either the requirements as noted above in subsection (b) or (c) shall be used. In no case shall a combination or mixing of these two (2) criteria be allowed. Any change of signage shall follow the same criteria. If the sign area criteria are changed, then all other signage on the site shall be required to be changed to the same criteria. 
e.  The aggregate area of all ground/pole signs on a site in the interstate access zone (ground sign under thirty-five (35) feet in height and high rise sign) shall not exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
Sec. 32-10. - Wall sign regulations. 
    Except as authorized by this section, each separately licensed business shall be allowed one (1) wall sign. 
(a)  Single-tenant buildings. 
(1)  The aggregate square footage of wall signs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the building face to which it is affixed. 
(2)  Buildings having more than one (1) street frontage (on an existing paved ROW) may have one (1) additional wall sign affixed to that secondary ROW frontage. The size of this secondary wall sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the smallest/narrowest building elevation or equal to the size of the primary wall sign, whichever is less. Regardless of the number of street frontages, no more than two (2) wall signs shall permitted. 
(b)  Multi-tenant buildings. 
(1)  The aggregate square footage of wall signs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of building elevation of the tenant unit to which it is affixed. 
(2)  Buildings having more than one (1) street frontage may have additional wall signage affixed to that secondary ROW frontage as follows: 
a.  Corner-unit tenants may have one (1) additional wall sign affixed to their secondary ROW frontage. The size of this secondary wall sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the smallest/narrowest building elevation or equal to the size of the primary wall sign, whichever is less; or 
b.  A multi-tenant directory wall sign may be affixed to the secondary ROW frontage according to paragraph (b)(1) above. 
(c)  No wall sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface, except that for purposes of this section, roof surfaces constructed at an angle of seventy-five (75) degrees or more from horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. This subsection shall not apply to displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on roofs. 
(d)  No sign attached to a building may project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall. 
Sec. 32-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 32-12. - Sign illumination and signs containing light. 
    All illuminated signs shall provide shielding from the source of illumination in order that such source shall not be directly visible from any public way or residential zone or use. No sign within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zone or use may be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Sec. 32-13. - Dynamic or variable message sign regulations. 
(a)  Dynamic or variable message signs, as defined in LDR Section 32-2 of this chapter, shall be allowed, provided they comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Size and location. 
a.  Freestanding/monument signs. 
1.  That portion of the sign that constitutes the electronic changeable display shall be allowed up to fifty (50) percent of the total allowable sign area. 
b.  Building-mounted signs. 
1.  Building-mounted dynamic or variable message signs are prohibited. Bus shelters approved by the City shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(2)  Number of signs. No development may have more than one (1) sign that contains a dynamic or variable message display. Bus shelters approved by the City shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(3)  Display. 
a.  The display of the sign shall not change more rapidly than once every two and one-half (2.5) seconds; 
b.  The display shall not, or shall not appear to, flash, undulate, pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking and chasing lights; the display shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist or otherwise portray movement, animation or video; 
c.  Scrolling or traveling of a static message onto the sign from one (1) direction only per display shall be allowed; provided that each message remains in a static state for at least two and one-half (2.5) seconds. There shall be two and one-half (2.5) seconds of blank screen between messages; 
d.  No message shall require more than ten (10) seconds to be displayed in its entirety; 
(4)  Light levels. 
a.  All signs shall have installed ambient light monitors and shall, at all times, allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the dynamic or variable message sign based on ambient light conditions; 
b.  Maximum brightness levels for dynamic or variable message signs shall not exceed eight thousand (8,000) nits when measured within one (1) meter of the sign's face at its maximum brightness during daylight hours and five hundred (500) nits when measured within one (1) meter of the sign's face at its maximum brightness between dusk and dawn. 
(5)  Zoning and use. 
a.  Dynamic or variable message signs shall not be allowed at, on or visible to the public from any dwelling or home occupation in a residential zoning or residential use. 
b.  Businesses, churches or schools located in a residential zoning are allowed dynamic or variable message signs providing that: 
1.  They comply with Sections 32-13(a)(1) and 32-13(a)(2) of this chapter; 
2.  Dynamic or variable message signs within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zoning or use shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
c.  Except for those located on bus shelters approved by the City, dynamic or variable message signs are not permitted in the following districts: Urban Mixed-Use (UMU). 
(6)  Additional permit requirements. In addition to the permit requirements set forth in Section 32-3 of this chapter, a permit for a dynamic message sign must include the following: 
a.  Dynamic or variable message sign permit applications must include a copy of the manufacturer's operating manual, which includes the manufacturer's recommended standards for brightness, scrolling or traveling speed and other display operations; 
b.  Dynamic or variable message sign permit applications must also include a certification from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall, at all times, be operated in accordance with City regulations and that the owner or operator shall provide proof of such conformance upon request of the City; 
c.  Dynamic or variable message signs require a listing mark from a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (i.e. Underwriters Laboratories, Electronic Testing Laboratory, etc.) with the label and certification number; 
d.  Additionally, whether the sign is programmed from the site or from a remote location all requirements of Section 32-13 of this chapter shall be enforced. 
Secs. 32-14-32-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS SIGN PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32-21. - Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  All portable signs (those not permanently attached to a building or the ground including snipe, sandwich, trailer-mounted and pedestal-mounted) are prohibited except those listed under Section 32-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All roof-mounted signs and those which extend above the parapet of the building are prohibited. 
(c)  All flashing lights which are not a part of the sign's copy are prohibited. 
(d)  No signs shall be erected in any residential zone except as permitted in this ordinance. 
(e)  No sign may be placed at any location on a lot or parcel of land where it may interfere with or obstruct free and clear vision for pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic. 
(f)  Signs with visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, except for traditional barber poles, are prohibited. 
(g)  Signs with the optical illusion of movement by means of a design that presents a pattern capable of giving the illusion of motion are prohibited. 
(h)  No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature or message, it would tend to obstruct the view of or be confused with official traffic signs or other signs erected by governmental agencies. 
(i)  Confusing lights. There shall be no lights, either fixed, flashing or moving, which might create confusion with traffic lights or lights on emergency vehicles. 
(j)  Distance from residential districts. Signs on properties in commercial or industrial districts, which abut a residential district or use, shall not be erected closer than a distance at least equal to the top of said sign from any residential district boundary line. 
(k)  Obstruction. No signs shall be erected in a manner that would impede ingress or egress through any door or emergency exit in any building. No sign shall be erected so as to impede access to, or operation of, a fire escape, emergency (fire) lane or any other safety device. 
(l)  Signs erected on public property, rights-of-way or on private property located on public property, (such as private utility poles) are prohibited, other than signs erected by public authority for public purposes and signs authorized in writing pursuant to Article [Section] 337.407 of the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 35-2018, § 7, 10-9-18) 
Sec. 32-22. - Maintenance of signs. 
(a)  All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation, supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept in a state of good repair. With respect to freestanding signs, components (supporting structures, back, etc.) not bearing a message shall be constructed of materials that blend with the background colors or shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the natural environment. 
(b)  All sign faces shall be maintained with a clear and unfaded copy or a "For Rent" sign. 
(c)  If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting "shell" of a sign or the supporting braces, anchors, or similar components, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located or other person having control over such sign shall, within thirty (30) days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, replace the entire message portion of the sign with a blank face or remove the remaining components of the sign, or the sign shall be considered an illegal sign, all nonconforming protection status void, all permits void and said sign shall be required to be totally removed. This subsection shall not be construed to alter the effect of Section 32-24 of this chapter, which prohibits the replacement of a nonconforming sign, nor shall this subsection be construed to prevent the changing of the message of a legally permitted sign. 
Sec. 32-23. - Unlawful cutting of trees and shrubs. 
    No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, excessively trim, destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation unless authorized by the City of Titusville and any other agency having jurisdiction. 
Sec. 32-24. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to allow nonconforming signs that were lawfully permitted and obtained all City of Titusville permits, before the adoption of the [Land Development] Code to continue until they are no longer used or become hazardous, but not to encourage their survival. Such signs are hereby declared to be incompatible with the overall intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Removal of nonconforming and illegal signs. All nonconforming, illegal and non-permitted signs, except as provided herein, shall be removed immediately. 
(c)  This section is reserved for any future text addition/amendments. 
(d)  No conforming sign or advertising structure shall be permitted to be erected on the same lot or parcel with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or made conforming. 
(e)  Continuance of nonconformities. A nonconforming sign may be continued, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  A nonconforming sign shall not be modified in such a way that would increase the nonconformity of the sign. 
(2)  Nonconforming sign or sign structures that are defined as abandoned under this chapter shall not be permitted for reuse and must be removed. 
(3)  There may be a change of tenancy or ownership of a nonconforming sign without the loss of nonconforming status, as long as the new occupancy occurs within ninety (90) days of the previous occupational license transfer or expiration date. 
(4)  If a nonconforming sign damaged by fire, flood, explosion, collapse, wind, war or other catastrophe to such an extent that the cost of repair and reconstruction will exceed fifty (50) percent of the current value as defined in these regulations at the time of damage, it shall not be used or reconstructed except in full conformity with the provisions of this [Land Development] Code. Notwithstanding, the preceding and for the purpose of these regulations, any sign damaged to the extent that the support structure is severed, or lifted from its foundation or the foundation is lifted out of the ground or the sign case is totally removed from the support structure or wall, shall be considered destroyed and shall not be replaced expect [except] in total conformance with all current sign regulations. 
(5)  Normal repairs and maintenance may be made. 
(f)  Casual, temporary or illegal use. The casual, temporary or illegal use of any sign shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create any rights in the continuance of such use. 
Sec. 32-25. - Amortization of nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Sign variances. 
(1)  An application for a variance to the signage regulations noted in this chapter may be filed unless expressly prohibited. 
(b)  Voiding/cancellation of a sign variance. 
(1)  All previously approved signage variances granted prior to the adoption of these regulations (before July 13, 1999) shall be void in the event any of the following occur: 
a.  The sign is destroyed. 
b.  The sign is removed. 
c.  The sign is determined to be abandoned. 
d.  The situation/justified as noted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals for approval of the variance no longer exists. 
(2)  All approved signage variances granted after the adoption of these regulations (after July 13, 1999) shall be void in the event any of the following occur: 
a.  The sign is determined to be abandoned. 
b.  The situation/justified as noted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals for approval of the variance no longer exists. 
Sec. 32-26. - Bench signs, bus benches, bus shelters and billboards. 
(a)  Bench signs, bus benches and bus shelters shall be permitted, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No person, firm, corporation, club or other entity (hereinafter referred to as the "sponsor") shall place a bus bench, bench sign or bus shelter within any right-of-way in the City without an agreement with the City Council authorizing said sponsor to place benches within rights-of-way in the City. 
(2)  Bus shelters and bus benches shall only be permitted at designated bus stops along existing SCAT bus routes that are deemed appropriate by the City. 
(3)  Bus shelters and bus benches shall not be permitted in locations where, in the opinion of the City Manager or designee, will adversely affect the safety of motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians. 
(4)  Bus shelters and benches shall only be permitted in State of Florida rights-of-way with the written approval of the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) District Engineer or his designee. 
(5)  No more than one (1) bus shelter, bus bench or bench sign may be placed at each location. 
(6)  No bus shelter, bus bench or bench sign shall be placed within a right-of-way until the City Manager or his designee has issued a permit for the placement of such shelter, bench or sign. 
(7)  The proposed bench, shelter or sign location must meet the criteria set forth in Chapter 14-20, "Private Use of Right-of-Way", Florida Administrative Code and Florida Statutes § 337.408, "Regulations of Benches, Shelters and Waste Disposal Receptacles Within Rights-of-Way". 
(8)  Where bus shelters are not permitted or cannot be located within a right-of-way, they may be located within building setbacks. In addition, bus shelters shall not be included in calculating maximum lot coverage except within the area of critical concern. 
(9)  The sponsor shall be responsible for maintaining each of its bus benches, bus shelters and bench signs in accordance with the provisions of Section 32-22 of this chapter. In addition, the base of the bench or shelter must be maintained from any tall grass or weeds that would hinder the safe use of the bench or shelter. Treatment and elimination of fire ants or other dangerous insects from area around the bench shall be considered part of proper maintenance. 
(10)  Bus shelters, bus benches and bench signs existing as of the adoption date of this regulation shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b)(2) and (b)(5) of this section for a period of two (2) years, provided that they meet the maintenance requirements of subsection (b)(8). After the two-year period, bus shelters, bus benches and bench signs shall be required to conform to all regulations outlined herein. 
(11)  Removal. Any bus shelter, bus bench or bench sign that, in the opinion of the code enforcement supervisor, does not meet the requirements for said facilities as set forth in these regulations, shall be immediately repaired or removed at the owner's expense. In the event the Florida Department of Transportation notifies the City that the bus bench or bus shelter is required to be repaired or removed, said facilities shall be immediately repaired or removed at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Billboards shall be permitted on parcels with a zoning designation of T, CC, RC, M-1, M-2, M-3 or GU, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Location. 
a.  The parcel must be located entirely within an interstate access zone as defined in Chapter 32, Signs, Article I, General Sign Regulations, Division 2, Display of Signs, Section 32-9(h) or abut the I-95 right-of-way. (For sites abutting I-95, the said sign shall be solely for advertisement of the traveling public on I-95 and required to face I-95). 
b.  No billboard shall be established or located in a shoreline area overlay district as defined in Chapter 29, Article II Titusville Shoreline Area Overlay District (TSA) of these Land Development Regulations. 
c.  No billboard shall be established or located in an historical preservation overlay district as defined in Chapter 29, Article VI, Historic Preservation (HPA) of these Land Development Regulations. 
d.  No billboard shall be located on a property without the consent of the property's owner or legal representative. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. 
a.  A minimum lot size of one (1) acre shall be required for billboards. If the minimum lot size of that permitted zoning district is less than one (1) acre, the minimum one (1) acre lot size shall apply and not be subject to any variance. 
b.  If the minimum lot size of that permitted zoning district is more than one (1) acre, than the more restrictive lot size requirement shall be met; and not subject to any variance. 
(3)  Minimum frontage. 
a.  A minimum frontage (from existing paved ROW) of two hundred (200) feet shall be required. If the minimum frontage of that permitted zoning district is less, the two hundred-foot frontage requirements shall apply and not be subject to any variance. If the minimum street frontage of that permitted zoning district is higher than the more restrictive shall apply and not subject to any variance. 
(4)  Setbacks. 
a.  Billboards must maintain a setback of a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any residential zoning district or use. 
b.  Billboard signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines. These setbacks shall be measured as the distance from the closest point of the billboard sign to the nearest property line. 
c.  On a corner lot which abuts at least two (2) rights-of-way, a billboard shall not be erected within the sight distance triangle as defined in Transportation Technical Manual, Street Intersections. 
d.  A billboard located within five hundred (500) feet of any toll plaza of any limited access highway, as measured along the edge of the pavement of said highway, shall be setback at least five hundred (500) feet from the edge of the right-of-way of the limited access highway. 
(5)  Separation. 
a.  Billboards shall not affect the visibility of any existing conforming ground sign located on adjacent properties. 
b.  All billboard signs shall be located at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from all existing permitted billboard signs on the same side of the road as measured from their closest points. This separation requirement shall not be construed to not apply to any non-permitted billboards. This separation requirement shall apply to all billboards (permitted and non-permitted/illegal). The applicant may submit an official complaint to the Code Enforcement Official for citation in order to attempt to remove a non-permitted/illegal billboard. 
c.  Signs shall be no closer than five hundred (500) feet, as measured from the right-of-way, of an exit ramp, on ramp, interchange or overpass. 
d.  A billboard shall not be erected within a one hundred-foot radius from the intersection of the centerline of a right-of-way and the nearest railroad track grade crossing. 
e.  A billboard shall not be erected within three hundred (300) feet of the nearest property line of a park. 
(6)  Height. 
a.  Billboards shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet above the crown of the road it is primarily designated to serve or thirty-five (35) feet above the existing grade, whichever is greater. A certified survey shall be required to be submitted confirming the crown of the road elevation directly in front of the billboard or confirming existing grade elevation. 
b.  The sign area shall be at least ten (10) feet above the ground. 
(7)  Number. 
a.  No more than one (1) billboard sign shall be located on any one (1) minimum sized lot or parcel, as noted in Section 32-26 of this chapter. 
b.  Billboard signs shall only be permitted on a lot or parcel where said billboard sign is the only use of said lot or parcel. 
(8)  Size. 
a.  The maximum allowable sign surface area for any billboard sign shall be four hundred (400) square feet. 
(9)  Embellishments. 
a.  Embellishments may not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the allowable square footage of advertising surface area. 
b.  Embellishments will be allowed to a maximum of five (5) additional feet in overall height of sign and shall not allow rectangular extensions which result in additional internal advertising surface square footage. 
(10)  Face styles. 
a.  Billboard sign faces shall be of the following types: 
1.  Poster panels or bulletins mounted on a freestanding structure with advertising copy applied in the form of pasted paper. 
2.  Indexing signs made with a series of triangular vertical sections that turn and stop or index, to show three (3) pictures or messages in the same area. 
3.  Painted bulletins where the advertiser's message is painted directly on the background of a freestanding display area. 
(11)  Configurations. 
a.  All faces on a multiple-faced billboard shall have sign faces of identical dimensions and configurations. 
b.  No portion of the sign structure of any billboard shall extend above any part of the sign face. 
c.  On a double-faced billboard which is constructed in the form of a V, the internal angle of the apex shall not exceed forty-five (45) degrees and the backs of the faces shall not be separated by more than thirty-six (36) inches at the apex of the V. 
d.  Double-faced billboards which have two (2) faces placed back to back shall not be separated by more than forty-eight (48) inches. 
e.  Multiple vision billboards shall be permitted; the individual sections which contain the advertising copy shall be displayed for at least six (6) seconds continuously without movement; the duration of movement of sections between advertisements not exceeding two (2) seconds. 
f.  Tri-faced or triangular billboards shall not be permitted. 
g.  Billboards on the roof of any building are prohibited. 
h.  Side-by-side billboards are prohibited. 
i.  Vertically stacked or double-tier billboards are prohibited. 
j.  No single-faced billboard shall have an interior angle from road to face of sign in excess of forty-five (45) degrees, and shall be installed as to minimize a view of the rear of a sign. 
k.  Each sign face on a billboard shall be completely covered when a message is posted. If the message is smaller than the sign face's dimensions, skirting or screening shall be used to achieve conformity. 
l.  No billboard shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by a governmental entity, or which by reason of position, shape or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any official traffic control device. 
(12)  Landscaping. 
a.  The base of each structure shall be planted with suitable landscaped material, and maintained so as to ensure a minimum landscape screen of four (4) feet in height and seventy-five (75) percent opacity within one (1) year of planting. 
(13)  Lighting. 
a.  Billboard lighting shall be uplit by fixtures mounted to the structure. 
b.  Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights are prohibited. 
c.  Signs must be effectively shielded to prevent beams or rays from being directed toward any portion of the traveled ways and must not be of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
d.  No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
(14)  Permit requirements. 
a.  No billboard shall be erected without securing a permit from the Building Official and payment of the permit fee. 
b.  The building permit number of a billboard shall be permanently affixed at eye level to the billboard pole situated closest to the nearest road. 
c.  A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or repair of any existing or new billboard. Changes to the advertising message shall not require a permit. 
d.  Fees shall be as follows: 
1.  The building plan review fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
2.  The building permit cost shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
3.  The annual license/inspection fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
e.  Billboards shall be plainly labeled on the apron with the owner's name, maintenance firm and City of Titusville permit number. The maximum size of this identification shall be sixteen (16) square feet. 
f.  A permit from the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) is also required prior to erection of any billboard adjacent to a state highway. In the event of a discrepancy between the provision of FDOT permitting requirements and this section, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
g.  All billboard construction plans must be sealed by a registered engineer and meet all applicable requirements set forth in the Standard Building Code. A site plan or survey showing location of billboard, nearest billboard, nearest residential use, proposed landscaping and elevations are required to be submitted. 
(15)  Maintenance. 
a.  Billboards shall be regularly maintained in good and safe structural condition. 
b.  The general area in the vicinity of a billboard shall be kept free and clear of sign materials, debris, trash and refuse. 
c.  All billboard faces must be maintained with a clear and unfaded copy of paid advertising, a public service message or a "For Rent" message. All components thereof, including without limitation, supports, braces and anchors, shall be kept in a state of good repair. 
(Ord. No. 35-2018, § 8, 10-9-18) 
Editor's note- Sec. 8 of Ord. No. 35-2018, adopted Oct. 9, 2018, amended § 32-26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 32-26 pertained to off-premises signs and billboards, and derived from the original codification. 
Sec. 32-27. - Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or regulations to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this article or regulation may, at the option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message and the noncommercial copy may be substituted at any time in place of the commercial copy or returned to a commercial message as authorized by these regulations. The noncommercial message (copy) may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one (1) noncommercial message to another noncommercial message, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the size, height, setback and other dimensional criteria contained in this article and regulation have been satisfied. 
Sec. 32-28. - Content neutrality as to sign message (viewpoint). 
    Notwithstanding anything in this article or regulations to the contrary, no sign or sign structure shall be subject to any limitation based upon the content (viewpoint) of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. 
Sec. 32-29. - Severability. 
(a)  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article. 
(b)  Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth in Section 32-29(a) of this chapter, or elsewhere in this article, this regulation, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
(c)  Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth in Section 32-29(a) of this chapter, or elsewhere in this article, this regulations, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article that pertains to prohibited signs. 
(d)  Severability of prohibition on billboards. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition on billboards as contained herein. 
Secs. 32-30-32-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUSINESS LICENSES AND SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-41. - Handbills; permit; posting. 
    The posting of show bills, handbills, notices or advertisements, or brand, write, mark or paint any signs, letters or characters upon a building, wall, fence or other property, including tree or telephone, telegraph, streetlights, traffic signs, other city regulatory signs or city poles are prohibited except as set forth per Volume I, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Licenses and business regulations, Article I, In general, Section 11-1, Handbills; permit; posting 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 27, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 32-42. - Pain management clinics. 
    Within thirty (30) days of the removal of a pain management clinic from a building, site or parcel of land for any reason, the property owner shall be responsible for removing all signs, symbols, or vehicles identifying the premises as a pain management clinic. 
Sec. 32-43. - Electronic gaming establishment signage requirements. 
    In addition to the regulations set forth per Section 32-13 of this chapter, Signage requirements [related to electronic gaming establishments], the exterior signage shall be limited to the advertisement of the consumer product and/or service sold at the facility. No signs shall be posted on the exterior of any electronic gaming establishment that suggest gambling takes place or display any image commonly associated with slot machines or gambling. All signage shall be further subject to all applicable City of Titusville code regulations regarding signs. Any sign for which a city permit has been previously granted which contain images commonly associated with slot machines or gambling may be maintained for up to five (5) years from the date of this article. 
DIVISION 5. - SIGN REGULATIONS BY ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 32-44. - Requirements for zoning districts consistent with Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use. 
    Ground signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. [See Chapter 27, General provisions, Article IV, Future land use/zoning matrix standards.] 
Sec. 32-45. - Planned Industrial District (PID). 
(a)  Signage. 
(1)  Entrance sign. Entrance signs for Planned Industrial Developments shall not be higher than ten (10) feet from ground level or longer than twenty (20) feet. One (1) two-faced or two (2) one-faced entrance signs shall be permitted at each access to the development. 
(2)  Ground signs. 
a.  Only one (1) ground sign shall be permitted per lot. 
b.  Said sign shall not be higher than eight (8) feet from ground level nor exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. 
c.  Said sign shall be constructed of the same exterior material as the front of the building and/or be architecturally compatible with the building. 
d.  Said sign may be illuminated internally or by ground lighting only. 
e.  Said sign may only identify the building name, address, or the name of the building occupants. 
(3)  Wall signs. 
a.  Only one (1) wall sign shall be permitted per building. 
b.  Said sign shall not be larger than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
c.  Said sign shall be architecturally compatible with the building facade and not distract from the overall building design. 
d.  Said sign shall only identify the building name, address or the building occupants. 
(4)  All other signage issues not addressed in this section shall be governed by the signage regulation as noted in this chapter (Chapter 32, Article I of this chapter). 
Sec. 32-46. - Urban Village (UV) zoning. 
(a)  The regulations in this section are applicable to master-planned developments within the Urban Village (UV) zoning district. Commercial properties abutting the UV zoning district, if located in other zoning districts, may utilize the regulations in this section so long as those properties outside of the UV zoning district share common access, parking, and design standards with the UV zoned property. The intent of these regulations is to allow flexibility in sign placement and the number of building mounted signs while maintaining a maximum allowable aggregate sign area. In the event of a conflict between regulations in this section and other sections of Chapter 32, Signs, this section shall prevail. 
(1)  Wall signs. 
a.  The number of wall signs shall be limited only by the maximum total aggregate area established by these regulations. 
b.  The facade (public entrance side) of the building or leasable unit (in multi-tenant buildings) shall be used to determine the maximum allowable sign area. 
c.  The aggregate area of all wall signs (including projecting signs and awning signs) shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the facade. In no case shall the total area of all wall signs for a building or leasable unit (in multi-tenant buildings) exceed six hundred (600) square feet. In multi-tenant buildings, the area of the facade of the leasable unit shall be used to determine the maximum allowable sign area for said leasable unit, and each individual unit shall be reviewed independently from other leasable units within the same building. 
d.  No less than fifty (50) percent of the aggregate sign area erected shall be placed on the facade (public entrance side) of the building or leasable unit (in multi-tenant buildings). 
e.  Wall signs shall not be oriented towards properties designated with residential zoning or residential uses outside of the property zoned Urban Village (UV). 
f.  Wall signs may be illuminated. All illumination shall meet the site lighting requirements located in this chapter Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Display of signs, Section 32-10, Sign illumination and signs containing light, and Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 5, Lighting of the Land Development Regulations, Section 30-192, Site lighting standards. 
g.  Non-illuminated signs placed on service entrances and not exceeding three (3) square feet in area are exempt from the above regulations. 
h.  Wall signs shall not extend above the parapet or eave line of the wall to which said sign is affixed. 
i.  Wall signs shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from the wall to which said sign is affixed. 
(2)  Projecting Signs. (See "projecting sign illustration" below.) 
a.  The number of projecting signs shall only be limited by the maximum total aggregate area of wall signs established by these regulations. 
b.  Projecting signs are calculated towards maximum allowable wall sign area. The aggregate area of all wall, projecting, and awning signs shall not exceed the maximum established in this section. 
c.  Dimensional standards: 
1.  Projecting signs shall maintain a clear height consistent with the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Projecting signs shall not exceed a fifteen-foot maximum height from ground level to top of said sign. Projecting signs that are mounted under a canopy or awning and project downward are exempt from this requirement. 
3.  Projecting signs shall not project more than four (4) feet from the wall face to which the sign is mounted. Projecting signs that are mounted under a canopy or awning shall not project downward more than four (4) feet. 
4.  Projecting signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
5.  For the purposes of measuring sign area, projecting signs arranged in a back- to-back configuration shall only apply the area of one sign face when calculating the maximum allowable sign area. 
d.  Projecting signs may be illuminated. All illumination shall meet the site lighting requirements located in this chapter Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Display of signs, Section 32-10, Sign illumination and signs containing light, and Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 5, Lighting of the Land Development Regulations, Section 30-192, Site lighting standards. 
e.  Projecting signs shall not project into public or private rights-of-way used for vehicular circulation or designated parking areas. 
f.  Projecting sign illustration: 

(3)  Awning/canopy signs. 
a.  The number of awning/canopy signs shall only be limited by the maximum total aggregate area of wall signs established by these regulations. 
b.  Awning/canopy signs are calculated towards maximum allowable wall sign area. The aggregate area of all wall, projecting, and awning signs shall not exceed the maximum established in this section. 
c.  Awning/canopy signs may be painted, printed, or otherwise incorporated into the material used for the awning. 
d.  Each awning/canopy sign, including any lettering or logos, emblems, or insignias placed on the valance of an awning/canopy, shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet or comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the awning on which the sign is applied. 
e.  Awning/canopy signs shall not be illuminated. 
(4)  Internal directional signs. (See internal directional sign illustration below.) 
a.  Internal directional signs are ground or building mounted signs for aiding navigation within a development. These signs are intended to be used by pedestrians to assist in navigating and locating facilities within a master planned development. The signs should be pedestrian in scale and match the development in terms of materials, colors, and aesthetic style. 
b.  Internal directional signs shall meet the following dimensional criteria: 
1.  Shall not be placed within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the development utilizing said sign. 
2.  Shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height including any embellishments or other aesthetic enhancements. 
3.  Each blade shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
c.  Internal directional signs shall be placed in a manner which does not impede the flow of pedestrians or create a hazard to users of the site. 
d.  No more than three (3) internal directional signs shall be included in a development. 
e.  Internal directional signs shall require a permit. 
f.  Internal directional signs may be illuminated. All illumination shall meet the site lighting requirements located in this chapter Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Display of signs, Section 32-10, Sign illumination and signs containing light, and Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 5, Lighting of the land development regulations, Section 30-192, Site lighting standards. 
g.  Internal directional sign illustration: 

(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 2, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 32-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 28 of Ord. No. 31-2017, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, deleted § 32-46, Commercial accessory structures and uses; which had been renumbered as § 32-47 by section 3 of Ord. No. 35-2017, adopted Oct. 10, 2017. 
Sec. 32-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE SIGNAGE AND STREET GRAPHICS 

Sec. 32-49. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to implement the Downtown Community Redevelopment Agency (DCRA) Plan and Vision, the design Vision expressed through the Urban Design Manual, and general intent of the new code expressed in Article I. This section simplifies and refines the sign regulations to create a more appropriate, flexible, and marketable way for businesses within the DCRA to access their patrons through a declarative design scheme. The plan envisions new standards for future development. These standards or regulations will be aimed at preserving the historic character while creating more appealing physical conditions. The goal is to realize a downtown area through "smart growth" that will attract and sustain private investment and create a unique sense of place. 
(b)  The intent of this section is to recognize that downtowns and suburban areas are different. Therefore, this section and the Urban Design Manual shall govern all signs in the district. In addition, the City's Sign Code, Article I of this chapter contains definitions and processes that regulate the determination and placement of signs and street graphics. In the case of conflicting provisions, the terms or words contained in this document shall prevail. Building permits are required for all permanent signs. 
(c)  Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district (DMU) are the same as the boundaries of the Downtown Community Redevelopment Area, with the exception of the Residential Historic Preservation zoning district (see Chapter 28, Zoning, Article III, Downtown Mixed-Use Smart Code). 
Sec. 32-50. - General requirements. 
(a)  All signs shall be subject to a discretionary aesthetic appropriateness review by the Development Review Committee (DRC) to ensure that signs are consistent and in harmony with the Downtown Community Redevelopment Area (DCRA) Plan, the Downtown Mixed-Use District Code and the Urban Design Manual. The DRC shall utilize the graphics in this section and adopted within the Urban Design Manual as demonstrative guidelines, but shall make a determination of appropriateness on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  Signs may be flat against the facade, mounted projecting from the facade, or mounted above the top of the facade. 
(c)  Public "wayfinding" signage is encouraged, but must maintain the uniform design standards adopted by the agency for the district. 
(d)  If signs are to be illuminated, they shall meet the standards set forth herein. LED lighting is permitted. 
(e)  All signs shall be designed to be compatible with the respective storefront and subject building in scale, proportion, and color and should be visually interesting and compatible in the context of the DCRA guidelines. 
(f)  All projecting, marquee, canopy, under canopy, wall or other bracketed signs shall be installed in such a manner that there shall be no visible angle iron support structure above a roof, building face or wall, unless such brackets are incorporated into the signage as decorative elements of the signage. 
Sec. 32-51. - Finish materials. 
    Only the following materials are allowed to be used within the DCRA: 
(a)  Wood: painted or natural; 
(b)  Metal: copper, brass, galvanized steel, aluminum; 
(c)  Painted canvas; 
(d)  Paint/engraved directly on facade surface; 
(e)  Concrete block with stucco, brick, or stone finish; 
(f)  Materials that are made to resemble the above; or 
(g)  Plastic or PVC; 
(h)  Any materials that are otherwise approved by the Development Review Committee (DRC). 
Sec. 32-52. - Sign types and regulations. 
    Sign design shall be generally regulated from within the Urban Design Manual and this section of the Code. The DMU Sign Code allows for some signs that are not included in the City's general sign regulations or that will be considered differently within the five (5) sub-districts. Therefore, the following sign regulations shall be in addition to those found in Article II of this chapter. 
Sec. 32-53. - Ground-mounted monument or pole sign. 
    One (1) wide-based, monument or pole style, permanent sign shall be permitted, per Table 2, on parcels of land under one (1) ownership in all districts; or on those parcels with more than one (1) ingress/egress serving more than one (1) building in the Uptown or Midtown areas only. In addition to table 2 requirements, Monument signs: 
(1)  Shall be located no closer than zero (0) feet from the front, side or rear property lines, except within the site triangle. 
(2)  Shall not exceed two (2) faces. 
(3)  Shall be consistent in design, format and materials with the architecture of the existing or proposed building. Within the Downtown sub-distict, monument signs shall be consistent with the historic character of the district. 
(4)  Shall be in an enclosed base with a minimum width of two-thirds (?) the width of the sign. Landscaping shall be incorporated around the base to include low-growing shrubs and ground cover and/or annuals to promote color. 
(5)  Shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet on parcels under one (1) ownership. 
Sec. 32-54. - Permanent flags. 
    The following standards shall apply to permanent flags: 
(1)  One (1) flagpole and one (1) flag may be permitted per parcel. 
(2)  The maximum width from top to bottom of any flag shall be twenty (20) percent of the total distance of the flagpole. 
(3)  Flagpoles shall maintain the same setback requirements as tenant monument signs. 
(4)  Flagpole heights shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height above grade. 

Sec. 32-55. - Wall- or building-mounted tenant sign. 
    For buildings with separate exterior tenant entrances: In addition to the ground-mounted monument/pole sign, tenant signs shall be permitted on the exterior walls of the building at a location near the principal tenant entrance, and be consistent with the following criteria, and Table 1 and 2: 
(1)  Shall be limited to one (1) sign per tenant. 
(2)  The sign(s) shall be clearly integrated with the architecture of the building and shall be consistent in design, format, and materials with the architecture of the proposed building. 
(3)  The sign(s) shall not project above any roof or canopy elevations. 
(4)  Wall signs shall display only one (1) surface and shall not be mounted more than twelve (12) inches from any wall. 
(5)  When more than one (1) tenant sign is used on one (1) building, all tenant signage shall be consistent in size, materials, and placement. 

Sec. 32-56. - General configurations. 
    This section defines allowable signage and provides criteria for size, placement, and amenities. Allowable sign types, sizes, and heights, shall be based upon the sub-district location. Table 1 describes non-monument signage. Table 2 describes additional criteria for all signage. 
Table 1: Wall, Fin, Marquee, Canopy, Projecting Signs Wall Face in Square Feet Maximum Total Sign Area as a Percentage of Wall Face Maximum Wall Sign Area in Square Feet Maximum Number of All Signs Under 1,000 10 20 1* 1,001-2,000 10 60 1* 2,001-3,000 10 96 2 3,000-5,000 10 120 2 Over 5,000 10 180 3 One (1) additional sign is allowed per additional Right-of-Way. All projecting signs shall be installed in such a manner that there shall be no visible angle iron support structure above a roof, building face or wall, unless such brackets are incorporated into the signage as decorative elements of the signage.  
Table 2: Sign Design Criteria Type Number Size of Face 1 Height Special Requirements Landscaped Lighting Setback Monument 1 per single tenant parcel 32-49 s.f. on parcels up to 1 acre; 50-64 s.f. for parcels over 1 acre and up to 3 acres; up to 81 s.f. for parcels in excess of 3 acres 10' max. in all subdistricts For multi-tenant buildings, each occupancy may have one of the following sign types; one wall or projecting sign, and one canopy, or one undercanopy sign. These signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Code and the UDM. Yes, ground cover, color palette of plant materials, low level shrubs Up, back, internal, required Min. 0' from r/w 1 plus 1 for parcels exceeding one acre in size and that have more than one access point serving more than one building 25' max. for uptown or civic waterfront for properties adjacent to U.S. Hwy. 1 Projection signs Per Table 1 Per Table 1 12' clear height min.; 28' max. N/A Yes Such signs shall not extend more than 5' from the wall face; nor be within 2' of the right-of-way Fin signs 8' clear height minimum Yes Marquee or canopy signs 12' clear height min.; 28' max. Maximum copy area of canopy signs shall be two square feet per linear foot of canopy front and sides Yes LED changeable copy signs 1 per monument sign 50% of total sign are allowed Per district Special conditions apply per Section 6.7 2 N/A Yes N/A Notes: 
  1 All monument signs are double-faced signs. The "face size" is for each side. 
  2 The DRC may approve an LED component to a wall sign.  
Sec. 32-57. - Signs permitted in each sub-district. 
(1)  Civic Waterfront: Allowable types: All per Table 1 and Table 2. 
(2)  Uptown: Allowable types: All per Table 1 and Table 2. 
(3)  Downtown: Allowable types: All per Table 2. Design, format and materials of monument signs shall be consistent with the historic character of the district. 
(4)  Midtown district: Allowable type: All per Table 1 and Table 2. 
Sec. 32-58. - Special circumstances and lot configurations. 
(1)  Building adjacent to off-street parking. Wall signs may be displayed on the side or rear of a building adjacent to an off-street parking area if the parking area is thirty (30) feet or more in width. However, the total area of all wall signs on the premises shall not exceed the assignable wall area calculated for the frontage of the building. 
(2)  Multiple frontages. If a building has frontage on two (2) or more streets, each frontage shall be separately considered for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of these regulations. However, the permitted sign area for one (1) frontage shall not be combined with another frontage to place the combined sign area on one (1) frontage. Neither shall this section be construed to supersede the provisions limiting and restricting the use of temporary signs for buildings with multiple frontages. 
(3)  Signs on awnings. In addition to other permitted signs, a sign consisting of letters not exceeding an average height of twelve (12) inches placed within an area width not exceeding eighteen (18) inches may be painted, placed, or installed upon the front and sides of any awning erected and maintained in accordance with the City's building code. An identification emblem, insignia, initial or other similar feature not exceeding an area of eight (8) square feet may be painted, placed or installed elsewhere on any awning. 
(4)  Wall sign under awnings. In addition to other permitted signs, a sign consisting of letters not exceeding an average height of twelve (12) inches placed within an area width not exceeding eighteen (18) inches may be painted, placed, or installed upon the front of the wall above the entrance door and maintained in accordance with the City's building code. 
Sec. 32-59. - Other signs. 
(1)  Incidental signs. Up to two (2) incidental signs may be attached to a ground sign structure or to a building wall, but may not be attached perpendicular to the wall. Such signs are restricted to trading stamps, credit cards accepted, and official notices of services required by law or trade affiliations. Area of each sign may not exceed five (5) square feet; the total area of all such signs may not exceed ten (10) square feet. 
(2)  Manual changeable copy signs. Manual changeable copy signs are permitted by this article to be up to the maximum size of permitted sign area when utilized for cinema/theater signage, fuel price signage or for schools and churches but otherwise such manual changeable copy signs are subject to a maximum size of nine (9) square feet or up to one-quarter (twenty-five (25) percent) of the permitted sign area. 
(3)  Portable signs. Portable signs are not allowed except for menu signs as regulated in this section. 
(4)  Window signs. The total area of all window signs on any side of a building shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window area. 
(5)  Menu signs. A maximum of one (1) menu board sign shall be allowed per street address. Menu signs shall be utilized only during regular business hours and shall be removed during nonbusiness hours and during serious incidents of inclement weather that may destabilize the menu board. Menu boards may be placed on private property or within the public right-of-way on a sidewalk only, provided they are within five (5) feet of the owner's front door and are not on another's property, do not interfere with pedestrian movement, or wheelchair access to, through and around the site. At least six (6) feet of contiguous clear sidewalk width must remain for pedestrian traffic. The total sign area per face shall not exceed six (6) square feet. Maximum height shall be four and one-half (41/2) feet. 
(6)  [Banner signs.] Banner signs are allowed and must be no larger than two (2) feet wide by two (2) feet high, be firmly secured, and be maintained in good condition at all times. 
Sec. 32-60. - Illumination. 
    Illumination of signs shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  White is the primary color of light which is permitted. The DRC may approve other colors in keeping with the sign design scheme. 
(2)  Flashing signs shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Floodlight illumination is permissible, provided that the floodlight or spotlight is positioned so that none of the light shines onto an adjacent property or in the eyes of motorists or pedestrians. 
(4)  No bare bulb illumination shall be used. 
(5)  Searchlights shall not be permitted to be used to illuminate signs or properties in the advertising or promotion of a business or in the attraction of customers to a property. 
(6)  Individual letters and symbols may be internally lit or backlit and may project no more than twelve (12) inches from the building facade. 
(7)  Backlighting of signs shall be permitted, provided that, should neon lighting be utilized, the neon tubing shall not be exposed. 
(8)  Illumination shall not encroach upon sea turtle or other habitat nesting areas in accordance with federal laws. 
Chapter 33 - DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) 

Sec. 33-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Planned Development (PD) is an alternative to standard zoning districts in which the landowner and City Council negotiate the zoning standards that will apply to a specific parcel of land such that the resulting development will be of superior quality while protecting the health, safety and welfare of the general public. The PD will promote efficient and economical land use, an improved level of amenities, appropriate and harmonious variety in physical development, creative design, improved living environments, and protection of existing and future City development. Under this development process, land development is planned as an entity under a Master Development Plan and overall density of the site remains constant while dwelling units are transferred throughout the site and developed in clusters, tracts, pods, etc. Additionally, greater amounts of land are allocated for open space, a mixture and variety of housing types and land use are provided for and natural elements are preserved. Planned Developments may include a mixture of uses, but such uses must conform to and implement the Comprehensive Plan. The district shall be consistent with the Future Land Use category in which the property is located. 
Sec. 33-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The PD agreement shall include a Master Development Plan and shall comprehensively set forth all of the zoning standards that shall apply to the subject parcel of land and shall be approved pursuant to the Master Plan and Rezoning procedures specified in Chapter 34 Procedures, Article II Legislative and Quasi-judicial. 
(b)  All PD (including PUD and PUDZ) agreements adopted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall continue to be governed by the terms of such agreements. All PD zoning designations shall be indicated on the Zoning Atlas. 
(c)  Where a Planned Development is located in an overlay district, development shall also be in accordance with the requirements of those districts. Should a conflict arise between requirements contained in the aforementioned overlay zones, the stricter requirements shall prevail. 
Sec. 33-3. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  All uses proposed within a PD shall be specified in the application for rezoning to the PD Zoning District. The applicant shall identify the specific uses in the application. The uses shall be included in the PD rezoning ordinance. Upon approval by City Council, buildings or structures or land or water may be used only for the following purposes. Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1), commercial, convenience stores, and health studios and spas shall be permitted subject to City Council determination at the time of PD approval that such uses are compatible with the existing and future development of adjacent and nearby lands within the PD. All uses permitted in a planned development shall be consistent with the comprehensive land use plan designation for the subject site, including densities and intensities of use. A PD may include, and shall be limited to, the following permitted uses: 
Planned Development Consistency Consistent with the Following Minimum Standards Residential Sec. 33-3(a)(1) The PD must be consistent with the existing comprehensive plan land use designation Secs. 33-4-33-6 Commercial Sec. 33-3(a)(2) Secs. 33-4-33-7 Light Industrial Sec. 33-3(a)(3) Secs. 33-4-33-6 Mixed-use Sec. 33-3(a)(1), (2) Secs. 33-4-33-7 Mixed-use Sec. 33-3(a)(1)-(3) Secs. 33-4-33-6  
(1)  Residential may include single-family detached dwellings, patio homes, townhouses, multifamily, family day care homes and neighborhood group homes, or combinations thereof, consistent with the residential uses established in Chapter 28 Zoning, Article V, Use Standards. 
(2)  Commercial uses consistent with the commercial uses established in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article V, Use standards. 
(3)  Light Industrial [uses] consistent with the Light Industrial Services and Warehousing (M-1) zoning district established in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article V, Use standards. 
Sec. 33-4. - Minimum land area required for a planned development. 
(a)  The minimum land area shall be five (5) acres. However, a two-acre minimum site size will be allowed if the PD is located in the southern area of the Community Development Block Grant Action Plan South Street Target Area, generally bounded by South Street to the north, Harrison Street to the south, Barna Avenue to the west, and F.E.C. Railroad and Deleon Avenue to the east, and as shown on the attached [following] map: 

Sec. 33-5. - Planned Development Standards. 
(a)  Standards for PD zoning. 
(1)  Applicants for PD zoning shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposed PD zoning standards will protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public to a greater extent than would have been possible pursuant to the standard zoning regulations set forth in this article. 
(2)  A Planned Development shall be so located with respect to arterial streets, collector streets and other transportation facilities, as to provide direct access to such PD without creating or generating traffic along local streets in residential areas or clusters outside the PD. 
(3)  Planned Developments shall be so located and developed in relation to sanitary sewer and potable water lines, storm and surface drainage systems and other utility systems and installations that neither extensions nor enlargement of such systems will be required in manner, form, location, degree, scale or timing resulting in higher public costs or earlier inclusion of public costs then would development in forms generally permitted under existing zoning in the area. The developer shall confirm public water and sewerage disposal facilities by written agreement with the City and/or other governmental agency or private utility firm acceptable to the City. The developer shall provide all necessary stormwater management, street access, paved streets, parking facilities, fire hydrants and street lighting making provisions for service and access with adjoining properties under other ownerships. Further, where existing streets or traffic control devices are affected by the development, the developer shall provide the necessary changes or additions, as may be required by the City. 
(4)  The developer shall place all utility lines underground, including all telephone lines and service lateral electrical distribution lines serving individual installations. Other high voltage electrical lines may be placed underground or on concrete poles provided the poles are within street right-of-way and have provisions for street lighting. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and be contained in pad mounts, enclosures, or vaults. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the construction shall be compatible with the primary building design. Landscaping with shrubs and plants shall be provided to screen the pad mount transformers. 
(5)  In no instance shall industrial uses be located abutting and/or adjacent to any residential districts and/or uses. Residential and industrial districts shall be required to be separated by another district, landscaped buffer area or combination of both with a minimum separation from boundary to boundary between the residential and industrial districts of five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  Access. Every dwelling unit or other use permitted in a PD, shall have access to a public street, either directly or via approved private roads dedicated for public or private use guaranteeing access. Permitted uses in a PD are not required to front on a dedicated public road. 
(1)  The right-of-way and pavement width for roadways shall be consistent with the City's Land Development Regulations and all primary and secondary impacts shall be subject to concurrency as provided in the City's Comprehensive Plan and the concurrency requirements set forth per Chapter 30 Development Standards, Article IV Concurrency of the Land Development Regulations. 
(2)  Dedicated streets and roadways shall be subject to all design criteria of the state, county, or City dependent upon which jurisdiction maintains control of the roadway. 
(c)  Parks and Open Space. 
(1)  The minimum percentage of parks and open space required for a PD is thirty-five (35) percent of the total gross acreage of the PD. The open space shall meet the minimum standards set forth per Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open space. 
(2)  All parks and open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the Master Plan. The developer shall choose a method of administering open space as specified in Chapter 30, Development standards, Article I, General provisions, Division 3, Operations and maintenance. 
Sec. 33-6. - Internal yard and bulk requirements. 
(a)  The following shall be required for development in a PD: 
(1)  Minimum lot size. Within the boundaries of the PD, no minimum lot size shall be required. In an Area of Critical Concern, the maximum impervious surface for the entire development area shall be forty (40) percent of the site, excluding the thirty-five (35) percent open space requirement, public rights-of-way, wet retention areas and wetlands. In the case of residential subdivisions, the total amount of maximum impervious surface for each lot will be noted individually on the final plat. 
(2)  Frontage. In no instance shall any one (1) building extend more than three hundred (300) feet in length without being separated by a break of at least twenty (20) feet, or a difference in facade treatments. 
(3)  Minimum living areas. 
a.  Single-family: Nine hundred (900) square feet. 
b.  Town homes: Eight hundred (800) square feet. 
c.  Condominiums: Eight hundred (800) square feet. 
d.  Multifamily apartments: Six hundred (600) square feet. 
(4)  Maximum building height. Building height must comply with any design standards or other plans or policies provided for in the area of the development, or must be compatible with the surrounding existing development patterns in the area. In all instances, the maximum building height shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Dedication and construction of public rights-of-way. Upon recommendation from the Administrator, City Council may additionally require a time schedule and appropriate surety for dedication and construction of public rights-of-way at time of need within and surrounding the proposed PD. 
(6)  Maximum residential density and floor area ratio shall not exceed the maximums of the designated Comprehensive Plan future land use category. 
Sec. 33-7. - Exemptions. 
    Reserved. 
Sec. 33-8. - Review criteria. 
(a)  In evaluation and consideration of an application for rezoning to the Planned Development (PD) District, the City shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and any other small area plan, design standards, or visioning plan that applies to the area in which the development is located. 
(2)  Internal Compatibility and Design: 
a.  The streetscape pattern shall provide for pedestrian and bicycle pathways, as well as an interesting vista that includes street trees, sidewalk treatments, and lighting. 
b.  The overall development shall make use of existing natural features and interesting topography. 
c.  In commercial and residential PDs, a variety of residential designs and commercial spaces shall be included, and the mix of land uses should be designed to be compatible and complimentary. 
d.  Building designs shall provide for architectural styles that are compatible with surrounding development or design standards that apply to the area. 
e.  Open space shall provide for quality recreational amenities including fountains and passive recreational amenities, such as benches and lighting. 
f.  Projects in existing urban contexts shall provide urban amenities, such as structured automobile parking, amenities for bicycle users, and public meeting areas. 
(3)  External Compatibility: 
a.  The proposed development shall not negatively impact the quality of life for any adjacent residential uses. Negative impacts can include a decrease in property values and any substantial increase in noise or traffic. Any traffic impacts shall be demonstrated with a traffic analysis and the developer, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, shall mitigate the impacts. 
b.  The proposed development shall not negatively impact any adjacent conservation lands. 
c.  The proposed development shall provide bikeway and trails to be consistent and compatible with the Brevard Metropolitan Planning Organization's overall Greenways and Trails program. 
d.  Access and street patterns of the development shall compliment and be compatible with the existing street system of the surrounding development. 
e.  Commercial and industrial uses within the development shall be adequately buffered from any adjacent residential uses. 
Sec. 33-9. - Procedure for securing approval of a Planned Development. 
(a)  A formal pre-application meeting shall be held with the Planning Department staff. At this meeting, discussion should take place on the project's concept, project compliance with the City's policies and ordinances, identification of any development issues for possible resolution and a tentative schedule of submittal deadlines and review dates. 
(b)  Submission of plans and action thereon. 
(1)  Procedure for securing approval of a Planned Development shall follow the Master Plan approval process for a rezoning set forth per Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and Quasi-judicial. 
(2)  The development plan of the Planned Development shall meet the requirements of professional land planning services; promote public health, safety and general welfare; provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience, conserve the values of surrounding property; and protect against nuisances and hazards. 
(3)  Development plans for all master plans shall be submitted in accordance with the City's general site plan and/or subdivision development plan requirements contained in Chapter 30, Development Standards and Chapter 34, Procedures of this Code [the Land Development Regulations]. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a detailed textual statement containing all proposed uses within the Planned Development, including all restrictions, covenants, limitations, hours of operation, rules, regulations and such other data and information as the City shall require, which the applicant intends to place on the property. Upon approval by the City Council, this textual statement shall become a part of the City's zoning regulations for that Planned Development. After final approval of the Planned Development, including the textual statement, any amendment to the provisions of the textual statement must be made in accordance with the Master Plan Procedures specified in Chapter 34, Procedures of the Land Development Regulations. 
(c)  Time periods and extensions thereof. 
(1)  Construction shall begin within a period of five (5) years, beginning with the enactment date of the ordinance creating the Planned Development. Failure to begin construction within this five-year period shall automatically cause the ordinance establishing the Planned Development to be rescinded, unless a request for an extension of time is granted. 
(2)  An application for an extension of the five-year period shall be made to the City Council and shall be accompanied by such evidence as shall be necessary to show substantial need and shall be made before the expiration of the five-year period. In its sole discretion, the City Council may, by resolution, grant the extension; provided, however, that the petitioner shall have no vested right to receive such an extension. 
(3)  After a Planned Development has been approved by the City Council, no substantial modification to the approved plan of development shall be made unless submitted to the City Council and approved by the City Council. 
(4)  If the City Council determines that the plan is abandoned, or if construction is terminated after the completion of any stage, or if construction is abandoned or discontinued for a period of one (1) year, or if there is evidence that further development is not contemplated, the City Council may rescind or modify the ordinance establishing the Planned Development. 
Secs. 33-10-33-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID) 

Sec. 33-21. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Planned Industrial Development (PID) district is created to provide for areas of large scale, high technology and other clean light industry in an attractive parklike atmosphere. It is further intended that this district be utilized to promote industrial activity, more efficient and economical industrial land use, harmony in physical design and industrial relationships, variety and amenity in industrial development and the protection of adjacent and nearby existing and future nonindustrial uses and activities. Planned Industrial Development districts will encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development including architecture, landscaping, and graphic design. This district is intended to develop within those areas identified as Planned Industrial Park on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map. 
Sec. 33-22. - Permitted principal, conditional and accessory uses. 
    The permitted, permitted with limited conditions, conditional uses, and accessory uses shall be consistent with the uses and standards established in Chapter 28, Zoning. 
Sec. 33-23. - Criteria and standards approval of a Master Plan. 
(a)  Greenbelt. Within a Planned Industrial Development, a greenbelt shall be designated on the Master Plan and be required as follows: 
(1)  Where the project abuts a major collector or higher classification roadway or non-industrial/planned industrial land uses: Fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Remaining perimeter: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Improvements within the required greenbelt shall be limited to underground utilities and irrigation systems, required rights-of-way perpendicular to the greenbelt, pedestrian and bicycle paths, stormwater management systems, and passive recreation areas. The required greenbelt, excepting identified wetlands, may be included in calculating the open space required by Section 33-23(c), Common open space. 
(b)  Lots. 
(1)  Each lot shall front on a public right-of-way or private street within the PID. 
(c)  Common open space. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total site area, exclusive of rights-of-way, shall be set aside as common open space and dedicated for public use or held in common by the owners of the industrial park, subject to maintenance provisions in deed restrictions approved by the City Council. Said common open space area may include required greenbelts and areas designated for stormwater retention or detention requirements provided that they are utilized for passive recreation, nature observation or other accessible recreational activity. Regulatory wetlands may be credited for up to a fifty (50) percent credit to the required common open space at a 2:1 ratio. The open space shall meet the minimum standards set forth per Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open space. 
(d)  All parks and open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the Master Plan. The developer shall choose a method of administering open space as specified in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article I, General Provisions, Division 3, Operations and Maintenance. 
(e)  Sidewalk and bicycle lanes. Five-foot sidewalks and five-foot bike lanes shall be required on both sides of all streets within the Planned [Industrial] Development. In lieu of sidewalks and bike lanes, the developer may propose a pedestrian/bicycle path. The path shall: provide access to all lots and parcels within the development; be a minimum ten (10) feet wide; be constructed with a stabilized all-weather surface; and shall be located in dedicated easements, common areas, or greenbelt areas. The pedestrian/bicycle path, if proposed, shall be incorporated in the Master Development Plan. 
(f)  Commerce component. The developer may, as part of the Master Development Plan, designate and provide specific areas of the development as commercial, office, educational institution and service uses within a park like setting provided that these commerce areas do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the PID development. The permitted uses allowed in the commerce component of the PID development are established in Chapter 28, Article II and Article III of these regulations. 
(1)  A Planned Industrial Development that incorporates commerce components must have a minimum site area of ten (10) acres. 
(2)  The commerce component shall be clearly illustrated on the Master Plan Development for the PID development. 
(g)  Conflicts. Where the provisions contained in the approved Master Development Plan are in conflict with the content of these regulations, the provisions contained in the approved Master Development Plan shall prevail. 
Sec. 33-24. - Criteria and standards approval of a site plan. 
(a)  Landscaping shall adhere to the regulations established in Chapter 30, Division 10, Landscaping, of these [Land Development] Regulations. Additionally, each site development shall introduce a landscaping "theme" as part of the overall landscape plan and shall be implemented to compliment the building and site plan. 
(b)  Loading facilities and areas shall adhere to the regulations established in Section 30-280 of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(c)  Outdoor storage shall adhere to the regulations established in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article V, Zoning Use Standards. 
(d)  Lighting shall adhere to the regulations established in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 5, Lighting. 
(e)  Signage shall adhere to the regulations established in Chapter 32, Signs. 
(f)  Mechanical/electrical equipment or other utility features on a roof, ground or buildings shall be screened from public view with material harmonious with the building or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public street or adjoining property. 
(g)  Fences shall adhere to the regulations established in Chapter 30, Development standards, Article II, Improvements, Division 4, Fences/walls. 
(h)  Lots. 
(1)  Flag lots are prohibited. 
Sec. 33-25. - Approval process. 
(a)  Master Plan: Procedures for securing approval of a Planned Industrial Development shall follow the Master Plan procedures described in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and quasi-judicial. 
(b)  Site Development: Procedure for securing approval of a site development shall follow the site plan and/or subdivision procedures described in the Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions and Article IV, Site plans. 
Secs. 33-26-33-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNED OFFICE PARK 

Sec. 33-31. - Purpose and intent. 
    An applicant for an Office Professional (OP) zoning category and district may develop an office park in order to preserve appropriate wetlands and upland habitat. An applicant may apply for office park style development in the Office Professional (OP) zoning district as a part of an application for zoning, site plan, or subdivision plat review and approval, provided the following criteria are met. 
Sec. 33-32. - Permitted principal, conditional and accessory uses. 
    The permitted, permitted with limited conditions, conditional uses, and accessory uses shall be consistent with the Office Professional (OP) zoning district uses and standards established in Chapter 28, Zoning. 
Sec. 33-33. - Criteria and standards. 
(a)  All streets, pedestrian paths, utilities, and signage shall be developed in accordance with Chapter 30, Development standards, Article II, Improvements, Division 7, Streets/sidewalks/bikes, of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(b)  Parks and open space. 
(1)  The minimum percentage of parks and open space required for a Planned Office Park is thirty (30) percent of the total gross acreage of the Planned Office Park. The open space shall meet the minimum standards set forth per Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open space. 
(2)  All parks and open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the Master Plan. The developer shall choose a method of administering open space as specified in Chapter 30, Development standards, Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Operations and maintenance. 
Sec. 33-34. - Approval process. 
(a)  Procedures for securing approval of Planned Office Park shall follow the Master Plan procedures set forth in Chapter 34, Article II, Legislative and quasi-jurisdiction. 
(b)  A Planned Office Park shall be developed in accordance with the site plan and/or subdivision procedures described in the Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions and Article IV, Site plans. If areas for common use of occupants of the development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and facilities in the park. 
(c)  All land included within the proposed Planned Office Park shall be under the legal control of the applicant. The applicant shall agree to proceed with the proposed park development according to the provisions contained herein and such conditions may be attached to the Master Plan for Planned Office Park. 
Sec. 33-35. - Planned Office Park (POP) Development Standards. 
A. Purpose The Planned Office Park is a development option that may be utilized within the Office Professional (OP) zoning district. B. Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 - Article IV and Article V C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, Overall Required for POP (acres) 5 Lot area, Minimum within the POP (sq. ft.) 87,120 Lot width, Minimum (ft.) None Density, Maximum (du/ac) NA Floor area per dwelling unit, Minimum (sq. ft.) NA Building coverage, Maximum (% of lot area) 30 Lot Coverage, Maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, Maximum (ft.) None Front yard setback, Minimum (ft.) 50 Side corner setback, Minimum (ft.) 35 Interior side yard setback, Minimum (ft.) 35 Rear yard setback, Minimum (ft) 35 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 - Article VII NOTES: Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
Secs. 33-36-33-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGIONAL MIXED-USE (RMU) 

Sec. 33-41. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The Regional Mixed-Use District (RMU) is established as a special district for the purpose of establishing a zoning category to facilitate development of a regionally mixed-use development that can accommodate a variety of land uses. This district is intended to be a master planned development and to allow the integration of uses so that all uses are developed into a harmonious fabric. This zoning district permits a mixture of recreation, open space areas, tourist, residential, office, retail, commercial, industrial park and marina uses within a single integrated development. It is intended to assure that the project shall be developed with the highest aesthetic standards of the City of Titusville, and to create a pleasant and attractive physical environment which will contribute to the work, living, shopping and recreation experiences of the occupants. The RMU district may permit any combination of residential, multifamily, commercial, industrial, park and recreation, and public uses within a single Master Plan Development. Recorded covenants shall be required to ensure that integrated design standards within individual projects shall be provided. Site/development and projects shall be required to be designed so as to ensure compatibility. 
(b)  Location criteria and general criteria. 
(1)  Size and location criteria. 
a.  An RMU development shall contain a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) acres. No additions to the original development boundary shall be permitted without City Council approval. 
b.  If an expansion is proposed, all existing portions and new proposed additional areas shall proceed through the review and master-planning process for creation and approval of a new Master Plan. Additional conditions and restrictions on the existing approved and developed RMU area may be imposed by City Council. 
c.  Any additional land area shall be required to connect fully and contiguously to the existing RMU area along at least twenty-five (25) percent of the new land area boundary and have a minimum land area of ten (10) acres. (See Section 33-45(d), "Graphic Illustration" for additional information). 
d.  Any addition shall not be permitted across Arterial rights-of-way outside of the existing RMU development. 
(2)  Development intensity (no variance shall be permitted to these criteria). 
a.  No single type of use shall occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the total acreage within the total RMU development. 
b.  A Master Plan for the entire development shall be approved before commencement with any development, including any form of clearing. 
c.  The Master Plan shall also include the internal road network of all collector and arterial road rights-of-way and their ingress/egress points into the RMU development. Any alteration of any collector or arterial road rights-of-way or any ingress/egress points into the RMU development shall require amendment to the Master Plan. Alterations to the internal road network with a local street designation not involving ingress/egress points into the RMU development may be approved administratively by the Planning Department without revising the Master Plan. 
(3)  Parks and Open Space. 
a.  The minimum percentage of parks and open space required for an RMU development is twenty (20) percent of the total gross acreage of the RMU development. The open space shall meet the minimum standards set forth per Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article III, Improvements, and Division 3, Open Space. 
b.  All parks and open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the Master Plan. The developer shall choose a method of administering open space as specified in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article I, General Provisions, Division 2, Operations and Maintenance. 
(4)  An RMU project shall be required to be developed as a single integrated design entity. The total project shall be required to be under single ownership or control when the project is applied for. 
a.  Unity of control shall be assured for project management, maintenance and operation through covenants recorded with the Master Plan per the Master Plan Procedures set forth per Chapter 34, Procedures. The covenants shall legally tie into the management structure overseeing the entire project. A property owners' association shall take over all management and maintenance of the RMU project once eighty-five (85) percent of the total RMU area is developed, or thirty (30) percent of the maximum allowable single use is developed (whichever occurs first). 
(5)  RMU development shall be located with access to an existing improved (i.e. paved) major/minor arterial road right-of-way corridor. A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total perimeter boundary of the RMU development shall directly front an existing improved (i.e. paved) major/minor arterial right-of-way. All main access points to RMU shall be from the major/minor arterial(s) right-of-way. No portion of the I-95 road right-of-way shall be used to meet this criteria. 
(6)  As a part of the Master Plan, connectivity and compatibility between uses shall be required. Commercial and service uses shall be concentrated for maximum pedestrian convenience and located for easy accessibility by residents and visitors. Residential uses shall be arranged, located and safeguarded as to provide security for residents. And, residential uses shall be so arranged and located to be separated from major vehicle traffic flows so to protect privacy and tranquility of the residents. 
(7)  A twenty-five (25) foot wide buffer shall be required within tracts around the perimeter of the RMU district. This buffer may be required to be increased during the approval process when nonresidential uses abut the perimeter of the RMU district and are not considered compatible with abutting areas outside of the RMU district. 
(8)  The following zoning sub-districts are established with generalized uses within the RMU zoning. An RMU development shall include a mix of three (3) or more land uses. 
a.  District RMU-100 - Public and Park and Recreation. Purpose and intent-This district is to identify areas that will be specifically used for public uses, including, but not restricted to, governmental uses, recreation facilities, schools, parks, emergency services, libraries, government offices. 
b.  District RMU-200 - Single-family. Purpose and intent-In this district, emphasis is given to single-family residential uses intended to facilitate the development of neighborhoods that reflect an emphasis towards interaction on a human scale. This district allows a mix of residential-type uses including civic, recreational, and cluster neighborhood related commercial nodes that are master planned in conjunction with an overall RMU Master Plan. The intent is to establish a livable, vibrant neighborhood community. Single-family residential tracts/districts shall be required to be a minimum of ten (10) acres in area. 
Goals - Development in this district is encouraged to be a self-sufficient residential network with convenient proximity to commercial uses and employment centers. Such development may encourage innovation in planning and design by including: 
1.  Open space woven into the development pattern to create recreational opportunities and visual enjoyment. 
2.  A strong sense of community identity based on a shared, coherent and functionally efficient environment. 
3.  A hierarchy of street patterns and blocks arranged to provide comprehensible and interesting routes of travel. An internal hierarchy of streets with pedestrian and bike access and other roadways wide enough to carry and provide greater vehicular mobility is encouraged. 
4.  A series of pedestrian links to provide easy access between residences and activity nodes. 
c.  District RMU-300 - Multifamily. Purpose and intent-In this district, emphasis is given to establishing high density multifamily residential uses and is intended to facilitate the development of neighborhoods that reflect an emphasis toward interaction on a human scale. This district encourages more density and intensity. This district allows a mix of multifamily residential-type uses including civic, recreational and clustered neighborhood-related commercial nodes that are master planned in conjunction with an overall RMU Master Plan. The relationship between multifamily, time-shares, hotels and commercial may all be interconnected. The location of commercial retail and commercial office should be connected or combined with these residential type uses, but shall be part of an overall pre-established Master Plan. Multifamily residential tracts/districts shall be required to be a minimum of seven (7) acres. 
Goals - It is the goal of this district to establish a higher level of density and intensity. This district will have an urban high-density form rather than suburban low/medium density form. Planning development and design objectives of this district include: 
1.  A strong sense of community identity based on a shared, coherent and functionally efficient mixed-use environment. 
2.  Building/open spaces and other visual features that act as landmarks, symbols and activity centers for community identity with downtown similarities. 
3.  Compatibility of buildings and other environmental improvements as determined by their arrangement, bulk, character and landscaping to establish a liveable and harmonious, yet uniquely diverse environment. 
4.  A hierarchy of public and/or private streets, designed for a balanced mix of both pedestrians and automobiles. An internal hierarchy of streets, with pedestrian and bike access and other roadways wide enough to carry and provide greater vehicular mobility is encouraged. 
5.  A coordinated transportation system with a hierarchy of facilities designed for automobiles, public transit, bicycles and pedestrians. 
d.  District RMU-400 - Commercial. Purpose and intent-Within this district, emphasis is given to larger retail commercial uses, office parks, commercial marina(s), resort hotels, theme/amusement parks and other tourist related type uses. These uses should still be connected to residential areas, but with much less emphasis on vehicles and more pedestrian inter-connectivity. Commercial tracts/districts shall be required to be a minimum of ten (10) acres. 
Goals - The commercial district should encourage innovative commercial and office development and shall be adjacent to major thoroughfares and neighborhood villages. This district may offer a variety of goods and services to the Brevard County area and Central Florida market as well as the residents within the RMU district. The goal of this district will include providing a compatible mix of commercial, office and institutional uses which serve the local and regional market: 
1.  Located with direct access to major thoroughfares. 
2.  Be in close, convenient and compatible proximity to the residential areas. 
3.  Prominent buildings should act as landmarks, symbols and activity centers to enhance the overall community identity. 
e.  District RMU-500 - Industrial Park. Purpose and intent-Industrial park uses should encourage high tech industrial, light industrial uses and office/research, which shall be developed and have the appearance and character of an up-scale industrial park. Industrial park district shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres. Industrial park district shall be specifically intended to be physically separated from the residential districts RMU-200 and RMU-300; the industrial uses shall be designed in keeping with the similar character of the other districts. Outdoor storage of materials shall be prohibited within the RMU-500 classification. 
Goals - The goal of this district is to provide employment diversity, both for the community and the region. Industrial park uses shall maintain the community character and compatibility by utilizing innovative design and planning principles. 
1.  Located with direct access to major thoroughfares. 
2.  Be compatible with the other uses within the RMU Project and City of Titusville. 
3.  Have an internal hierarchy of streets, with pedestrian and bike access and others wide enough to carry and provide greater vehicular mobility. 
4.  Prominent buildings should act as landmarks, symbols and activity centers to enhance the overall community identity. 
5.  Development should function as both local and regional employment centers. 
f.  District RMU-600 - Study Area Holding Zone. Purpose and intent-It is intended that the study area is designed as a holding zone that would apply to lands on a temporary basis awaiting a Master Plan approval and/or when a Master Plan expires. 
Sec. 33-42. - Permitted principal, conditional, accessory and prohibited uses. 
    The regulations pertaining to allowable uses are specified in Chapter 28, Zoning, of these [Land Development] regulations. 
Sec. 33-43. - Maximum density. 
    The regulations pertaining to density are specified in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article V, Zoning District Standards, of these regulations. 
Sec. 33-44. - Height, yard and area requirements. 
(a)  The regulations pertaining to density are specified in Chapter 28, Zoning, Article V, Zoning District Standards, of these regulations. 
(b)  Buffers. In addition to the buffers set forth in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article II, Improvements, Division 10 Landscaping, the following shall be required: 
(1)  The following buffers shall be required between abutting RMU districts. Each tract/subdivision shall provide fifty (50) percent of the required area of this buffer. The buffer area shall be required to be platted as a buffer. In the event a tract's zoning is changed and a larger buffer area between RMU districts is required, the tract requesting the zoning change shall be required to make up the difference. 
Buffer Requirement Between Districts in Feet RMU-100 
Public uses RMU-200 
Single-family RMU-300 
Multifamily RMU-400 
Commercial/office use RMU-500 
Industrial Park uses RMU-100 
Public uses 0 0 0 0 25 RMU-200 
Single-family 0 0 50 50 500 feet 1 
See note at the end of this table RMU-300 
Multifamily 0 50 0 50 500 feet 1 
See note at the end of this table RMU-400 Commercial/office use 0 50 50 0 25 RMU-500 
Industrial Park uses 25 500 feet 1 
See note at the end of this table 500 feet 1 
See note at the end of this table 25 0  
1 Note: Industrial uses shall not be located abutting and/or adjacent to any residential district (RMU-200 and RMU-300) and/or uses. Within and without residential and Industrial districts shall be required to be separated by a buffer area or another district with a minimum separation from boundary to boundary of five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  Included in buffer areas shall be areas indicated for landscaping, sidewalks, boardwalks, utilities, open space, street furniture, and lighting. No parking or buildings shall be allowed in the buffer areas. 
(3)  A road right-of-way and/or driveway shall not be used as a buffer between districts unless said road right-of-way or driveway meets the following criteria: 
a.  Regardless of the roadway category, said right-of-way or driveway shall be required to be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet in width. 
b.  The right-of-way or driveway shall be required to have a landscape median in the middle with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet separating the travel lanes the full length between districts/uses. Landscaping in this median shall extend the full length of the median and shall not be only ground cover but shall include trees, flowers, shrubs, etc. The City of Titusville Landscape Inspector approval of the final landscaping design of this median area shall be required. The property owner association shall bear all responsibility for maintaining this landscape median. 
c.  See Section 33-45(d) for graphic illustration. 
Sec. 33-45. - General provisions. 
(a)  General Criteria. 
(1)  Regional Mixed-Use districts are intended to be both self-sufficient and regional. The mixing of zoning within a district is permitted but recognizes the need for compatibility. In order to ensure this compatibility, all activities shall be required to be master planned up-front. No one (1) single district or type of use shall be more than fifty (50) percent of the RMU area. No variances shall be permitted to this criterion; however, internal boundaries and districts may be adjusted in accordance with the procedures as set forth in Section 33-45(b), Amendment to the Master Plan. 
(2)  Open space, park and recreation. The minimum open space for the overall RMU development shall be twenty (20) percent. The minimum park and recreation for residential in any individual tract within RMU-200, RMU-300 or RMU-400 sub-districts shall be ten (10) percent. The minimum park and recreation for the overall RMU development shall be fifteen (15) percent. 
(3)  Signage. All signage shall be in accordance with the Land Development Regulations Chapter 32, Signs. 
(4)  Pedestrian/bicycle paths. 
a.  All collector and arterial road rights-of-way within the RMU district shall be required to provide pedestrian sidewalks and bicycle lanes/paths to connect the various districts and uses within the total RMU development. 
b.  An overall pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan shall be included in the overall roadway/circulation plan for the RMU development. 
(5)  Screening. Any commercial development which abuts a residential zone or use shall provide screening pursuant to Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article II, Improvements, Division 10, Landscaping. 
(b)  Amendment to the Master Plan. 
(1)  Administrative changes to district boundaries of the original Master Plan may be done by the planning staff in cases where the change is to a lower district classification or for change to Public Use RMU-100 District. In no instance shall industrial uses (RMU-500-Industrial Use) be located abutting and/or adjacent to any residential districts (RMU-200-Single-Family Use and RMU-300-Multifamily Use) and/or uses. Residential and Industrial districts shall be required to be separated by another district, landscaped buffer area or combination of both with a minimum separation from boundary to boundary between the residential and industrial districts of five hundred (500) feet. See Section 33-45(b)(2), Table categorization from one district to another district, for determination as to if a change may be administrative or required to proceed through the rezoning process. 
(2)  Request for administrative change shall be in writing and shall include overall RMU Master Plans, location of proposed changes, detailed listing of existing and proposed uses, and detailed documentation of acreage to ensure that the proposed change will not violate the above noted use and area restrictions of this article. Planning staff shall have the ability to impose conditions on administrative change requests. 
Categorization from one district to another districts* Existing District Requested New District RMU-100 
Public Uses RMU-200 
Single-family RMU-300 
Multifamily RMU-400 
Commercial/ 
Office Use RMU-500 
Industrial Uses RMU-100 Public Uses N/A Administrative Administrative Administrative Administrative RMU-200 Single-family Administrative N/A Administrative Administrative Administrative RMU-300 Multifamily Administrative Rezoning required N/A Administrative Administrative RMU-400 Commercial/Office Use Administrative Rezoning required Rezoning required N/A Administrative RMU-500 Industrial Uses Administrative Rezoning required Rezoning required Rezoning required N/A N/A Not applicable. 
* Administrative zoning to a higher category may be permitted based upon the following: 
 1. When the entire tract and/or phase have not commenced any development of any type. 
 2. There is no development in other adjacent tracts and/or phases (outside of this phase or tract) within two hundred and 
   fifty (250) feet of the area proposed to be re-categorized. 
 3. Revised tract Master Plan approvals shall be required to be obtained. 
Above noted rezoning shall follow the rezoning process as noted in Chapter 34 Procedures, Article II Legislative and Quasi-judicial, Division 2, Rezoning of these regulations  
(c)  Procedure for securing approval of a Regional Mixed-Use district. 
(1)  Master Plan. A district wide Master Plan is required. Submission of plans and action thereon. 
a.  Procedure for securing approval of a Master Plan in the RMU zoning district shall follow the Master Plan approval process specified in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and quasi-jurisdiction. 
b.  The development plan of the RMU shall meet the requirements of professional land planning services; promote public health, safety and general welfare; provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience, conserve the values of surrounding property; and protect against nuisances and hazards. 
c.  Development plans for all Master Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the City's general site plan and/or subdivision specific development plan requirements contained in Chapter 30, Development standards and Chapter 34, Procedures. 
(d)  Graphic illustrations. 
(1)  This section is intended to supplement the text of the RMU regulations by providing graphic illustrations to further document the intent of these regulations. 
(2)  Supplement to Section 33-41(b)(1)c. 

(3)  Supplement to Section 33-41(b)(1)c. 

(4)  Supplement to Section 33-41(b)(1)c. 

(5)  Supplement to Section 33-44. 

(6)  Supplement to Section 33-44. 

(7)  Supplement to Section 33-44. 

(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 29, 10-24-17) 
Secs. 33-46-33-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - URBAN VILLAGE (UV) 

Sec. 33-51. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The Urban Village (UV) District is established as a mixed-use zoning district. The purpose of this district is to promote a mix of land uses with high density residential and commercial developments allowing for greater height limitations. Maintenance of the district character as identified in the adopted US 1 Corridor Master Plan, along with harmonious coexistence with surrounding land uses, are paramount concerns. It is further intended that the district be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the UMU future land use designation and the US 1 Corridor Master Plan. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Urban Village zoning district are designed and established as shown on the zoning map of the City and in the following illustrations: 



Sec. 33-52. - Permitted principal and conditional uses. 
    The regulations pertaining to allowable uses are specified in Chapter 28, Zoning, of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
Sec. 33-53. - Maximum allowable height. 
    The regulations pertaining to height are specified in Chapter 28, Zoning, of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
Sec. 33-54. - Maximum residential density. 
    The regulations pertaining to density are specified in Chapter 28, Zoning, of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
Sec. 33-55. - Urban Village Master Plan requirements. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  A mixed-use development shall be so located with respect to arterial streets, collector streets and other transportation facilities as to provide direct access to such Urban Village without creating or generating traffic along local streets in residential areas or clusters outside the Urban Village. 
(2)  UV mixed-use developments shall be so located and developed in relation to sanitary sewer and potable water lines, storm and surface drainage systems and other utility systems and installations that neither extensions nor enlargement of such systems will be required in manner, form, location, degree, scale or timing resulting in higher public costs or earlier inclusion of public costs than would generally be permitted under existing zoning in the area. The developer shall confirm public water and sewerage disposal facilities in a utility agreement with the City and/or other governmental agency or private utility firm acceptable to the City. The developer shall provide all necessary stormwater management, street access, paved streets, parking facilities, fire hydrants and street lighting making provision for service and access with adjoining properties under other ownerships. Furthermore, where existing streets or traffic control devices are affected by the development, the developer shall provide the necessary changes or additions as may be required by the City. 
(3)  The developer shall place all utility lines underground, including all telephone lines and service lateral electrical distribution lines serving individual installations. Other high voltage electrical lines may be placed underground or on concrete poles provided the poles are within street right-of-way and have provisions for street lighting. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and be contained in pad mounts, enclosures, or vaults. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the construction shall be compatible with the primary building design. Landscaping with shrubs and plants shall be provided to screen the pad mount transformers. 
(b)  Access. Every dwelling unit or other use permitted in an UV mixed-use development shall have access to a public street, either directly or via approved private roads dedicated for public use guaranteeing access. Permitted uses in an Urban Village are not required to front on a dedicated public road, but all uses must be accessible to the public. 
(1)  The right-of-way and pavement width for roadways shall be consistent with the City's Land Development Regulations and all primary and secondary impacts shall be subject to concurrency as provided in the City's Comprehensive Plan and Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article IV, Concurrency of the Land Development Regulations. 
(2)  Dedicated streets and roadways shall be subject to all design criteria of the state, county, or City dependent upon which jurisdiction maintains control of the roadway. 
(c)  Townhome Projects. Townhomes shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 30, Article III, Improvements, and Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions, Division 5, Plat. A maximum number of ten (10) dwelling units are allowed in a building group of townhome units. Staggered setbacks are encouraged to lessen the straight row effect, unless designed around a parking garage structure to lessen the visual impact of the parking structure. 
Sec. 33-56. - Design review criteria. 
(a)  In evaluation and consideration of an application for a Master Plan, the City shall consider the following criteria for an Urban Village: 
(1)  Consistency with the US 1 Corridor Master Plan objectives and action strategies. 
(2)  Internal Compatibility and Design: 
a.  The streetscape pattern should provide for pedestrian and bicycle pathways, street trees, sidewalk treatments, and lighting. 
b.  The overall development should make use of existing natural features and topography. 
c.  The residential and commercial spaces shall be designed as Florida frame vernacular, Spanish Eclectic, Bungalow, Classical Revival, or a reasonable approximation of these architectural styles as shown by the US 1 Corridor Master Plan. 
d.  Retail development designed in a linear site design with multiple retail uses housed in one continuous structure and with parking located directly in the front or rear of the retail structure without consideration of pedestrian movement, and centralized open space provisions shall be prohibited. 
e.  Retail development shall be developed in a manner consistent with the pedestrian orientation and guidelines of the US 1 Corridor Master Plan. 
f.  Retail development shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent residential community. Loading and unloading and refuse collection areas servicing the retail uses shall be located to provide the most minimal impact to the adjacent residential community or communities. 
g.  The mix of land uses should be designed to be compatible and complimentary. 
h.  Wayfinding entrance and use signs shall be consistent and described in an overall sign plan. 
i.  On-site signage shall use a consistent theme without neon, flashing, electronic, electronic reader board, or other reactive background lighting. 
j.  Open space shall provide for quality recreational amenities, including fountains, benches and lighting. 
k.  Projects shall provide urban amenities, such as structured automobile parking, facilities for bicycle users, and public meeting areas. 
l.  Reserved. 
(3)  External Compatibility: 
a.  The proposed development should not negatively impact the quality of life for any adjacent residential uses. Negative impacts can include a decrease in property values and any substantial increase in noise or traffic. Any traffic impacts shall be demonstrated with a traffic analysis and the impacts shall be mitigated by the developer in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the applicable Land Development Regulations. 
b.  The proposed development should provide bikeway and trails to be consistent and compatible with the Brevard Metropolitan Planning Organization's overall Greenways and Trails program and the Greater Titusville's Eco-Heritage Trail Plan. 
c.  Access and street patterns of the development shall compliment and be compatible with the existing street system of the surrounding development and allow for connection to commercial uses. 
d.  Nonresidential uses within the development shall be adequately screened from any adjacent residential uses. 
e.  Reserved. 
(4)  Parks and Open Space: 
a.  The minimum percentage of parks and open space required for the Urban Village is twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross acreage of the Urban Village. The open space shall meet the minimum standards set forth per Chapter 30, Development standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open space. 
b.  All parks, open space and civic plazas shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the Master Plan. The developer shall choose a method of administering open space as specified in Chapter 30, Development standards, Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Operations and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 30, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 33-57. - Procedure for securing approval of an Urban Village mixed-use. 
(a)  Submission of plans and action thereon. 
(1)  Procedure for securing approval of a Master Plan in the UV zoning district shall follow the Master Plan approval process set forth per the Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and quasi-jurisdiction. 
(2)  The development plan of the UV shall meet the requirements of professional land planning services; promote public health, safety and general welfare; provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience; conserve the values of surrounding property; and protect against nuisances and hazards. 
(3)  Development plans for all Master Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the City's general site plan and/or subdivision specific development plan requirements contained in Chapter 30, Development Standards and Chapter 34, Procedures. 
Secs. 33-58-33-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NEIGHBORHOOD VILLAGE 

Sec. 33-61. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of a Neighborhood Village [is to] provide unique opportunities to create commercial developments at a scale that is compatible with surrounding residential development and create a comfortable environment for pedestrians. These areas allow residents in the area to receive basic services without leaving the neighborhood. These centers reduce the reliance on automobiles by allowing residents to walk or bike to nearby services. By creating spaces that allow residents to gather, these centers add to the identity of a neighborhood and increase safety as more people are active within the community. 
Sec. 33-62. - Applicability. 
    A Neighborhood Village is permitted in any zoning district shown in the Zoning Table with the exception of the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), provided uses are governed by the applicable underlying zoning district regulations. 
Sec. 33-63. - Submittals. 
    A conceptual plan must be submitted in compliance with the Master Plan Procedures set forth per the Procedures Chapter. 
Sec. 33-64. - Minimum Neighborhood Village standards. 
(a)  Urban Design . The overall design of a Neighborhood Village and associated residential development shall be consistent in architectural styles. Infrastructure such as lighting, bike racks, and benches shall be similar in design in the Neighborhood Village and any residential uses within the redevelopment proposal. Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be required within the development. Buildings within the Neighborhood Village shall reserve the ground floor for commercial establishments to create an active pedestrian environment. 
(b)  Frontage. A Neighborhood Village may be located on an arterial or collector street. If a new public or private street is created then at least one (1) street shall be considered a collector or through street for purposes of meeting these standards. Building facades shall not exceed two-hundred (200) feet in length along any one (1) street, or exceed the maximum footprints established in (e) below without being separated with a plaza. 
(c)  Plaza. A Neighborhood Village shall incorporate plazas, courtyards or forecourts to provide public open space and areas for outdoor seating. Plazas shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width while not exceeding sixty (60) feet in width and shall be as deep as the adjacent buildings to serve as pathways between parking areas and building entrances. Plazas shall include at a minimum: one ornamental fountain or art installation to serve as a focal point, ornamental lighting, arbors, trellises, planted beds, drinking fountains, and awnings or canopies. 
(d)  Street setback. Along all street frontages, buildings should be flush with the sidewalk, except for entries, courtyards, or outdoor seating areas. This is to engage pedestrian activity and encourage drivers to slow down and watch for pedestrians and parking cars. The maximum setback along any street frontage shall be zero (0) feet. If a courtyard or outdoor seating area is provided along the sidewalk, a setback up to ten (10) feet may be provided. 
(e)  Massing. Buildings shall be oriented towards, and provide all principal access to a public sidewalk. In order to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential developments, building footprints shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  Frontage along one (1) roadway: Maximum twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(2)  Frontage along two (2) roadways: Maximum twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, footprint shall be defined as the area of the foundation of the ground floor of a building. Any floor area above the ground level will not be counted towards footprint. 
(f)  Doors and entrances. All buildings shall have their principal entrance opening to a sidewalk or plaza. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement. The principal entrance shall not open onto or face towards a parking lot. Pedestrian access to the principal structure shall be provided through an improved surface. 
(g)  Windows and entryways. The ground floor of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and to complement pedestrian scale activity by arranging windows and doors so the uses within buildings are visible and/or accessible from the street on at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the first floor street frontage between two (2) and eight (8) feet in height. These windows shall be clear and free of glazing or other treatments to create a mirrored effect from the exterior of the building. Solid walls shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in length. Doors shall be recessed into the face of the building to provide a sense of entry and to add variety to the streetscape. All upper floors of buildings within the Neighborhood Village shall have windows of smaller size as compared to the ground floor, and repeat in rhythms to mimic that of a traditional main street. This difference in window forms and rhythms of placement will create the appearance of vertical mixed-use buildings with residential dwellings above commercial uses. Building elevations shall be required as part of the Master Plan submittal requirements. 
(h)  Required parking. Parking within the Neighborhood Village shall adhere to the parking requirements established in the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district, Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 9 Parking/Loading/Storage, Subdivision 2, Downtown Mixed-Use parking requirements. Parking shall be located at the rear of any principal building or in a midblock location. On-street parking may count toward the parking requirement. Parking shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line. The area between any parking and the property line shall be landscaped to screen the parking area from the adjacent street and sidewalks. Access to the parking area shall be provided by a sidewalk a minimum of six (6) feet in width but no more than ten (10) feet in width. 
(i)  Signage. Signage in the Neighborhood Village shall be pedestrian in scale and shall be limited to the following types of signs: Fin, Menu Board, Wall, Under Canopy, and ground-mounted monument signs (as provided for below). Allowable signs shall meet the regulations established in Chapter 32, Signs of these regulations. Changeable copy signs are strictly prohibited. One (1) ground-mounted monument sign may be installed per Neighborhood Village. This monument sign shall be no more than six (6) feet in height and shall be limited to two (2) faces in a back-to-back configuration. Each sign face shall be no more than sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
(j)  Mechanical equipment. Electrical meter and service components, similar utility devices, whether ground-mounted, wall-mounted or roof-mounted shall be screened from view at the property line. Parapets shall be required along the perimeter of all buildings utilizing a flat-roof system. 
Sec. 33-65. - Review criteria. 
    The proposal shall meet the intent of the underlying zoning district set forth per Chapter 28, Zoning and criteria of the Master Plan Procedures set forth per Chapter 34, Procedures. 
Sec. 33-66. - Approval process. 
(a)  A site plan is required for the development of a Neighborhood Village. Any subdivision of land shall conform to the standards and procedures set forth in the Procedures Chapter [34], Article V "Subdivision". 
(1)  A Neighborhood Village shall be developed in accordance with the procedures set forth per Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions, of these regulations. If areas for common use of occupants of the development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and facilities within the proposed development. Upon approval, the Neighborhood Village shall be identified on the Official Zoning Atlas by a "NV" designation and the applicable plat book and page. 
(2)  Procedures for securing approval of a Neighborhood Village as a Planned Development (PD) shall require a Master Plan as set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and Quasi-judicial. 
Secs. 33-67-33-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CLUSTER SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 33-81. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility in site design for large lot development in order to allow developers to preserve common open space and natural resources. 
Sec. 33-82. - Applicability. 
    Notwithstanding conditional use and zoning design standards provisions of Chapter 28, Zoning, in the Residential Estate (RE) zoning district, an applicant for an RE category and district shall be encouraged to voluntarily apply for cluster development in order to preserve appropriate wetlands and upland habitat. An applicant may apply for cluster style development and open space incentive as a part of an application for zoning or at the time of subdivision plat review and approval provided the following criteria are met. 
Sec. 33-83. - Criteria and standards. 
(a)  Parks and Open Space. 
(1)  The minimum percentage of parks and open space required for a Cluster Subdivision is fifty (50) percent of the total gross acreage of the Cluster Subdivision. The open space shall meet the minimum standards set forth per Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open Space. The fifty (50) percent open space and conservation area may consist of wetlands and uplands with not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the set aside of the total lands consisting of upland vegetation. 
(2)  As a part of the open space requirement, a thirty-foot buffer of preserved native upland or wetland vegetation along adjacent public roadways and twenty-foot buffer between adjacent parcels shall be required to qualify for the cluster development. The buffer open space area may count towards the fifty (50) percent open space for conservation areas. Parks and open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the Master Plan. The developer shall choose a method of administering open space as specified in Chapter 30, Development standards, Article I, General provisions, Division 2, Operations and maintenance. 
(3)  In the event the parcel and subdivision qualifies and meets the above criteria then, in that event, the height, yard and area requirements shall be as follows: 
Cluster Subdivision Development Standards A. Purpose A Cluster Subdivision is a development option that may be utilized within the RE zoning districts to create a unique subdivision that offers varying lot sizes and allows for the protection of vegetation, topography, or other desirable features. B. Use Standards Typical Lot Pattern See Chapter 28 - Article IV and Article V C. Intensity and Dimensional Standards Lot area, Minimum (sq. ft.) 10,000 Lot width, Average at Building Line Minimum (ft.) 100 Density, Maximum (du/ac) 1 1 Floor area per dwelling unit, Minimum (sq. ft.) 2,000 Building coverage, Maximum (% of lot area) 40 Lot Coverage, Maximum (% of lot area) NA Height, Maximum (ft.) 35 Front yard setback, Minimum (ft.) 25 2 Side corner setback, Minimum (ft.) 25 Interior side yard setback, Minimum (ft.) 15 Rear yard setback, Minimum (ft.) 25 Accessory Use Development Standards See Chapter 28 - Article VII NOTES: 
   1 The overall maximum residential density for any development, including uplands and wetlands shall not exceed 1 unit per gross acre. (i.e. 80 acres, 80 units) 
   2 At least 50% of the lots must have a 35' minimum front yard setback. Typical Development Configuration (For illustrative purposes only)  
(4)  The overall maximum residential density for any development, including uplands and wetlands shall not exceed one (1) unit per gross acre, i.e., eighty (80) acres, eighty (80) units. 
(5)  To the extent possible, the open space area shall be a contiguous parcel in order to preserve the nature habitat for wildlife. 
(6)  The stormwater management system shall be designed to preserve, to the extent practical and possible, the native vegetation and may be located within the fifty (50) percent open space and conservation area provided compliance is achieved in accordance with other applicable land development regulations. 
(7)  Native vegetation and Florida Friendly Landscaping shall be encouraged within the subdivision. 
(8)  The open space area shall be set aside in a conservation easement dedicated for the benefit of the residents of the subdivision or to the public. 
Sec. 33-84. - Approval process. 
(a)  A cluster subdivision shall be developed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions, of these regulations. If areas for common use of occupants of the development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and facilities in the park. Upon approval, the cluster subdivision shall be identified on the Official Zoning Atlas by a "CS" designation and the applicable plat book and page. 
(b)  Procedures for securing approval of a cluster subdivision as a Planned Development (PD) shall require a Master Plan as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  All land included within the proposed subdivision shall be under the legal control of the applicant. The applicant shall agree to proceed with the proposed subdivision according to the provisions contained herein and such conditions may be attached to the plat. 
Secs. 33-85-33-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN 

Sec. 33-101. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility in site design for residential developments in order to allow developers to preserve common open space and natural resources. The specific purposes of this section are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by avoiding surface and groundwater pollution, contaminated run-off, air quality contamination, and urban heat islands that result from pavement and the clearing of natural vegetation; 
(2)  Protect and preserve natural resources, such as wetlands, streams, lakes, steep slopes, woodlands, and water recharge areas; 
(3)  Reduce infrastructure and housing costs by reducing conventional subdivision design, which requires more pavement, wetland crossings, grading of trees and natural areas, and maintenance of lawn and landscaping; 
(4)  Protect property values by allowing open space design features that enhance the marketability of development; 
(5)  Protect design flexibility; and 
(6)  Promote development on soils that are most suitable for urban densities while preserving soils that are primarily adaptable to their uses, such as woodlands, wildlife habitat and agriculture. 
Sec. 33-102. - Applicability. 
    Conservation development is a technique used to promote the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, agricultural lands and common open space. The term "conservation subdivision" shall refer to a residential subdivision in which development is guided to and clustered on the most suitable portions of a tract, in order to allow key environmental resources and open spaces to be protected and preserved for the benefit and enjoyment of the community. Lots are placed together into one (1) or more groupings within defined areas on a parcel, and are separated from other groupings and/or from adjacent developments by the protected open space. To achieve this type of development, the guidelines contained in this ordinance provide an alternative to traditional subdivision standards, allowing flexibility in lot dimensions, configuration and development standards. The guidelines also provide for density bonuses to encourage the utilization of conservation subdivisions. 
Sec. 33-103. - Standards. 
(a)  A conservation subdivision is permitted in any residential zoning district shown in the zoning table with the exception of the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU), Commercial and Industrial zoning districts. 
Zoning Table: Permitted Zoning District (A) District (B) Maximum Density Rural Area RE 1/ac RR 1/.5ac Urban Area R-1A 10,000 sf R-1B 7,500 sf R-1C 6,500 sf R-2 9/ac R-3 15/ac A conservation subdivision design may be incorporated into Mixed-Use zoning districts with a Master Plan.  
(b)  The subdivision shall utilize only the type(s) of dwellings permitted by the property's zoning. 
(c)  Permitted uses are governed by the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(d)  Minimum lot size. No minimum lot size shall be required. 
(e)  Dedication and construction of public rights-of-way. Upon recommendation from the Administrator, City Council may additionally require a time schedule and appropriate surety for dedication and construction of public rights-of-way at time of need within and surrounding the proposed Conservation Subdivision. 
Sec. 33-104. - Open space. 
(a)  The following open space regulations shall be required in addition to the development and dedication standards set forth in Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article III, Improvements, Division 3, Open Space, and Chapter 30, Development Standards, Article I, General Provisions, Division 2, Operations and Maintenance. The more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(1)  Any unencumbered space, park, or public or private spaces otherwise committed to preservation or recreation (active or passive), but not including areas required for stormwater management (retention or detention) unless expressly permitted herein, may be counted towards the minimum open space requirements. 
(2)  The minimum percentage of open space required for a conservation subdivision is fifty (50) percent of the total gross acreage of the development. 
(3)  All common open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the master development plan of a PD. The developer shall choose one (1) or a combination of the following methods of administering common open space: 
a.  Establishment of an association or nonprofit corporation of all individuals or corporations owning property within the planned development to ensure the maintenance of all common open space, as provided by the development order. 
b.  Retention of ownership, control and maintenance of all or a portion of all common open space by the developer, as provided by the development order. 
(4)  Land designated as open space will be restricted by appropriate legal instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney as open space perpetually. Such instrument shall be binding upon the developer, its successors, and assigns, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land. Such instrument shall be in recordable form. 
(5)  All common open space, as well as public and recreational facilities, shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures, or the development order will be in default. 
(6)  Should the developer elect to administer common open space through the association or nonprofit corporation, said organization shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  The developer must establish the association or nonprofit corporation prior to the sale of any lots. 
b.  Membership in the association or nonprofit corporation shall be mandatory for all residential property owners with the planned development and said association or corporation shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders. 
c.  The association or nonprofit corporation shall manage all common open space and recreational and cultural facilities that are not dedicated to the public, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of said land and any other land within the planned unit development not publicly or privately owned, and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land. Should the developer elect an association or non-profit corporation as a method of administering common open space, the title to all residential property owners shall include an undivided fee simple estate in all common open space, as approved by the development order. 
Sec. 33-105. - Size and location of site. 
    There is no minimum or maximum size for a conservation subdivision. However, the minimum open space requirement may limit the number of residential units. 
Sec. 33-106. - Connectivity. 
    The conservation subdivision shall include a pedestrian circulation system. All sidewalks shall connect to other sidewalks or with trail sidewalks, and trails shall connect to potential areas qualifying as conservation areas on the development parcel, adjoining undeveloped parcels, or with existing conservation areas. 
Sec. 33-107. - Density bonus. 
(a)  The gross density of a conservation subdivision shall not exceed the maximum density shown in the Zoning Table Section 33-103(a) for the property's zoning. A density bonus may be allowed provided the following are included on the conservation subdivision: 
(1)  Gross density shall be calculated in the manner described by the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Reserved. 
Sec. 33-108. - Approval. 
(a)  A conservation subdivision shall be developed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions of these regulations and the submittal requirements set forth per the Procedures Manual. If areas for common use of occupants of the development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and facilities in the park. Upon approval, the conservation subdivision shall be identified on the Official Zoning Atlas by a "CS" designation and the applicable plat book and page. 
(b)  Procedures for securing approval of a conservation subdivision as a Planned Development (PD) shall require a Master Plan as set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and Quasi-judicial. 
(c)  All land included within the proposed subdivision shall be under the legal control of the applicant. The applicant shall agree to proceed with the proposed subdivision according to the provisions contained herein and such conditions may be attached to the plat. 
Secs. 33-109-33-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS 

Sec. 33-111. - Transfer of development rights. 
(a)  Purpose and Intent. This section is intended to provide greater flexibility in the pattern of development and redevelopment by allowing for the transfer of residential development rights (unused residential density) from one (1) parcel or site to another parcel or site where the Community Redevelopment Agency (herein referred to as the CRA) and City Council determines that: 
(1)  Such transfers will assist in the renewal, rehabilitation, and creation of the economic, environmental, physical and historical resources of the Community Redevelopment Area, as well as the renewal, rehabilitation, preservation, and creation of public space in the Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use district and more specifically the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district; and 
(2)  Such transfers will further the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the Community Redevelopment Plan, and the Downtown Master Plan. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Receiving Sites: Areas within the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district of the Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use district of the Land Development Regulations and adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
Sending Sites: Any areas within the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) Zoning District as set forth within the City's adopted Land Development Regulations as authorized by the Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use District as set forth in the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan, provided that such site shall be deemed by the City Council to be appropriate for use as public open spaces, public parks, urban park spaces and amenities, public recreational facilities, stormwater facilities, historic preservation; or other approved public purpose and private development that is consistent with the Downtown Master Plan. 
Sever: The removal of a development right from property rights possessed by an owner of real property. The term describes and connotes a removal or separation, in perpetuity, as distinguished from a restriction or limitation, which may be overridden, deleted, or is subject to a time frame. 
TDR Bank: The record maintained by the City for the deposit and withdrawal/purchase of city-owned TDRs, and the record of all TDR transactions within the CRA. Privately transferred TDRs are considered a private transaction, but the approval of sending and receiving sites for all TDRs must comply with the regulations set forth in this section, and shall be recorded as part of the TDR Bank. 
Transferable Development Rights: A development right is an appurtenant right of land ownership that has economic value separate from the land itself, subject to reasonable regulation by the local government under its police power, and that may be transferred from the land from which the right is severed (sending site) to another piece of land (receiving site). Once severed, all city-owned TDRs are technically deemed deposited into the TDR Bank but thereafter, if only a portion of the development rights attributable to a sending site are transferred to a receiving site, the remaining development rights remain deposited in a TDR Bank in accordance with the provisions of this section for city-owned TDRs. Private TDRs are considered a private transaction per the regulations set forth in this section. Transferable Development Rights means the maximum density (dwelling units) exclusive of variances or conditional use permits that would be permitted to be transferred by the property's zoning on the date of the transfer approval which will be calculated and allocated by a formula developed by the City. These rights are sometimes referred to herein as "TDRs." 
Sec. 33-112. - Establishment of sending sites; transfer of TDRs. 
(a)  Establishment of sending sites. Any property in the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning district, upon recommendation of the CRA and the approval of the City Council, in its sole discretion, after a public hearing, may be eligible as a sending site, subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of this section. 
(b)  TDRs transferred from City-owned sending sites. The City Council, in its sole discretion and after the required public hearings as described herein, shall deposit all development rights (in terms of dwelling units) from its sending sites, as they are defined herein, in the TDR Bank for distribution and transfer in accordance with all of the procedures and limitations of this section, and specifically as limited by the following: 
(1)  A public hearing is held to determine the merits of the city-owned site as a TDR sending site for the recommendation of the CRA. A second and final public hearing is held by City Council to determine the approval of the sending site TDR transfer. All public hearings shall be held and advertised in accordance with the conditional use permit process as provided for in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and Quasi-judicial, Division 4, Conditional Use Permits with the City as the applicant. 
(2)  All monies received by the City in connection with the Transfer of Development Rights, shall be deposited into the Community Redevelopment Agency Trust Fund for the purpose of capital improvement construction of projects specifically listed in the adopted Capital Improvements Program of the Community Redevelopment Agency and the related Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Privately owned sending sites. 
(1)  Application process for sending sites. The owner of a prospective sender site (or designated representative by means of notarized signature) shall submit a complete application to the Planning Department. A complete application shall include the following: 
a.  Applicable fee. 
b.  Names, addresses, and signatures of the owners of the prospective sending site. 
c.  Current survey of the property. 
d.  A copy of the deed, or other instrument, evidencing the legal ownership of the property. 
e.  For sender sites conveyed to the City, title information or evidence satisfactory to the City Attorney that the conveyance will be free and clear of all liens or encumbrances and not a default of any lien or mortgage. For sender sites, which will continue to be privately owned, title evidence listing all lien holders, mortgages or other encumbrances affecting the sending sites. 
f.  A statement from the Code Enforcement Supervisor stating all outdoor code enforcement regulations are in compliance. 
All application submittals must be provided in a form acceptable to the Planning Department prior to scheduling for public hearings. 
(2)  Establishment of TDRs. 
a.  The City staff shall determine the total amount of undeveloped residential density on the proposed site based on the existing zoning regulations, excluding any density bonuses that have been approved through the conditional use process, that are in effect at the time the application is filed. This determination shall be provided, in the form of a determination letter, to the applicant within fifteen (15) working days of the application submittal date, and shall include all supporting documentation. The applicant, if objecting to the aforementioned determination by the City staff, may submit a letter to the Planning Department describing the objection, which will be provided to the CRA and City Council for their consideration, but may not be considered a legally binding letter in any manner, but only providing information to the CRA and City Council with additional information to inform their decision, pursuant to this section. 
(3)  Public Hearings. After a public hearing, the CRA shall recommend to the City Council, whether the proposed privately owned sending site is acceptable in accordance with the intent expressed by this section. The City Council shall then hold a second public hearing to determine, in its sole discretion, whether the proposed sending site is acceptable in accordance with the intent expressed by this section. All public hearings shall be held and advertised in accordance with the conditional use permit process as provided for in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and Quasi-judicial, Division 4, Conditional Use Permits. 
(4)  Conveyance of privately owned sending sites to the City. Upon approval by the City Council, the sending sites may be conveyed to the City unencumbered, free and clear of any and all liens and mortgages, after correction of title defects and payment of any outstanding fines or fees owed to the City, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council. After title to the approved sending site has been conveyed to the City in the manner described in this section, the City shall authorize the release of the TDRs and shall record such release in its records and in the public records of Brevard County. Should the property owner agree to convey the property to the City, the property owner shall convey the property with all rights including those other than the residential density associated with the transfer of the development rights. 
(5)  Development limitations on sending sites. The approved sending sites shall then be used only as a public open space, public parks, public urban park spaces and amenities, public recreational facilities, public parking facilities, regional stormwater improvements, historic preservation or other public purpose and private approved development approved by the City Council. Those sending sites that are proposing commercial redevelopment and/or retention, rather than historic preservation or public purpose improvements, must demonstrate consistency with the Community Redevelopment Plan and the Downtown Master Plan and the following review criteria also applies: 
a.  The applicant of commercial redevelopment and/or retention must provide a conceptual site plan and elevations for the redevelopment of the site if redevelopment of the site is proposed. 
b.  The City shall review the site based on the future viability of the site as a nonresidential site exclusively, also considering the existing nonresidential development, current code compliance, and consistency with the Downtown Mixed-Use zoning regulations. 
c.  Areas for nonresidential redevelopment and/or retention for sending sites shall be limited to the following sub-areas as provided for in the Downtown Master Plan: 
1.  The Town Center sub-area, with the exception of properties along Hopkins and Washington Avenue; 
2.  The Civic Center area; and 
3.  The Southern Gateway sub-area. 
d.  The City Council may require a sending site that is proposed for nonresidential retention to provide a percentage of the funds generated by the sale of the TDRs to the CRA Trust Fund for public capital projects. 
(6)  Development limitations on privately owned sending sites. As a condition to the approval of any privately owned sending sites, the City Council shall require that the owner of the privately-owned sending site record a restrictive covenant or other instrument, in a form approved by the City Attorney, restricting the privately owned sending site from any future residential development consistent with Section (5), above. No TDRs approved for use from a privately owned sending site shall be approved on any site plan for the receiving site until the requirements of this subsection have been complied with. To ensure the orderly redevelopment of properties within the Downtown Mixed-Use Land Use district and the Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU) zoning district, the City shall maintain a record of any transfers from privately owned sending sites. The sending site shall be labeled TDR on the official zoning map. 
Sec. 33-113. - Definitions. 
(a)  Eligible receiving sites. All property within the DMU zoning district is established as receiving sites. Receiving sites must be developed as permitted by the Land Development Regulations, as may be amended from time to time, in combination with the development rights available to the site through the maximum allowable density and intensity as set forth in the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
(1)  Development limitations on receiving sites. 
a.  The development rights accepted on a receiving site shall be limited to the maximum allowable density and intensity as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Parking and all other requirements of the Land Development Regulations of the City of Titusville shall be in accordance with any additional density acquired through the transfer of development rights, unless otherwise granted through the variance process set forth in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article V, Variances and Appeals, Division 1, Variances. 
c.  The transfer of development rights shall not cause the development or redevelopment of any site to exceed the rights provided to that site by the Land Development Regulations. 
d.  The transfer of development rights shall not cause any harm or negative impacts on adjacent property. 
e.  The transfer of development rights shall not cause harm or negative impacts on public facilities, unless such impacts are mitigated through a developer's agreement provided for in this section and approved by City Council. 
f.  Fees. Application fees for transfer of development rights shall be in accordance with Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IX, Fees, Division 1, Land Development Fees. The applicant shall be responsible for all application fees. The applicant shall also be responsible for all consulting fees regarding planning, engineering, legal, appraisal, technical, environmental, and other issues related to this section, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council. 
Sec. 33-114. - Calculation and costs. 
(a)  Calculation of density for the TDR Bank calculation. The transferable development right for a development unit shall be calculated and determined as provided in the section below. Only whole residential units may be purchased and transferred to the receiving site. 
(b)  Cost of transferable development rights from City-owned sites. 
(1)  Appraisal. At the time of approval of the TDRs, the City Council shall consider the acceptance of the appraised land value for the sending site as follows: the cost for a dwelling unit of development right shall be determined by the market value of the sending site as determined by a current real estate appraisal (updated by no more than three (3) months from the date application is heard at a public hearing) prepared for the City by an appraiser, selected by the City Manager, but paid for by the applicant. The appraisal amount (also based on the permitted floor area ratio of allowable commercial space) shall then be divided by the permitted residential units, currently allowed under the land development regulations. The City Council may reduce the per-unit cost to be competitive with other sending site TDRs. 
(2)  Nonrefundable deposit. Approval of a receiving site shall be subject to payment of a nonrefundable deposit of ten (10) percent of the cost of the city-owned TDRs, which shall be paid within ninety (90) working days of the City Council approval of the application. Failure to make such a deposit within this time frame shall result in an automatic voiding of the City Council approval. Full payment for the city-owned TDRs shall be made within thirty (30) working days of site plan approval for the receiving site. 
(c)  Cost of transferable development rights issued by private owners from privately owned sending sites. The price of TDRs from approved privately owned sending sites shall be determined by the private owners. The City shall be notified of the negotiated price of all TDR transactions and shall be given the option of offering the sale of any City-owned TDRs to the receiving site property owner at the negotiated price. The City shall exercise any option provided by this subsection within thirty (30) days of the date of any application received by the City for approval of a privately owned sending site. 
Sec. 33-115. - Procedures pertaining to the approval of development rights on a potential receiving site. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  No receiving site, or site plan on a receiving site, may be approved by the CRA or City Council unless a sending site has first been identified and approved by the CRA and City Council, and the owner of the receiving site commits to purchase the TDRs already deposited in the TDR Bank from a privately or publicly owned sending site. The formal approval by the CRA and City Council of the transfer of TDRs, whether from City-owned TDRs or from a privately owned sending site shall occur concurrently with the approval of the receiving site's conceptual site plan, as defined in Chapter 34, Procedures, Division 4 although the actual transfer may only occur with the final site plan approval from the City Manager or designee as provided in Chapter 34, Procedures, Section 34-213; but in no event may site or building permits on a receiving site be issued until such transfer has actually occurred and been documented as provided herein. 
(2)  An applicant for the transfer of development rights to a potential receiving site shall file a complete application with the Planning Department. This application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The names, addresses, and signatures, of all fee simple owners of all properties included in the receiving site. "Fee simple owner" for the purpose of this requirement shall be defined as all parties having a financial interest, either direct or indirect, in the subject matter of the application. Such disclosure shall include, but not be limited to, disclosure of all persons having an ownership interest, direct or indirect, in all properties involved in the application; 
b.  The street addresses and survey(s) of the properties involved, legal description of each property or parcels involved; 
c.  A conceptual site plan for the receiving site as defined in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article II, Legislative and Quasi-judicial, Division 4, Conditional Use Permits; 
d.  A general description of the densities, intensities, height, and other aspects of the development of the proposed receiving site, including parking facilities, stormwater retention and any other applicable improvements; 
e.  A description of the proposed development's compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, Community Redevelopment Plan, and the Downtown Master Plan; 
f.  A rendering describing the architectural characteristics of the project from the perspective all adjacent roadways; 
g.  A description of any expected or granted variances, conditional use permits, development agreement, and/or public/private partnership agreements with the Community Redevelopment Agency; 
h.  A letter confirming a pre-application meeting with the Community Development Department as provided in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Site plans; 
i.  Any other requirements as deemed necessary by the Administrator. All of the aforementioned documents must be described, summarized, and agreed upon in a Developer's Agreement pursuant to Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VIII, Development Agreements of the City's Land Development Regulations. 
(b)  Review by the Administrator. 
(1)  The Administrator shall review the application and the developer's agreement and schedule the application for public hearing with the Community Redevelopment Agency, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the City Council. 
(2)  The notice requirements shall be the same as the developer's agreement process as provided in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VIII, Development Agreements of the City's Land Development Regulations. 
(c)  Review by the Community Redevelopment Agency and City Council. The CRA and City Council, after reviewing the application, may, in its sole discretion, approve with modifications or conditions or approve less than the full amount of requested TDRs, in which case the applicant shall return to the CRA and City Council with a revised site plan and Developer's Agreement for its further consideration or deny the application of TDRs. 
(1)  It is understood and recognized by any and all applicants, as well as any property owners within the approved sending and receiving site district, that until a transfer of development rights is so approved by the City Council, said TDRs have no intrinsic or inherent value and cannot be considered as a "matter of right" in the valuation of any potential sending site or receiving site. It is solely the final approval by the City Council, in its sole and complete discretion, and based on the criteria set forth herein, that gives rise to any value of and for TDRs. 
(2)  It is understood by any and all applicants that, until a receiving site obtains final site plan approval from the City Manager or designee, no receiving site TDR transaction shall be recorded or recognized pursuant to this section. 
(3)  A resolution authorizing the withdrawal and transfer of TDRs from the TDR Bank must be adopted prior to such transfer, but, once adopted, shall automatically, change the TDR Bank statement to reflect the approved transaction subsequent to the mandatory recording of resolution by the City in the official records of Brevard County, Florida. 
(4)  The CRA and City Council shall review the application for TDRs based on the following criteria; provided, however, that approval of the application, in whole or in part, is solely within the City Council's discretion. 
a.  The project is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  The project is consistent with the Community Redevelopment Plan; 
c.  The project is consistent with the Downtown Master Plan; and 
d.  The project meets all requirements of the Land Development Regulations visibly shown in the conceptual site plan, notwithstanding requirements related to engineering review in the site plan review process as stated in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article IV, Site plans of the City's Land Development Regulations unless otherwise permitted through the variance process. 
(5)  Recording of Documents. Prior to issuance of a site and/or building permit, documentation evidencing the transfer shall be recorded against the titles to both the receiving and sending sites, as may be applicable, in the public records of Brevard County, Florida and an irrevocable covenant running with the land which shall include all conditions imposed by the City Council and the Land Development Regulations, shall be recorded against the title to the receiving site, in the public records of Brevard County, Florida. The covenant and all other documents recorded pursuant to this section for receiving sites of city-owned TDRs shall include a notification that the approval of the TDRs shall be extinguished in the event that no building permit has been issued for the receiving site within twenty-four (24) months from the date of the resolution rendered unless an extension is granted for twelve (12) months as provided by this section, and shall contain a statement by which the owner(s) of the receiving site shall agree to bind itself, its successors, and assigns with regard to all conditions, restrictions, and obligations contained therein through a Developer's Agreement adopted pursuant through Chapter 34, Procedures, Article VIII, Development Agreements of the City's Land Development Regulations. All documents must be submitted to the Planning Department and must be in a form acceptable to the Planning Department. The receiving site shall be labeled TDR on the official zoning map. 
Sec. 33-116. - Establishment of the TDR bank; deposits and withdrawals from the TDR bank; limitations. 
(a)  TDR Bank. The City Council, by the adoption of this section in the Land Development Regulations, hereby establishes the TDR Bank, which shall be maintained and operated by the City Manager or designee, for the deposit and withdrawal/purchase by private or non-profit developers of developments and shall be retroactive to all TDR transactions involving city-owned TDRs. 
(1)  A TDR Bank statement labeled as Exhibit A shall be attached to each City Council resolution authorizing the TDRs and the deposit or withdrawal of development rights shall be amended administratively and dated each time transfers are made in accordance with this section. 
(2)  The TDR Bank statement will also indicate all approved transfers from privately-owned sending sites, the total TDRs transferred and an identification of the receiving site. The TDR Bank statement shall be amended administratively and dated each time transfers are made in accordance with this section. 
Secs. 33-117-33-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-1. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter sets forth the general application and review procedures required for obtaining development orders and development permits. This article also specifies the procedures for appealing or requesting reconsideration of decisions, rezonings, conditional use permits, variances, and legislative action. The following procedures provide for the orderly review of permits and development orders in the Florida Statutes: 
(1)  Generally. The Administrator is authorized and directed to prepare a Development Review Procedures Manual (DRPM) containing supplemental administrative regulations and procedures, forms, applications, submittal requirements, internal review procedures, charts and related materials, consistent with the intent and content of this Code, and necessary to facilitate the efficient, effective and equitable administration of this Code. 
(2)  Format and publication. The Development Review Procedures Manual shall be drafted in plain English, shall have a table of contents and index, and shall be published and made available to the general public at a cost not exceeding the actual cost of duplication. 
(3)  Approval by City Council. The Development Review Procedures Manual shall be completed and submitted to the City Council for approval by resolution. Amendments to the manual shall be presented to the City Council for approval by resolution. 
(4)  [Resubmission.] No person may resubmit a rezoning, Comprehensive Plan amendment (CPA), annexation or conditional use permit request within one (1) year after the first denial of said request by City Council, or two (2) years after the second denial. A resubmittal is considered to be a request for identical zoning, CPA, annexation or conditional use. A submittal with a significant change in either zoning, CPA, annexation or conditional use will not be considered identical. 
Sec. 34-2. - Establishment of the Development Review Procedures Manual (DRPM). 
    A procedures manual is hereby established. The Development Review Procedures Manual provides additional standards, criteria, and submittal requirements for specific development order standards. 
Sec. 34-3. - The applicant. 
    Applications for a development order or permit approval will be accepted only from persons having the legal authority to take action in accordance with the permit or the development order approval sought. Applications shall be made by the owners or lessees of property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this chapter, or the agents of such persons (who may make application in the name of such owners, lessees, or contract vendees). The Administrator may require an applicant to submit evidence of his authority to submit the application whenever there appears to be a reasonable basis for questioning this authority. 
Sec. 34-4. - Applications must be complete to form and content. 
(a)  Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Community Development Department and must be complete, including all plans and attachments required by these regulations, before the Administrator is required to consider said application. 
(b)  Section 3.1 of the Development Review Procedures Manual establishes additional application requirements that shall be met for all applications. 
(c)  A pre-application meeting shall be conducted with staff prior to the submittal of an application. 
(d)  Application shall be made available to the public either in the Community Development Department or City Clerk's office. 
Sec. 34-5. - Required information and forms. 
    The Administrator shall provide necessary applications and other supplemental information as described in Section 3.2 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 34-6. - Reference to standards. 
    Detailed or technical design requirements and construction specification relating to various types of improvements (streets, sidewalks, etc.) are set forth in the City of Titusville Design and Technical Requirements manual. Further information regarding references to standards are established in Section 3.3 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. These regulations require a certain element of a development to be constructed in accordance with the detailed requirements set forth in one (1) or more of these regulations, then no construction work on such element may be commenced until detailed construction drawings have been submitted to and approved by the Administrator. Failure to observe this requirement may result in permit revocation, denial of final subdivision plat approval, or other penalty. 
Sec. 34-7. - Applications to be processed expeditiously. 
    Applications shall be processed pursuant to Section 3.4 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 34-8. - Public hearing approvals required. 
(a)  The following actions require the approval of City Council after review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval from the Community Redevelopment Agency when required: 
(1)  Annexations; 
(2)  Amendments to the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Titusville, including: 
a.  Amendments to the adopted goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  Amendments to the future land use map (Comprehensive Plan amendment or CPA); 
(3)  Land Development Regulations; 
(4)  Conditional uses in the districts where so designated (see Chapter 28, Zoning); 
(5)  Community Redevelopment district activities, acting as the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA); 
(6)  Planned Development, Planned Industrial Development, Planned Office Park, Regional Mixed-Use, and Urban Village applications. 
a.  Master Plan. 
(7)  Subdivision approval for: 
a.  Sketch plat. 
b.  Final plat. 
(8)  Other actions as directed by the City Council. 
Sec. 34-9. - Administrative approvals required. 
(a)  The following activities require approval or the issuance of a development order (permit) by the Community Development Department and are under the implementation authority of the Administrator: 
(1)  All site plan approvals. 
(2)  Building permits in compliance with these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(3)  Sign permits. 
(4)  Interpretation of land uses where deemed appropriate. 
(5)  Determination of consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and the concurrency management system as an individual determination, or as part of the issuance of a development order. 
(6)  Determination of compliance and issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO). 
(7)  Issuance of occupational licenses. 
(8)  Application and collection of fees. 
Sec. 34-10. - Permits required. 
    No use of property or change to same, including clearing, grubbing, grading or excavation, shall be commenced, nor shall buildings or other structures be constructed, erected, moved or altered without first obtaining a permit or approval as set forth in Sections 34-8 and 34-9 above. 
Sec. 34-11. - Permits applicable to land. 
    All development orders or permits shall be issued in the name of the applicant but shall apply to the land, lot, parcel or site described in said permit, except for business tax receipts which apply to the individual as well as to the site. 
Sec. 34-12. - Burden of presenting evidence; burden of persuasion. 
(a)  The burden of presenting a complete application to the permit-issuing body shall be upon the applicant. The Administrator shall determine if an application is complete before processing same. 
(b)  Once a completed application has been submitted, the burden of presenting evidence that the applications should be denied for any reason shall be upon the party or parties urging this position. 
(c)  The burden of persuasion on the issues of whether the development will comply with the requirements of this chapter remains at all times on the applicant. The burden of persuasion on the issue of whether the application should be denied rests on the party or parties urging that the requested permit should be denied. 
Secs. 34-13-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE AND QUASI-JUDICIAL 
DIVISION 1. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT 
Text amendment and map amendments both follow the same process below. 

Sec. 34-21. - Intent. 
    This division is intended to establish the procedure for adoption of a Comprehensive Plan amendment, which takes approximately eight (8) months from application submittal to the final adoption hearings, if approved for transmittal. Comprehensive Plan amendments include text amendments and map amendments. Text amendments can modify, add or delete the text of the City's Comprehensive Plan. A map amendment can change the land use category on the City's Future Land Use Map. The applicant shall supply all necessary data and analysis to support a request for a Comprehensive Plan amendment. In addition, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed amendment is consistent with the elements of the Comprehensive Plan and the application shall contain the general requirements listed in this section below. Any provision of applicable law, which is in conflict with these regulations, shall control over these regulations and follow the procedures as set forth in Chapter 163 and Chapter 360 of the Florida Statutes as amended. 
Sec. 34-22. - Required information/exhibits. 
    For any proposed amendment to the future land use map, land use changes and annexations, the applicant shall provide the submittals specified in the Development Review Procedures Manual. The application shall provide information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 4.1. 
Sec. 34-23. - Discouragement of urban sprawl. 
(a)  The City will require a mixture of housing types and uses as a means to discourage urban sprawl, reduce greenhouse gases, and achieve energy efficient land use patterns. The City shall control urban sprawl, characterized by leapfrog development, strip development, and low density residential over a large area. 
(1)  The City shall only issue development orders or development permits consistent with the provisions of the City Concurrency Management System, as provided in the Land Development Regulations. 
(2)  All Comprehensive Plan amendments shall provide justification for the need for the proposed amendment and demonstrate how the proposed amendment discourages urban sprawl and not adversely impact natural resources. In evaluating proposed amendments, the City shall consider each of the following: 
a.  The extent to which the proposed amendment is contiguous to an existing development area which has developed in a manner providing a compact, contiguous development pattern with the proposed amendment; 
b.  The extent to which population growth and development trends warrant an amendment, including an analysis of vested and approved but unbuilt development; 
c.  The extent to which adequate infrastructure to accommodate the proposed amendment exists, or is programmed and funded through an adopted capital improvement schedule, or will be privately financed through a binding executed agreement, or will otherwise be provided at the time of development impacts as required by law; 
d.  The extent to which the amendment will result in an efficient use of public funds needed for the provision of new infrastructure and services related to it; 
e.  The extent to which the amendment will not result in a sprawl development pattern as determined by Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, and will not discourage infilling of more appropriate areas available for development within existing Development Area Boundaries; and 
f.  The extent to which the amendment will result in a sustainable development pattern through a balance of land uses that is internally interrelated, demonstrates an efficient use of land, ensures compatible development adjacent to agriculture lands, protects environmental qualities and characteristics, provides interconnectivity of roadways, supports the use of non-automobile modes of transportation, and appropriately addresses the infrastructure needs of the community. 
g.  The extent to which the amendment results in positive market, economic and fiscal benefits of the area as demonstrated through a market demand analysis, economic impact analysis and fiscal impact analysis. 
(3)  The extension or expansion of utilities and roads should promote compact, contiguous development patterns. 
(4)  The City shall encourage urban and suburban growth only in areas where public facilities and services exist, and will not require expansion or increases in capacity as compared to existing facilities. 
(5)  Comprehensive Plan amendments to add development area shall be discouraged unless the applicant demonstrates the amendment provides economic development, job creation, preservation of the natural environment, or other public benefit. 
(6)  The City shall encourage infill development. Infill development is development on a vacant parcel or parcels of land within areas that are surrounded by an existing built area. Compatibility of the infill development shall be considered with the development review process. 
(7)  The City shall encourage redevelopment of already developed properties so as to utilize existing public facilities and revitalize existing neighborhoods. 
Sec. 34-24. - Procedures for processing a Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
    Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes. In addition to the procedures set forth in Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes, the Planning and Zoning Board shall make recommendations to the Council as the local planning agency (LPA) pursuit to Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes. 
Sec. 34-25. - Transmittal public hearings. 
(a)  A transmittal public hearing shall be held by the City Council pursuant to Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes. 
(b)  In addition to the advertising and notice required by Chapter 163 of the Florida Statutes, in the event the City initiates a Comprehensive Plan amendment that changes the permitted uses of land or changes land use categories, the City shall mail to the property owners affected by the plan amendment a courtesy notice to the property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the property, as shown on the latest ad valorem tax roles at least ten (10) days in advance of the meeting of the City Council. The failure to receive the courtesy notice shall not be grounds to invalidate the plan amendment request. 
Sec. 34-26. - Reapplication. 
    No person may resubmit a Comprehensive Plan amendment request within one (1) year after the first denial of said request by City Council, or two (2) years after the second denial. A resubmittal is considered to be a request for identical Comprehensive Plan amendment. A submittal with a significant change in the zoning land use will not be considered identical. 
Secs. 34-27-34-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REZONINGS AND TEXT AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 34-36. - Zoning amendments and rezoning. 
    Rezoning: The City Council and any property owner may request that their property be rezoned by filing with the City a written rezoning application. Rezoning applications shall be submitted and hearing dates established in accordance with the "Application Deadline and Meeting Schedule" published by the City and available in the Community Development Department and the City Clerk's office. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the land development fee schedule found on the City of Titusville website under Community Development/Development Services/Fee Schedule as adopted. 
Sec. 34-37. - Amendments to land development regulations. 
    The City Council and any property owner or his duly authorized agent may request an amendment to any section or requirement contained within these Land Development Regulations. Amendments include changes, additions and deletions and shall be processed in the same manner as a rezoning request. Any such proposal that affects the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan shall also be considered a Comprehensive Plan amendment and be processed pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 34-38. - Pre-application meeting. 
    A pre-application meeting shall be held with staff prior to the submittal of an application for a rezoning or text amendment. 
Sec. 34-39. - Submittals. 
(a)  The applicant shall provide the submittals specified in the procedures manual as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 5.1. 
(b)  In the event the requested rezoning is to a classification, which is inconsistent with the City of Titusville Comprehensive Plan and/or the Future Land Use Map, then the application shall be returned to the applicant for resubmittal and processing as a Comprehensive Plan amendment (CPA) pursuant to Article II, Division 1, Comprehensive Plan amendment. If the zoning request is consistent, the application shall be processed as set forth in these regulations. 
Sec. 34-40. - Criteria. 
(a)  The application shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their review and recommendation to the City Council. The application shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the application is consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan and associated elements: 
a.  Public facilities as required by the Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Regulations will be available and concurrent with the development. 
b.  Adequate existing improved public streets are available and/or the applicant has made provisions for installation of said improvements. 
c.  The land will support the proposed development and will not be subject to flooding or other physical constraints so as not to support the development. 
d.  The environmental impact of the proposed rezoning. 
(2)  The existing zoning, if deemed consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, shall be presumed correct unless substantial change in the area has occurred since the original zoning. 
(3)  The density or intensity of the proposed rezoning and use shall be consistent with: 
a.  The development in the area; and 
b.  Not likely to cause a depreciation of property values in the area. 
(4)  That the application is consistent with zoning in the area. 
(5)  That the application will protect the public health, safety, morals or welfare of the general public. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has sufficiently protected adjacent land uses and zoning districts by adequate buffering and screening. 
(7)  There are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in the existing zoning district. 
Sec. 34-41. - Advertising and notice. 
(a)  The required public hearing(s) shall provide for all parties in interest to be heard. The procedure for publication of notice for the public hearing on any request shall be in accordance with Chapters 163, 166 or 171, Florida Statutes, whichever is applicable, [and] at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. In addition, a courtesy notice will be sent to the property owners, as shown on the latest Brevard County Property Appraiser's ad valorem tax roll, located within five hundred (500) feet of the property. In addition, the City will post a notice on subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. The failure to deliver a courtesy notice or the failure of an adjacent property owner to receive a courtesy notice or failure to post the property shall not be grounds to invalidate the request. 
(b)  Approval of a rezoning request shall be granted based on a positive vote by a majority of City Council (three (3) members). A rezoning request shall be deemed denied when three (3) members of the City Council vote against a motion to approve the request or when three (3) members vote for approval of the motion to deny the request. In the event of a tie vote or in the event of a two (2) to one (1) vote, the action of the City Council shall be considered to be denial of the rezoning request. 
Sec. 34-42. - Reapplication. 
    No person may resubmit a rezoning request within one (1) year after the first denial of said request by City Council or two (2) years after the second denial. A resubmittal is considered to be a request for identical zoning. A submittal with a significant change in the rezoning will not be considered identical. 
Secs. 34-43-34-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASTER PLANS 

Sec. 34-51. - Master Plan. 
    A Master Plan is a land-use plan focused on one (1) or more sites within an area that identifies site access and general improvements and is intended to guide growth and development over a number of years or in several phases. 
Sec. 34-52. - Applicability. 
(a)  A Master Plan adopted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall continue to be governed by the terms of such plans, unless expired. All Master Plans shall be indicated on the Zoning Atlas. 
(b)  A district wide Master Plan is required with the submittal of a Planned Development (PD) rezoning. 
(c)  A district wide Master Plan is required prior to development in the Regional Mixed-Use (RMU), Urban Village (UV) and Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning districts. 
Sec. 34-53. - Planned Development districts (rezoning). 
    A Planned Development (PD) is a special district used to establish a zoning category to facilitate unique development within an established future land use designation. The purpose of a PD district is to: Provide flexibility in the planning and construction of development projects by allowing a combination of uses developed in accordance with an approved plan that protects adjacent properties; provide an environment within the layout of a site that contributes to a sense of community and coherent living style; encourage the preservation and enhancement of natural amenities and cultural resources, and to provide for a minimum amount of open space; provide for a more efficient arrangement of land uses, buildings, circulation systems, and infrastructure; and, encourage infill projects and the development of sites made difficult for conventionally designed development because of shape, size, abutting development, or natural features. A PD district is intended to assure that a project is developed to the highest aesthetic standards of the City of Titusville, and all uses shall be consistent with the designated future land use. 
Sec. 34-54. - Unified control. 
(a)  All land included in a Master Plan shall be under the legal control of the applicant, whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or group of individuals. The applicant shall state agreement to: 
(1)  Proceed with the proposed development according to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Provide agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, and sureties acceptable to City Council for completion of the development according to the approved plans and maintenance of such areas, functions and facilities as are not to be provided, operated or maintained at public expense; and 
(3)  Bind their successors in title to any commitments made under (1) and (2) aforementioned. 
(b)  All such agreements and evidence of unified control shall be examined by the City Attorney. A master plan shall only be approved after review by the City Attorney to confirm that agreements and evidence of unified control meet the requirements of this district. 
Sec. 34-55. - Master Plan submittal. 
(a)  Master Plan submittal. A Master Plan is required for determination as to the internal relationship between uses, activities proposed and their supporting systems and facilities. The Master Plan shall also address the relation to surrounding uses, activities, systems and facilities. The Master Plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual, Section 6.1. 
(1)  Application and fee; 
(2)  Name of the proposed development, name or names of the developers, name of owner, architect, landscape architect, surveyor, engineer and/or land planner; 
(3)  Location map, showing the relationship of the proposed development to the existing and any proposed streets, and any other property owned by the sub-divider in that vicinity. 
(4)  Survey of the parcel showing boundaries, total acreage, parcel numbers, legal description and all encumbrances such as easements, rights-of-way, etc. 
(5)  Site data including parcel size, current zoning and future land use classification, lands to be dedicated to public use, proposed easements, rights-of-way. 
(6)  Existing site characteristics including general information on site conditions and characteristics including adjacent developments, wooded areas, location of major trees, existing utilities, ditches, swales, wetlands and water bodies, flood zoned, topography, soils types, and areas of critical concern. Note any variances or conditional use permits that have been granted for the site. 
(7)  Proposed plan illustrating streets, lots, and other features such as common areas, retention areas, parks, etc. Street layouts shall indicate the type of street and proposed rights-of-way. Lot layouts shall identify the proposed number of lots and proposed lot sizes. 
(8)  The general layout of water, sewer and storm water systems including proposed connections for water and sewer and the legal positive outfall location for the storm water management system. Summary should include estimate of water allocation permit quantities (total average daily water demand - gallons). 
(9)  Proposed phasing, if any, with projected build-out date. 
(10)  An analysis of the proposed project relative to the City's concurrency management standards. 
(11)  Development plan identifying the location and acreage of each component and district of the project, including the location and placement of proposed land uses by type and density. 
(12)  Additional submittal requirements as set forth per the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 34-56. - Deviations from approved plans. 
    Deviations from approved development concept plans or failure to comply with any requirement, condition or safeguard imposed by the City Council during the approval or platting process shall constitute a violation of these Land Development Regulations. 
Sec. 34-57. - Master Plan approval. 
(a)  Following review and administrative approval of the Master Plan, the applicant shall submit the Master Plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their recommendation and to the City Council for final approval. The Master Plan shall include the internal road network of all collector and arterial road rights-of-way and their ingress/egress points into the development. Alteration of collector or arterial road rights-of-way or ingress/egress points into the development shall require an amendment to the Master Plan at the discretion of the Administrator consistent with the Modification Classification Table in the Development Review Procedures Manual, Section 6.3.3. Alterations to the internal road network with a local street designation, which does not involve ingress/egress points into the development, may be approved administratively without revising the Master Plan. Conditions may be imposed as part of the approval process. 
(b)  Upon review of the plan by the City, a public hearing shall be held to obtain input on the proposed Master Plan, in accordance with the applicable state statutes and city ordinances. The required public hearing notice shall be provided in accordance with Division 2, Rezoning and text amendments, Section 34-41, Advertising and notice. 
(c)  Following receipt of the recommendations of the City Manager or designee and the Planning and Zoning Commission, and upon consideration of public input obtained at the public hearing, and review of the planned development rezoning ordinance, the City Council shall adopt, adopt with conditions, or deny the application at the public hearing. Any and all conditions of the rezoning ordinance shall be reviewed by the City Council at the public hearing prior to final adoption. The adopted rezoning ordinance shall establish the Planned Development zoning classification on the specified parcel. 
Sec. 34-58. - Resolution and ordinance structure. 
    All Master Plan resolutions and Planned Development rezoning ordinances shall follow the standard format specified in the Development Review Procedures Manual (6.2, Resolution and Ordinance Format). Exceptions to this requirement are planned developments in the Urban Village (UV), Regional Mixed-Use (RMU), and Planned Industrial Development (PID) zoning districts. These zoning districts establish allowable uses and development standards. 
Sec. 34-59. - Approved Master Plan. 
    Amendment to a current approved Master Plan that does not involve a change of use may be processed as a Master Plan per the approval process established within this division. 
Sec. 34-60. - Conceptual plat. 
    A conceptual plat may be submitted with a Master Plan and approved as part of the rezoning. All information required to review and approve a Master Plan shall be submitted per Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions, Division 4, Plat, Subdivision 1, Sketch plat of the Land Development Regulations. The Master Plan procedures shall not preclude the need for a recorded plat or approved site plan prior to the first lot conveyance or certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 34-61. - Phasing. 
    A phasing schedule for any development proposal to be completed in more than one (1) phase shall be submitted for approval with the Master Plan. A development agreement may be submitted and approved with a Master Plan. All information required to review and approve a development agreement shall be submitted. 
Sec. 34-62. - Amendment to the Master Plan. 
    Amendments to an approved Master Plan shall follow the procedures in the Development Review Procedures Manual, Section 6.3.3. 
Secs. 34-63-34-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS (CUP) 

Sec. 34-71. - Intent. 
    Conditional use permits (CUP) are uses that would not generally be appropriate to a zoning district without compliances to more stringent development standards or conditions. The list of CUPs are those listed in Chapter 28, [Article IV, Use table]. 
Sec. 34-72. - Procedure for obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(a)  In addition to the following, the CUP shall require the submittals specified in the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
(1)  The property owner or authorized agent shall meet with the Administrator to explain the proposal, learn the procedures, and obtain an application form. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the completed application form together with the required exhibits with the Administrator and shall pay the required fees. All applications for a conditional use permit must be received by the City by the application deadline date established in the "application deadline and meeting schedule" available at the City. 
(3)  The Administrator shall transmit the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall notify all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. Failure of an adjacent property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the City Council's final action. 
(4)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet and determine compliance with these regulations and possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional use and determine what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce such adverse effects and recommend to the City Council one (1) of three (3) actions; approval, denial, or conditional approval. 
(5)  After transmittal of the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, the City Council takes official action on the request. 
Sec. 34-73. - Generally. 
(a)  Each conditional use shall be reviewed for application to the zoning district it may be applied to and the criteria and requirements contained in these regulations. The City Council shall take appropriate action on the request for conditional use permit after considering the recommendations by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Council shall review the request in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 34-76 and these regulations. If it grants a conditional use permit, the City Council may impose conditions, including time limits it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Conditional use permits issued to properties which subsequently are divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels shall be retained only on those parcels that still meet the conditions of the conditional use permit which are in effect at the time the land is subdivided. 
Sec. 34-74. - Required exhibits. 
(a)  No request for a conditional use permit will be accepted for processing until a complete application packet has been submitted by the applicant. For the purpose of this section, a complete application packet shall consist of the information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 7.1. 
(b)  In addition to the exhibits required per Section 7.1 of the Development Review Technical Manual, additional exhibits may be required. Other information, which may be requested by the staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council relative to a specific conditional use permit application must be provided at least one (1) week prior to the time of the applicable public hearing. 
(c)  In stating grounds in support of an application for a conditional use permit, it is necessary to show how the request fulfills both the general and specific standards for review. The applicant must show the effect the granting of the conditional use permit will have on adjacent and nearby properties, including as appropriate, but not limited to: Traffic and pedestrian flow and safety, curb-cuts, off-street loading and parking, off-street pickup of passengers, odor, glare and noise, particulates, smoke, fumes and other emissions, refuse and service areas, drainage, screening and buffering for protection of adjacent and nearby properties, and open space and economic impact on nearby properties. The applicant, at his discretion, may choose to present expert testimony, where necessary, to show the effect of granting the conditional use permit. 
Sec. 34-75. - Design requirements. 
    The granting of a conditional use permit does not eliminate the need for the proposed development to meet all appropriate Land Development Regulations prior to the approval of required development orders or business tax receipts. In addition, the City Council may require additional design standards based upon the proposed use and impacts on neighboring properties. 
Sec. 34-76. - Review criteria. 
(a)  Before any conditional use is granted, City Council shall apply the standards set forth herein and shall determine that satisfactory provisions and arrangement of the following factors have been met by the petitioner, where applicable. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall utilize the same factors in making a recommendation to the City Council regarding the approval of the request for a conditional use permit. 
(1)  Compliance with all elements of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures thereon, with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire and catastrophe shall be: 
a.  Adequate to serve the proposed use without burdening adjacent and nearby uses, and 
b.  Built to applicable City standards, if any. 
Burdening adjacent and nearby uses means increasing existing traffic on the closest collector or arterial road by more than twenty (20) percent, or ten (10) percent if the new traffic is primarily comprised of heavy vehicles, except where the affected road is at level of service A or B. New traffic generated by the proposed use shall not cause the adopted level of service for transportation on applicable roadways, as determined by applicable Brevard County standards, to be exceeded. Where the design of a public road to be used by the proposed use is physically inadequate to handle the numbers, types or weights of vehicles expected to be generated by the proposed use without damage to the road, the conditional use permit cannot be approved without a commitment to improve the road to a standard adequate to handle the proposed traffic, or to maintain the road through a maintenance bond or other means as required by the City Council. 
(3)  Nuisance factors detrimental to adjacent and nearby properties and the City as a whole, including, but not limited to, traffic, lights, noise, odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference and/or mechanical vibrations; 
(4)  The proposed conditional use shall not cause the adopted level of service for solid waste disposal, potable water, or wastewater to be exceeded. 
(5)  The proposed conditional use must have existing or proposed screening or buffering, with reference to type, dimensions and character to eliminate or reduce substantial, adverse nuisance, sight, or noise impacts on adjacent and nearby properties containing less intensive uses. 
(6)  Proposed signs and exterior lighting shall not cause unreasonable glare or hazard to traffic safety, or interfere with the use or enjoyment of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(7)  Hours of operation of the proposed use shall be consistent with the use and enjoyment of the properties in the surrounding residential community, if any. For commercial and industrial uses adjacent to or near residential uses, the hours of operation shall not adversely affect the use and enjoyment of the residential character of the area. 
(8)  Off-street parking and loading areas, where required, shall not be created or maintained in a manner which adversely impacts or impairs the use and enjoyment of adjacent and nearby properties. For existing structures, the applicant shall provide competent, substantial evidence to demonstrate that actual or anticipated parking shall not be greater than that which is approved as part of the site plan under applicable City standards. 
(9)  Required yards and other open spaces; 
(10)  General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district; 
(11)  Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the neighborhood or the City; and 
(12)  Any special requirements set out in the schedule of district regulations for the particular use involved. 
(b)  Without limiting the foregoing, the permit issuing body may require additional conditions, including limiting the permit to a specified duration. All additional conditions or requirements authorized by this section are enforceable. 
(c)  Without limiting the foregoing, City Council may require additional conditions, including limiting the permit to a specified duration. All additional conditions or requirements authorized by this section are enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as any other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
Sec. 34-77. - Revocation of conditional use permits. 
(a)  Where a conditional use permit has been issued pursuant to provisions of this ordinance, such permit shall become null and void without further action by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, unless: 
(1)  The conditional use commences within four (4) years of the date that the permit is approved, as evidenced by the receipt of a certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or business tax receipt as applicable. One (1) administrative extension of one (1) year may be approved by the City Manager or designee prior to expiration if the applicant has submitted a complete application for a development order and has obtained all requisite permits from the applicable regulatory agencies. 
(2)  City Council has adopted a specific expiration date as part of the initial approval of the CUP and the conditional use commences prior to the date of expiration as evidenced by the receipt of a certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or business tax receipt as applicable. Any extension of this expiration date can only be granted by City Council at a public hearing. 
(b)  A Conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one (1) particular use and shall expire if that use shall cease for more than six (6) consecutive months. However, the applicant may apply for a single one (1) year extension of the conditional use permit if the applicant has submitted a complete application for a development order needed to undertake the use and has obtained all requisite permits from the applicable regulatory agencies. 
(c)  Continuation of 2009 Real Estate Market Conditions. Where an applicant has an approved conditional use permit, and a current permit issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Florida Department of Environmental Protection or the St. Johns River Water Management District pursuant to part IV of Chapter 373, Florida Statutes, a two-year extension of the conditional use permit may be granted upon submittal of a written request and documentation of the required current permit. This provision is effective where the conditional use permit has an expiration date between January 1, 2014, and December 31, 2014. One (1) additional four-year extension may be granted administratively upon submittal of a written request. 
(d)  The City Council shall have the authority to modify or revoke a previously granted conditional use permit where there has been no development, construction, or implementation of the conditional use. Such modification or revocation may occur when the Planning and Zoning Commission finds the use of the conditional use permit: 
(1)  Would cause substantial and adverse impacts to the general health, safety or welfare through the effect of emissions, particulates, noise, or other negative impact; 
(2)  Due to changed conditions created by the person or entity owning the property to which the CUP was issued, would not meet the original standards for such approval; 
(3)  Would not meet the specific review standards or conditions attached by the Planning and Zoning Commission as part of the approval; or 
(4)  Due to changed conditions in the surrounding neighborhood as it has developed, would now cause substantial and adverse impact to the general health, safety or welfare of adjacent or nearby residents that would not have been apparent at the time of approval. 
(e)  The City Council shall have the authority to modify or revoke a previously granted conditional use permit where there has been development, construction, or implementation of the conditional use. Such modification or revocation may occur when City Council finds the use of the conditional use permit has failed to comply with any of the conditions and restrictions imposed in the conditional use permit, has created an unforeseen negative impact such as emissions, particulates, noise, or other negative impact, or has otherwise caused substantial and adverse effects on the general health, safety or welfare of adjoining and nearby property owners and residents, and the owner has had adequate opportunity to correct the deficiency through code enforcement procedures or other avenues of due process. This provision shall apply retroactively. 
(f)  Modification or revocation proceedings shall be initiated and processed in the same manner as an administrative rezoning. 
(g)  Existing conditional use permits shall be presumed to be waived when a rezoning application is granted, unless the applicant requests renewal of the conditional use permit(s). In the event of a rezoning request wherein the subject property also has an approved conditional use permit, upon request, the Council shall renew, modify, or revoke each existing conditional use permit. Unless reauthorized, conditional uses constructed or under construction at the time of the rezoning shall be considered nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 9-2018, § 1, 2-27-18) 
Sec. 34-78. - Reapplication. 
    No person may resubmit a conditional use permit request within one (1) year after the first denial of said request by City Council or two (2) years after the second denial. A resubmittal is considered to be a request for an identical conditional use permit. A submittal with a significant change in a conditional use permit will not be considered identical. 
Secs. 34-79-34-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 34-86. - Intent. 
    The approval of a subdivision is a legislative process involving City staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council review. The intent of this section is to ensure that adequate and necessary physical improvements of lasting quality will be installed to provide for safe and convenient traffic circulation; to provide an efficient, adequate and economic supply of utilities and services to new land developments; to prevent seasonal flooding through provision of protective flood control and drainage facilities; to help conserve and protect physical, environmental and scenic resources; to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare; and to implement the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 34-87. - Compliance with Land Development Regulations required. 
(a)  Compliance with the standard and performance requirements set forth in Chapter 30, Development standards is required of all subdivisions of land permitted in this section of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(b)  The size, shape and use of all lots to be created by the subdivision process in this section shall be consistent with the zoning districts set forth in Chapter 28, Zoning, of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(c)  If any other procedure or process as set forth in these regulations is required in order to submit a valid subdivision application, said procedure or process shall be completed and approved prior to a formal subdivision request being accepted by the Administrator. 
(d)  This part of these regulations is intended to be consistent with Chapter 177, Part I, Florida Statutes, including the definitions contained therein, and the requirements for plat approval and recordation. 
(e)  No lot shall be reduced in area or subdivided or no tract of land shall be subdivided or reduced in area in a manner which would result in causing any lot to have an area less than that required in the district in which it is located, or would reduce the height and yard area requirements of that zoning district in which it is located. 
Sec. 34-88. - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall apply to all divisions and subdivisions of land as defined herein, within the corporate limits, as now or hereafter established, of the City of Titusville, Florida, including any extraterritorial area established by interlocal agreement or legislative act of the State of Florida. 
Sec. 34-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 31 of Ord. No. 31-2017, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, deleted § 34-89, Final plat required. 
Sec. 34-90. - General requirements. 
(a)  Subdivision/division name. The name of any subdivision or division with the City of Titusville shall be approved by the City Council during the first review of said subdivision or division, or by the Administrator in the case of administrative approval of a division of land. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of any existing subdivisions or divisions within the City. 
(b)  Provision for future extension of streets. In all subdivisions, except for divisions with private ways, lots and parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future and for logical further subdivisions of land. No cul-de-sac shall be opened or modified as part of the subdivision process without permission of the City Council, however, stub outs are encouraged to be provided and may be required to meet the intent of this general requirement. 
Sec. 34-91. - Application and administration. 
    This section shall be applicable to all development related applications on a parcel(s) of land submitted to the City by an applicant pursuant to securing approval of a subdivision. These regulations shall apply to any subdivision development project within the corporate limits as now and hereafter established or extraterritorially, as may be established by law or interlocal agreement except those that are specifically excluded herein. 
Sec. 34-92. - Minimum requirements/application and approval. 
    The process for application and specific requirements and exhibits for a subdivision are contained in Chapter 34, Article III, Subdivisions, of these [Land Development] Regulations. Every subdivision of land within the City shall include the requirements contained in these [subdivision] regulations. Such requirements include: 
•  A pre-application as provided in Section 34-4. 
•  Sketch plat as provided in Chapter 34, Article III, Division 5, Subdivision 1 et seq., 
•  A preliminary plat as provided in Chapter 34, Article III, Division 5, Subdivision 2 et seq., 
•  A site plan as provided in Chapter 34, Article IV et seq., 
•  And a final plat as provided in Chapter 34, Article III, Division 5, Subdivision 3 et seq. 
•  Site plan approval process as provided in Chapter 34, Article IV. 
    The requirements contained within these sections shall constitute the minimum requirements and no omissions of required exhibits shall be permitted without prior approval of the Administrator. 
Sec. 34-93. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  Where deemed necessary to address special conditions or circumstances, the Administrator shall have the authority to require additional exhibits for any sketch plat, preliminary plat or final plat. 
(b)  Off-site improvements, as defined in Chapter 37 and set forth in the performance requirements of Chapter 30, shall be complied with as necessary for the approval of any subdivision proposal. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the subdivider to consider the following before seeking subdivision approval: 
(1)  The availability of highways, regional thoroughfares, and local thoroughfares to adequately serve the needs of the proposed development. 
(2)  Whether the proposed area for development can be served by public utilities without excessive costs for utility extensions beyond presently developed areas. 
(3)  Whether the proposed development conforms with the stormwater management plan of the City. 
(4)  That the proposed development will be in accordance with the latest adopted Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Regulations of the City. 
(d)  The City Council may disapprove development in unsuitable areas that are inaccessible, lack adequate paved road access, or lack nearby utilities. This shall be done in accordance with the City's Land Use Policies. 
Sec. 34-94. - Maintenance of dedicated areas until acceptance. 
    All facilities and improvements within any subdivision, as well as any required off-site improvements required as part of preliminary and/or final plat approval which are required to be dedicated for public use, shall be maintained by the owner of said subdivision in a clean, healthy and non-hazardous condition until such dedication and acceptance by the City has been made. 
Sec. 34-95. - Unity of title. 
    Where a unity of title is required a document recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County, stipulating that a lot, lots, or parcel of land shall be held under single ownership, shall be required and prevent further subdivision, transfer, or conveyance of land in any unit other than in its entirety. 
Secs. 34-96-34-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT SPLIT 

Sec. 34-111. - Intent. 
    The approval of a lot split is intended to be an administrative process for the division, or creation of lots in any zoning district not requiring the creation of new streets or rights-of-way. The process provides for the division of a limited number of lots with minimal need for public facility improvements, and access provided by existing public streets or private ways. This section is also designed to provide for infill in areas of the City currently served by adequate public facilities and services through a streamlined approval process. It is further intended to encourage the application and review of said divisions for the standards and requirements contained within these regulations while minimizing the costs of division review and the imposition of unnecessary requirements. For purposes of this article a lot split will be defined as follows: is the simple division of a single parcel of land into two (2) parcels meeting the requirements of Article III, Division 2. 
Sec. 34-112. - Application. 
    Application for a lot split shall be made on forms provided by the Administrator and shall provide the information set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual, Section 8.1. The Administrator shall have fifteen (15) working days to review said application and either approve, approve with conditions or deny said request. The findings of the Administrator shall be forwarded to the applicant in writing and, in the case of approval with conditions, shall be agreed to by the applicant in writing within ten (10) days of the receipt of said findings. 
Sec. 34-113. - Lot split qualifications. 
(a)  To qualify for a lot split the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  In all zoning districts, except as provided for below, where improvements being proposed do not exceed the following criteria: 
a.  Water, sewer and reuse can be provided by the addition of service lateral only for each lot being proposed (no main extensions required). 
b.  A stormwater management facility can be provided independent of any other created or existing lot. Each lot must have its own legal positive outfall. If the proposed lot split is part of a previously approved development with a stormwater management system in compliance this requirement may be waived. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide documentation validating the stormwater system rights. 
c.  There is a reasonable buildable area that does not have any adverse impacts to wetlands, threatened/endangered species or any environmental concerns. 
d.  Lots cannot be subdivided/split in such a way as to increase development density or intensity in a special flood hazard area. 
e.  Access for each lot will be from a driveway connection only. There is no public street or private way extension(s) required. 
f.  The proposed lot split does not require any dedication of areas to the public. 
(2)  No property may be divided in a manner which would result in any lot having an area or width less than that required by the zoning district in which it is located. 
(3)  In the OR zoning district as may be permitted by a conditional use permit as set forth in Section 28-54 of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
(4)  Flag lots may be approved for a single-family home in all residential zoning districts. Generally, flag lots shall be discouraged unless it can be reasonably shown that there is no other way to develop or gain access to said property for residential use. Said flag lot shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-five (25) feet on an existing dedicated public street or private way and usable access to the main body of the flag lot. In addition, the following requirements shall be applicable to flag lots created by this section: 
a.  A flag lot shall be a single parcel, tract or plot of land of one (1) acre or larger, connected to an existing dedicated public street or a private way by a narrow stem of no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width, which shall not be used to calculate the minimum lot area. 
b.  No more than two (2) flag lots shall be subdivided out of any parcel. 
c.  Single access strips or double access strips shall be a minimum of two hundred eighty (280) feet apart regardless of ownership. 
d.  The access strip for each flag lot shall intersect an existing dedicated public street or private way at no less than a sixty-degree angle for at least one hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way. 
e.  The Administrator may approve the issuance of a building permit for a single-family dwelling on a flag lot with a minimum frontage of twenty (20) feet, upon the submission of proof by the applicant, that the deed for same was recorded on or before June 26, 1978. 
f.  Section 30-227, Entrances to streets shall apply to flag lots. 
Sec. 34-114. - Approval. 
(a)  Lot split approval. Article III, Subdivisions, the Administrator shall approve the proposed division unless the division is not a lot split as set forth in Section 34-113, or the application, or the proposed division, fails to comply with requirements of this section. However, for good cause shown, either the Administrator or the applicant may at any time refer the application to the subdivision approval process in Article III, Subdivisions. 
(b)  Disapproval. If the division is disapproved, the Administrator shall within ten (10) days furnish the applicant with a written statement of the reason for disapproval. 
Secs. 34-115-34-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINOR DIVISION (NONRESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 34-126. - Intent. 
    The approval of a lot split, small-scale plat, and nonresidential minor division is intended to be an administrative process for the division, or creation of lots in any zoning district not requiring the creation of new streets or rights-of-way. These processes provide for the division of a limited number of lots with minimal need for public facility improvements, and access provided by existing public streets or private ways. Where a parcel is part of, and governed by, a current approved site plan, a nonresidential minor division allows for the fee simple ownership of portions of the site without the need to plat the newly created lots, while maintaining the integrity of the approved site plan. This section is also designed to provide for infill in areas of the City currently served by adequate public facilities and services through a streamlined approval process. It is further intended to encourage the application and review of said divisions for the standards and requirements contained within these [subdivision] regulations while minimizing the costs of division review and the imposition of unnecessary requirements. For purposes of this article a lot nonresidential minor division will be defined as the fee simple division of portions of a parcel which is part of, and governed by, a current approved site plan. 
Sec. 34-127. - Compliance with Land Development Regulations required. 
(a)  Nonresidential minor division where no new streets are being established shall not be subject to the platting requirements contained in this chapter if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The nonresidential minor division shall be subject to design and engineering review and shall be governed by an approved site plan. 
(2)  The Administrator shall provide approval, in writing, that such nonresidential minor division is not subject to the platting provisions contained in this chapter. 
Sec. 34-128. - Nonresidential minor division qualifications. 
(a)  To qualify for a nonresidential minor division the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  In all zoning districts, except as provided for below, where improvements being proposed do not exceed the following criteria: 
a.  Water, sewer and reuse can be provided by the addition of service lateral only for each lot being proposed (no main extensions required). 
b.  A stormwater management facility can be provided independent of any other created or existing lot. Each lot must have its own legal positive outfall. If the proposed lot split is part of a previously approved development with a stormwater management system in compliance this requirement may be waived. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide documentation to the City validating the stormwater system rights and maintenance agreement among all affected property owners. 
c.  There is a reasonable buildable area that does not have any adverse impacts to wetlands, threatened/endangered species or any environmental concerns. 
d.  Lots cannot be subdivided/split in such a way as to increase development density or intensity in a special flood hazard area 
e.  Access for each lot will be from a driveway connection to an existing right-of-way only; however where the lot is part of, and governed by, an approved site plan, access may be granted by access easement(s). There is no public street or private way extension(s) required. 
f.  The proposed lot split does not require any dedication of areas to the public. 
(2)  No property may be divided in a manner which would result in any lot having an area less than that required by the zoning district in which it is located. This requirement may be waived under a nonresidential minor division with easements in place to address parking and stormwater requirements, including maintenance of these facilities. 
(3)  If the new lot is part of, and governed by an approved site plan the following requirements may be waived: 
a.  Interior yard setbacks, only; setbacks to roadways and the perimeter shall not be waived. 
b.  Interior landscape buffer requirements. 
c.  Lot intensity and density may be waived as long as the overall site governed by the site plan meets all intensity and density requirements of the zoning district. 
d.  Minimum frontage requirements may be waived as long as the overall site governed by the site plan meets minimum frontage requirements of the zoning district. 
(4)  The subdivision of lots for ownership purposes does not convey additional development rights under the approved site plan. A substantial change to the site plan, as determined by the Administrator, may nullify all code waivers described in Sections 34-126 and 34-127. 
Sec. 34-129. - Application. 
(a)  Nonresidential minor division. Application for a nonresidential minor division shall be made on forms provided by the Administrator and shall have the following exhibits. The Administrator shall have fifteen (15) working days to review said application and either approve, approve with conditions or deny said request. The findings of the Administrator shall be forwarded to the applicant in writing and, in the case of approval with conditions, shall be agreed to by the applicant in writing within ten (10) days of the receipt of said findings. 
(1)  One (1) copy of the application form with fees. 
(2)  A metes and bounds description with a sketch of legal and boundary survey certified by a Professional Land Surveyor (PLS) registered in the State of Florida. 
a.  The sketch of legal must include lot lines, dimensions and acreage for lot(s) being created for the total tract and all lots. 
(3)  Executed copies of easements or other instruments acceptable to the City to provide for access, parking, utilities and stormwater requirements, including maintenance of these facilities. 
(4)  Title opinion with all encumbrances. 
(5)  Any additional information as may be required by the Administrator based upon site specific conditions. 
Sec. 34-130. - Approval. 
    Nonresidential minor division approval. Subject to Section 34-129, the Administrator shall approve the proposed division unless the division is not a nonresidential minor division as set forth in Section 34-128, or the application, or the proposed division, fails to comply with requirements of this section. However, for good cause shown, either the Administrator or the applicant may at any time refer the application to the subdivision approval process in Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions. 
Sec. 34-131. - Recording. 
    Recording of a nonresidential minor plan. Upon approval of the nonresidential minor division by the Administrator, all approved documents shall be recorded in the official records of Brevard County. The documents shall be filed by the Administrator with all fees paid by the subdivider. Upon recording, copies of the recorded documents shall be retained by the City for its records. 
Secs. 34-132-34-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SMALL-SCALE PLAT 

Sec. 34-141. - Intent. 
    The approval of a small-scale plat is intended to be an administrative process for the division, or creation of lots in any zoning district not requiring the creation of new streets or rights-of-way. The process provides for the division of a limited number of lots with minimal need for public facility improvements, and access provided by existing public streets or private ways. This section is also designed to provide for infill in areas of the City currently served by adequate public facilities and services through a streamlined approval process. It is further intended to encourage the application and review of said divisions for the standards and requirements contained within these regulations while minimizing the costs of division review and the imposition of unnecessary requirements. For purposes of this article a small-scale plat will be defined as follows: is defined as the division of a single parcel of land into three (3) but less than ten (10) lots meeting the requirements of Section 34-113. Per Florida Statute Chapter 177 the division of land into three (3) or more lots requires the subdivider to follow the platting process. 
Sec. 34-142. - Application. 
(a)  Small-scale plat. Application for a small-scale plat shall be made on forms provided by the Administrator and shall provide the information set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual, Section 10.1. The Administrator shall have fifteen (15) working days to review said application and either approve, approve with conditions or deny said request. The findings of the Administrator shall be forwarded to the applicant in writing and, in the case of approval with conditions, shall be agreed to by the applicant in writing within ten (10) days of the receipt of said findings, except that the division shall be forwarded to City Council with staff recommendation for approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(b)  The subdivision of land that does not meet the qualifications outlined in Section 34-113 must follow the subdivision requirements in Article III, Subdivision requirements. 
Sec. 34-143. - Small-scale plat qualifications. 
(a)  To qualify for a small-scale plat the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  In all zoning districts, except as provided for below, where improvements being proposed do not exceed the following criteria: 
a.  Water, sewer and reuse can be provided by the addition of service lateral only for each lot being proposed (no main extensions required). 
b.  A stormwater management facility can be provided independent of any other created or existing lot. Each lot must have its own legal positive outfall. If the proposed lot split is part of a previously approved development with a stormwater management system in compliance this requirement may be waived. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide documentation validating the stormwater system rights. 
c.  There is a reasonable buildable area that does not have any adverse impacts to wetlands, threatened/endangered species or any environmental concerns. 
d.  Lots cannot be subdivided/split in such a way as to increase development density or intensity in a special flood hazard area. 
e.  Access for each lot will be from a driveway connection only. There is no public street or private way extension(s) required. 
f.  The proposed lot split does not require any dedication of areas to the public. 
(2)  No property may be divided in a manner which would result in any lot having an area less than that required by the zoning district in which it is located. 
(3)  Flag lots may be approved for a single-family home in all residential zoning districts. Generally, flag lots shall be discouraged unless it can be reasonably shown that there is no other way to develop or gain access to said property for residential use. Said flag lot shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-five (25) feet on an existing dedicated public street or private way and usable access to the main body of the flag lot. In addition, the following requirements shall be applicable to flag lots created by this section: 
a.  A flag lot shall be a single parcel, tract or plot of land of one (1) acre or larger, connected to an existing dedicated public street or a private way by a narrow stem of no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width, which shall not be used to calculate the minimum lot area. 
b.  No more than two (2) flag lots shall be subdivided out of any parcel. 
c.  Single access strips or double access strips shall be a minimum of two hundred eighty (280) feet apart regardless of ownership. 
d.  The access strip for each flag lot shall intersect an existing dedicated public street or private way at no less than a sixty-degree angle for at least one-hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way. 
e.  The Administrator may approve the issuance of a building permit for a single-family dwelling on a flag lot with a minimum frontage of twenty (20) feet, upon the submission of proof by the applicant, that the deed for same was recorded on or before June 26, 1978. 
f.  Section 30-227, Entrances to streets shall apply to flag lots. 
Sec. 34-144. - Approval. 
(a)  Small-scale plat approval. The small-scale plat approval will follow the procedure outlined in Section 34-172 with exception that a preliminary plat is not required and there are no right-of-way dedications. 
(b)  Disapproval. If the division is disapproved, the Administrator shall within ten (10) days furnish the applicant with a written statement of the reason for disapproval. 
Sec. 34-145. - Recording. 
    Recording of a small-scale plat. Upon approval of the small-scale plat by the City Council, recordation of all approved documents shall be in accordance with Chapter 34, Procedures, Article III, Subdivisions, Division 8, Plat Endorsement, Recording. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 32, 10-24-17) 
Secs. 34-146-34-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLAT 
Subdivision 1. - Sketch Plat (Conceptual Plan) 

Sec. 34-151. - Procedure. 
(a)  The applicant is required to consult with staff prior to formal submittal of the sketch plat, as set forth in Section 34-210 of these regulations. A complete submittal as set forth in Section 34-152 below, shall be made to the Administrator. The Administrator shall determine completeness of any sketch plat submittal. Once the application has been determined to be complete, the sketch plat will be scheduled for review in accordance with the review schedule set forth is Section 34-214. The Administrator shall review the sketch plat and provide comments and recommendations for modifications to the proposed plat. The applicant shall revise the sketch plat as required and re-submit the amended sketch plat to the Administrator. 
(b)  Resubmittals shall address all comments as provided by the Administrator. If the applicant elects not to address all comments required by the Administrator, the applicant shall note the reasons for electing not to respond to the comment. If subsequent reviews are required by the Administrator the reviews shall follow the same time frames and procedures as the initial review. Upon completion of the review process the Administrator shall prepare a report for the Planning and Zoning Commission recommending approval of sketch plat, approval of the sketch plat with conditions, or denial of the sketch plat. A recommendation for conditional approval shall state the conditions for approval, and a recommendation for denial of the sketch plat shall state the code requirements or comprehensive plan goals, objectives or policies with which the proposed sketch plat fails to comply. The administrator shall then schedule the sketch plat for the next available Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. 
(c)  After consideration of the Administrator's recommendations, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the sketch plat based upon the review criteria contained in these [Land Development] Regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its findings to the City Council, who upon receipt of said findings, shall either approve, approve with conditions or deny the sketch plat. Approval of the sketch plat by the City Council authorizes the applicant to proceed with the site plans and the preliminary plat. Approval of the sketch plat with conditions authorizes the applicant to proceed with the site plans and the preliminary plat once the Administrator certifies in writing, to the applicant, that all conditions have been met. 
(d)  If a sketch plat is denied, no similar submittal on said property shall be made for one (1) year from the date of denial. 
Sec. 34-152. - Required submittals and exhibits. 
    Required submittals must be complete and done to accepted professional standards of design including a reasonable scale (maximum allowed one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet, north arrow, etc.). An aerial photograph should be provided showing the project site and adjacent properties. The application shall provide information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 11.1. 
Secs. 34-153-34-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 2. - Preliminary Plat (Site Plan) 

Sec. 34-161. - Definition. 
    Following review and approval of the sketch plat the subdivider may prepare a preliminary plat, which shall be in accordance with the sketch plat including such changes and considerations as shall have been adopted by the City Council or approved engineering information not available at time of sketch plat approval. Failure to apply for preliminary plat approval within one (1) year of sketch plat approval shall cause approval of the sketch plat to cease and become void. 
Sec. 34-162. - Submittal procedures. 
    The preliminary plat application shall include, at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  An application and review fee on the appropriate forms. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision preliminary plat shall require the exhibits, as specified in the Development Review Procedures Manual and be reviewed and approved with the site plan approval process as specified in Chapter 34, Article IV. 
(3)  One (1) electronic copy of the proposed subdivision preliminary plat and site plans in a format to be specified by the City. 
Sec. 34-163. - Required exhibits. 
    The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor (PLS) or engineer (PE) and shall provide information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 12.1. All plans shall be prepared to accepted design standards and signed and sealed by the appropriate design professional. 
Sec. 34-164. - Review Procedures. 
(a)  Upon determination by the Administrator that the application is complete, the Administrator shall review the application in accordance with the schedule in Section 34-214. 
(1)  Resubmittal and review of the preliminary plat: If there are any comments requiring modification to the preliminary plat during the site plan review, the applicant shall proceed to make any required revisions to the preliminary plat then resubmit the preliminary plat with the site plans in accordance with the procedures outlined in Chapter 34, Article III, Subdivisions. 
(2)  Approval of the preliminary plat: Approval shall not be construed as authority for filing of the plat with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Brevard County, nor as authority for the sale of lots in reference thereto. Approval of the preliminary plat shall, however, authorize the subdivider to exercise either of the following options prior to submitting the final plat: 
a.  Option No. 1. Prepare detailed cost breakdowns, and specifications for all required site improvements which meet the approval of the City, and install all required site improvements in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. All work shall be inspected and subject to the approval of the City. A fee equivalent to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the site construction costs shall be paid to the City (at this time) to defray costs of such inspections. 
b.  Option No. 2. Prepare detailed cost breakdowns and specifications for all required site improvements which meet the approval of the City, and provide a performance and material and labor payment bond or escrow agreement acceptable to the City, in the amount of one hundred and twenty (120) percent of the site construction costs, to guarantee the installation of the required improvements. Any performance and payment bond shall be from a company licensed as a surety in the State of Florida, listed by the U.S. Treasury Department and A:AAAA in Best's Insurance Guide. All work shall be inspected and approved by the City. A fee equivalent to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the estimated site construction costs shall be paid to the City (at this time) by the applicant or if necessary from the performance bond to defray costs of such inspection. 
(b)  No work shall be commenced in the subdivision until such time as the final site plans and specifications have been presented to and stamped approved by the Administrator, and the fee required above has been paid. 
Secs. 34-165-34-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 3. - Final Plat 

Sec. 34-171. - Definition. 
    A final plat legally establishes the division of property into separate parcels or tracts. The final plat shows lot boundaries, street dedications, easements, and any other divisions of land and shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor (PLS) or engineer (PE). The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat, and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the developer proposes to record and develop at the time; provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter and Chapter 177 of the Florida Statutes. 
Sec. 34-172. - Procedure. 
(a)  To obtain final plat approval, the subdivider shall within one (1) year, unless otherwise extended, of the date of preliminary plat approval and at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council, submit to the Administrator along with a filing fee as adopted by City Council and other information as set forth in [Development Review Procedures Manual] Section 13.1. 
(b)  Approval by the Council shall be based upon a report from the Administrator stating that all requirements of the preliminary plat and these regulations have been completed with the City Attorney indicating that all legal requirements for final plat approval have been met. 
(c)  Failure to apply for final plat approval within one (1) year of the date of preliminary plat approval shall cause approval of the preliminary plat to cease and become void unless otherwise extended as hereinafter provided. The subdivider may, prior to expiration of the preliminary plat, make application for an extension of time to file for final plat approval. The Administrator may grant an extension of time up to two (2) years provided the Administrator has been shown good cause for the extension. If the subdivider has not obtained final plat approval prior to the expiration of the two-year extension, the subdivider may apply to the City Council for an additional extension up to two (2) years. The subdivider shall show good cause why the time for filing the final plat should be extended and if a performance bond was submitted, an extension on said bond shall be documented. No extensions (from the Administrator and City Council) will be granted beyond a total of four (4) years). 
(d)  Approval of this final two-year extension by City Council is in no way guaranteed. The City Council has the option to re-evaluate the development and place additional conditions/restrictions on the developer, including, but not limited to, requiring the developer to comply with any development regulations enacted subsequent to the approval to the Preliminary Plat and to ensure to that public health and safety is assured. 
Sec. 34-173. - Required exhibits. 
(a)  The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat and shall meet the platting requirements of Florida Statutes Chapter 177 and the requirements of this section. In case of a large plat which may require two (2) or more sheets, the sheets are to be numbered and the number of the sheets are to be indicated on the first sheet below the title. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall provide information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 13.2. 
(b)  Final plat will require meeting the requirements of Section 34-216, site plan final acceptance, prior to being scheduled for City Council review and approval. 
(c)  Where the required improvements have not been completed prior to the submission of the final plat, the approval of said plat shall be subject to the subdivider guaranteeing the installation of said improvements through one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Filing a performance, and labor and material payment bond by the developer or jointly by the developer and builder, in the amount of one hundred twenty (120) percent of the estimated construction cost, or other acceptable forms of security, as determined by the Administrator for any unconstructed portions. 
(2)  Depositing or placing in escrow a certified check, cash, or acceptable pledge, in the amount of one hundred twenty (120) percent of the construction cost as approved by the City. 
(d)  Any performance bond shall be made from a company licensed as a surety in the State of Florida, listed by the U.S. Treasury Department and rated; AAAA in Best's Insurance Guide. Upon acceptance of all improvements by the City, the performance and payment bonds shall be released, and the subdivider shall furnish the city with a maintenance warranty bond as set forth in Section 34-216, site plan final acceptance. 
(e)  Deed restrictions. A full and complete copy of the deed restrictions shall be a required exhibit to the final plat. Such restrictions must be approved by City Council prior to recording of the plat. Said deed restrictions shall include a provision requiring the owners of property in the subdivision to notify and obtain the City Council's approval of any and all changes, amendments or alterations to the deed restrictions. Said deed restrictions shall provide an indexed mechanism to assess and/or fund any needed repairs or replacements of commonly held improvements. 
Secs. 34-174-34-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED (AGREEMENTS) 

Sec. 34-181. - Required improvements. 
    Approval of the final plat shall be subject to the subdivider having installed the improvements per the approved site plan, or having guaranteed, with a surety bond, or satisfactory escrow agreement, the installation of said improvements. The City shall be responsible for approving all plans and specifications for the required improvements, assuring adequate inspection of construction for compliance with the approved plans and specifications and for issuing a certificate of completion upon the acceptable completion of the work. 
Sec. 34-182. - Improvements required to be installed. 
    Any subdivider electing to delay installation of the required improvements until after the plat is approved by the City Council as authorized by Chapter 34, Article III, [Division 5], Subdivision 2, Preliminary site plan shall be required to install all of the required improvements within one (1) year from the date the final plat is approved. The Administrator, for good cause shown by the subdivider, may extend the time for installation of the public improvements for a period not to exceed six (6) months. When any subdivider requests an extension of time for installing the public improvements, the Administrator shall review the amount on deposit or the method of guaranteeing to determine whether the initial estimate and deposit is then sufficient to install the required improvements, and as a condition of any approval for extension of time, the Administrator may require an additional amount guaranteeing the installation of the improvements. A subdivider may delay installing sidewalks throughout the subdivision, except on lots obtaining a building permit, until two (2) years after final plat approval. A subdivider delaying installation of sidewalks shall post the necessary guarantee. At the end of the two-year period, all sidewalks not installed shall be installed by the subdivider. 
Sec. 34-183. - Extension. 
    At the conclusion of the initial two-year period the Administrator, for good cause shown by the subdivider, may extend the time for installation of the sidewalk improvements for a period of one (1) year. When any subdivider requests a one-year extension or renewal of a one-year extension of time for installation of sidewalk improvements, the Administrator shall review the amount on deposit or the method of guarantee to determine whether the initial estimate and deposit is then sufficient to install the sidewalk improvements, and as a condition of any approval for extension of time, the Administrator may require an additional amount to guarantee the installation of the sidewalk improvements. At no point will a sidewalk installation extension period exceed a total of five (5) years from the date the final plat is approved. 
Sec. 34-184. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In the event the subdivider fails to install the improvements within the above time periods, the City is authorized to take such action to require the improvements, as is necessary, to be installed by the subdivider. Said action may include the forfeiture of the bond, escrow funds, any other pledge held by the City or court action to compel installation of the improvements. In the event the amount of the guarantee is not sufficient to pay the entire cost of installing the required improvements, the subdivider shall be liable to the City for the balance of the cost necessary to install said improvements. In the event the City is required to initiate court action to enforce this provision, and the City is successful, the City shall be entitled to reimbursement for its attorneys' fees and costs incurred in prosecuting that action. 
(b)  A document from a registered professional engineer (PE) with his seal affixed certifying that the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications shall be required. 
Secs. 34-185-34-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SUBDIVISION WAIVERS 

Sec. 34-196. - Waivers to subdivision regulations. 
    The City of Titusville hereby finds and determines that some standards of the Land Development Code may be impracticable in some situations due to exceptional circumstances, such as difficult terrain and unique topographical conditions. The City of Titusville finds and determines that the granting of such exceptions is in the public interest, but that administrative review is needed in order to ensure that the spirit and intent of the Land Development Regulations is preserved. Accordingly, these procedures permit administrative exceptions to be granted as part of the subdivision plat approval process without the need for a variance. Applicants who are denied an administrate exception may then seek a variance in accordance with Article V, Variances and appeals of this chapter. 
Secs. 34-197-34-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PLAT ENDORSEMENT, RECORDING 

Sec. 34-201. - Recording of final plat required. 
(a)  Small-scale plats and major subdivisions require a plat to be approved by the City Council and endorsed by the Mayor and the City of Titusville, as set forth herein. 
(b)  The final plat shall be recorded by the Brevard County Clerk of Circuit Court within ninety (90) days of approval of said plat by City Council. After final plat approval by the City Council, the Administrator shall see that all requirements of Chapter 177 of the Florida Statutes have been complied with, before the plat is presented to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Brevard County for recording. No plat of land within the corporate limits of the City shall be recorded by the Clerk of the Circuit Court unless it shall have the approval of the Council inscribed thereon or endorsed in conformity with Article III of these [Subdivision] Regulations. 
(c)  Use of plat. The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision, or portion thereof, that has not been given final approval by the City Council or the Administrator as provided in Article II of these [Subdivision] Regulations and recorded in the official records of Brevard County, Florida is prohibited. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such prohibition. 
(d)  The Administrator shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until all drainage, street and utility improvements have been installed and accepted by the City. 
(e)  Any plat of land recorded by the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Brevard County without said approval and endorsement shall not be considered valid by the City of Titusville for the purpose of creating legally buildable lots. The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell or negotiation to sell land by references to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a division or subdivision, or portion thereof, that has not been given final approval, endorsement and recordation as provided in this section shall not exempt any such lot from the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Any division of land by metes and bounds description as the instrument of recording and/or transfer shall not exempt said lot or lots created from the requirements set forth above. 
(g)  No building permits shall be issued by the Administrator until final plat approval, endorsement and recordation and all fees required herein have been paid. Proof of recordation shall be furnished to the Administrator prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2017, § 33, 10-24-17) 
Secs. 34-202-34-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SITE PLANS 

Sec. 34-206. - Application and administration. 
    This section shall be applicable to all development related applications on any parcel(s) of land or building site submitted to the City by an applicant pursuant to securing approval of a development order. These [site plan] regulations shall apply to any development project within the corporate limits as now and hereafter established or extraterritorially, as may be established by law or interlocal agreement except those that are specifically excluded herein. 
Sec. 34-207. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to establish procedures and standards for the development of land in an effort to: 
(1)  Provide for the harmonious development of the City and consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and future land use map. 
(2)  Realize a coordinated design pattern of streets and implementation of the future traffic circulation map. 
(3)  Maintain the adopted levels-of-service for public facilities and service concurrent with the impact of development. 
Sec. 34-208. - Administrative duties. 
    The Administrator shall be responsible for the duties established in Section 14.1 of the Development Review Procedure Manual. 
Sec. 34-209. - Exceptions/exemptions. 
    All single-family and duplex (single lot) building permits in a recorded plat shall be exempted from this process. 
Sec. 34-210. - Development applications. 
(a)  Pre-application. 
(1)  In all circumstances, prior to submittal of an application for development to the City, the applicant is required, for a Class II development, to arrange for a preliminary staff consultation prior to actual submittal. The requirements of Section 34-211 will apply. This action is intended to minimize development planning costs, avoid misunderstandings or misinterpretations and promote compliance with requirements of these [site plan] regulations. 
(2)  Recognizing that the pre-application process is conceptual in nature, the pre-application review comments/suggestions/recommendations are not considered a thorough analysis of the plan, acceptance and/or final approval. 
Sec. 34-211. - Pre-application conference/concept plan. 
    The applicant shall submit to the Administrator a pre-application request in a format prescribed by the Community Development Department and an application fee as set forth in the adopted fee schedule. Said fee shall be a one-time pre-application review fee. The applicant shall submit plans in an electronic format specified by the Department. If the applicant desires to submit paper plans, one (1) paper copy shall be submitted. All submittals shall be at a scale sufficient to illustrate all data, required herein and as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 14.2. 
Sec. 34-212. - Concept plan approval process. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit to the Administrator a concept plan application in a format prescribed by the Community Development Department and an application fee as set forth in adopted fee schedule. Said fee shall be a one-time site plan review fee. All applications shall be at a scale sufficient to illustrate the submittal requirements established in Section 14.3 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
(b)  If the application is determined to be incomplete, all documents and the application fee shall be returned to the applicant with a notice of which requirements are missing. The determination shall be made within three (3) working days. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complete concept plan application, as determined by the Administrator, said plan shall be transmitted to the various development related departments for their review and comment. 
Sec. 34-213. - Application procedures. 
    Procedures for the submittal and review of applications for site plans are established in Section 14.4 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 34-214. - Application classifications and review schedules. 
(a)  Applications for site plan and subdivision review are divided into two (2) classifications as follows. The Administrator shall make the final decision on the assignment of each application to a specific classification. 
(1)  Class I minor improvement applications shall include: 
a.  Commercial/industrial landscape improvement. 
b.  Clearing permit. 
c.  Stormwater drainage improvement. 
d.  Service lateral repair or upgrade. 
e.  Drives and walks accessory to an existing structure. 
f.  Resurfacing of previously approved parking areas. 
g.  New parking lots of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less. Additions or accessory structures to nonresidential or multifamily residential structures where the addition or accessory structure is one thousand (1,000) square feet or less. 
h.  Lot splits with existing streets and utilities (potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater management). 
i.  A single item improvement not included in a Class II application such as a trash enclosure, a sidewalk, a driveway connection, etc. 
j.  A combination of three (3) or more Class I items for a single project. 
(2)  Class II applications shall include: 
a.  New construction, expansions or additions to existing nonresidential or multifamily development that will have one thousand (1,000) square feet or more of floor area and its required parking. 
b.  Paving of parking lots not previously paved. 
c.  New parking lots or additions to parking lots exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
d.  All new multifamily developments. 
e.  Small-scale plat with previously permitted streets and/or utilities (potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater management). 
f.  All subdivisions. 
(b)  For each class of development the review times shall be as specified on the following table. Review times noted are for each individual submittal and not the entire review period. Applications requiring resubmittal based on comments from staff will be subject to these time frames for each subsequent review. All review times are calendar days. The review times listed below are guidelines and may be adjusted by the Administrator. 
Action Class I Class II Pre-Application N/A 7 days Site Plan 15 days 30 days Lot Split and Small-Scale Plat 15 days 15 days Sketch Plat N/A 15 days Preliminary Plat/Site Engineering N/A 30 days Final Plat N/A 15 days  
Sec. 34-215. - Required exhibits. 
    All site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer (PE) and shall be composed of the following required exhibits. All plans shall be prepared to accepted design standards and signed and sealed by the appropriate design professional. Engineering plans shall include information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 14.5. 
Sec. 34-216. - Site plan final acceptance. 
(a)  All site plans must receive final inspection and acceptance, or appropriate bonding, prior to certificate of occupancy or final plat. 
(b)  Site plans must receive final inspection for compliance with the approved site plan(s). Final inspections will include, but will not be limited to, water, sanitary sewer, reuse, stormwater management systems, roads, parking lots, site lighting, signage, sidewalks, landscaping, irrigation, solid waste collection facilities, preservation/conservation areas and any other site specific requirement. 
(c)  Required closeout document submittals as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 14.6. 
Sec. 34-217. - Timeframes. 
    An applicant shall have twenty-four (24) months from the date of formal site plan submittal to obtain site plan approval. Failure to meet this requirement, will cause the site plan to automatically become null and void, and the fees shall not be refunded. 
    The site plan shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the approval date, during which time application shall be made for the applicable building permit(s). Upon application of the required building permit, the timeframes related to the building permit shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 39-2018, § 1, 8-28-18) 
Secs. 34-218-34-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
DIVISION 1. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 34-226. - Criteria for granting variances. 
(a)  The Board shall grant a variance request when in the opinion of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of such ordinance or regulations would do manifest injustice to, or impose an unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. In order to authorize any variance to the provisions of such ordinance, the Board must consider: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or building in the same zoning. 
(2)  Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the ordinance to other lands, buildings or structures in the same zoning district. 
(4)  The literal interpretation of the provisions of the ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of the ordinance. 
(5)  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(6)  The granting of the variance will preserve the spirit of the ordinance and remain in harmony with its general purpose and intent. 
(7)  In granting the variance, the public safety and welfare must be assured. 
(8)  In no case shall the granting of a variance result in a change of use which would not be permitted in that zone. 
Sec. 34-227. - Required exhibits. 
    No request for a variance will be accepted by the Administrator for processing until a complete application packet has been submitted by the applicant. For the purpose of this section, a complete application packet shall consist of the information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 15.1. 
Sec. 34-228. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  All notice requirements provided by this section shall be satisfied if the agenda of the public hearing is published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. The agenda shall specifically describe the property involved in each request as well as the relief sought. 
(b)  A sign at least ten (10) inches wide by thirteen (13) inches long shall be posted on any affected property at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and designate the nature of the variance sought and the date of the public hearing before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(c)  All property owners with one hundred (100) feet of the outer boundaries of the property subject of the request will be notified. Failure of an adjacent property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the Board's final action. 
(d)  Notification to the Community Redevelopment Agencies. Upon the receipt of an application for a variance within the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA), notification of such request shall be furnished to the City's Community Redevelopment Agency within which the site is located. The Community Redevelopment Agency may submit comments on such request prior to the date of the public hearing of the requested variance. 
Sec. 34-229. - Hearing and decision. 
(a)  An application for a variance shall be submitted and hearing dates established in accordance with the "Application Deadline and Meeting Schedule" published by the Department and available in the Department and the City Clerk's office. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals, after due notice thereof has been given, shall hold a public hearing on the application for a variance. The Board shall enter a written decision which shall become a public record. A copy of the Board's decision shall be mailed within five (5) calendar days to the applicant by the City. 
Sec. 34-230. - Index of decisions. 
    The City shall index all decisions by the Board by the case number and include the name of the applicant and the ordinance and section involved in the variance. 
Sec. 34-231. - Filing fee. 
    See the fee schedule on file with the Community Development Department. 
Secs. 34-232-34-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATOR) 

Sec. 34-241. - Basis of decisions. 
    The Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to, may modify or reverse the interpretation of the responsible City official. 
Sec. 34-242. - Contents. 
    A decision of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals to vary the application of any city ordinance or to modify an order of the responsible City official shall specify in what manner such variation and modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reason therefor. 
Sec. 34-243. - Effect; vote; filing 
    Every decision of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. It shall be in writing, and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be maintained by the City and shall be open to public inspection, and a certified copy shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant. 
Sec. 34-244. - Delay. 
    The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall in every case reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
Sec. 34-245. - Appropriate action by City official. 
    If a decision of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the responsible City official, or varies the application of any provision of any ordinance, the responsible City official shall immediately take appropriate action in accordance with such decision. 
Sec. 34-246. - Requests to be heard expeditiously. 
    The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hear and decide all appeals, variance requests, and requests for interpretations as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow regularly established agenda procedures, provide notice in accordance with Section 34-228 and obtain the necessary information to make sound decisions. 
Sec. 34-247. - Burden of proof in appeals and variances. 
    When an appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in accordance with this section, the Administrator shall have the initial burden of presenting to the Board sufficient evidence and argument to justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden of presenting evidence and argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of persuasion. 
Sec. 34-248. - Appeals of site plan. 
(a)  Procedural appeals: Any applicant that is aggrieved by a procedural decision by the Administrator may file a written appeal within thirty (30) days after the decision in dispute, accompanied by the appropriate fee. Appeals shall be filed with the City Manager and shall state fully the grounds for the appeal and all facts relied upon by the petitioner. The City Manager shall schedule the appeal for the consideration of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals (BAA) within sixty (60) days of receipt of the appeal. 
(b)  Technical appeals: Any applicant that is aggrieved by a technical decision of the Administrator or any other staff member empowered by the code may file a written appeal within thirty (30) days after the decision in dispute, accompanied by the appropriate fee. Appeals shall be filed with the Administrator and shall state fully the grounds for the appeal and all facts relied upon by the petitioner. The Administrator shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the Board of Adjustments and Appeals (BAA) within sixty (60) days of receipt of the appeal. 
Sec. 34-249. - Forms. 
    Appeals from a decision of an administrative official shall be filed on forms provided by the City unless otherwise provided for herein. Any affected property owner or his agent may file an appeal. 
Sec. 34-250. - Notice of appeal. 
    The notice of appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision complained of has been rendered. This requirement is jurisdictional and the appeal period shall not be enlarged. In case an emergency condition exists, which in the opinion of the responsible City official, might be unsafe or endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public, said official may limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period than thirty (30) days. 
Sec. 34-251. - Filing fee. 
    See the adopted fee schedule. 
Sec. 34-252. - Hearing and decision. 
    The Board of Adjustments and Appeals, after due notice has been given, shall hold a public hearing on said appeal. A copy of the Board's decision shall be mailed within five (5) calendar days to the appellant by the Recording Secretary of the Board. 
Sec. 34-253. - Index of decisions. 
    The Recording Secretary shall index all decisions by the Board by the case number and include the name of the appellant and the ordinance and section involved in the appeal. 
Secs. 34-254-34-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REHEARINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 34-261. - Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant whose request to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals for a variance or appeal has been denied, may apply to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals for a rehearing of the request in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Time: A request for rehearing must be made to the Administrator in writing before the close of business of the fifteenth day following the public hearing at which such request was denied. This requirement is jurisdictional and the time for filing may not be enlarged. 
(2)  Form: This request must be in writing, state with particularity the grounds upon which the request is based, identify the case by its case number, and be signed by the original applicant. 
(3)  Hearing: A timely filed request for rehearing will be heard by the Board of Adjustments and Appeals at its next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the request. The rehearing will be for the sole purpose of deciding whether or not the previously denied special exception, variance or appeal should be reheard. If the request for rehearing is denied, the previous decision of the Board shall be final. If the request for rehearing is granted, the original application for special exception, variance or appeal shall be rescheduled for public hearing at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to grant or approve a rehearing. 
(4)  Grounds: A request for rehearing cannot be granted unless one (1) or more of the following grounds are shown to exist: 
a.  There is newly discovered significant evidence which by due diligence could not have been discovered at the time of the original decision. 
b.  The original decision was based on an erroneous interpretation or conclusion of law. 
c.  The original decision was based upon fraud, misrepresentation or other misconduct of a person other than the applicant. 
(5)  Effect of rehearing: A decision by the Board to rehear an application is in no way a decision on the merits of the matter. An application which is to be reheard shall for all purposes be treated as a new application. All advertising and notice requirements for an original application shall be met prior to the rehearing. 
(6)  Rehearing fee: If the Board decides to rehear an application, the applicant shall be required to pay a rehearing fee as within five (5) days of the decision to rehear. Failure to pay the rehearing fee shall result in the denial of the application, which denial shall be final. 
Sec. 34-262. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  All notice requirements provided by this article shall be satisfied if the agenda of the public hearing is published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The agenda shall specifically describe the property involved in each request as well as the relief sought. 
(b)  A sign at least ten (10) inches wide by thirteen (13) inches long shall be posted on any affected property at least ten (10) days prior to hearing, giving public notice of the public hearing to be held before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals, said sign to designate the nature of the variance request and the date of the public hearing before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
Sec. 34-263. - Evidence. 
    All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or denial of the requested permit or appeal (crucial findings) shall be based upon reliable evidence. Competent evidence (evidence admissible in a court of law) shall be preferred whenever reasonably available, but in no case may crucial findings be based solely upon incompetent evidence unless competent evidence is not reasonably available, the evidence in question appears to be particularly reliable, and the matter at issue is not seriously disputed. 
Sec. 34-264. - Modification of application at hearing. 
(a)  In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at the hearing or to suggestions or recommendations by staff or Board of Adjustments and Appeals, the applicant may agree to modify his application including the plans and specifications submitted. 
(b)  Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the Board cannot be expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed changes without revised plans before it, the Board may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not be issued until plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the City staff. 
Sec. 34-265. - Record. 
(a)  A tape recording shall be made of all hearings and such recordings shall be kept for at least two (2) years. Accurate minutes shall also be kept of all such proceedings, but a transcript need not be made. 
(b)  Whenever practical, all documentary evidence presented at a hearing as well as all other types of physical evidence shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings and shall be kept by the City for at least two (2) years. 
Sec. 34-266. - Written decision. 
(a)  Any decision made by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals regarding an appeal or variance shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant or appellant and all other persons who make a written request for a copy with the office of the Administrator. 
(b)  In addition to a statement of the Board's ultimate disposition of the case and any other information deemed appropriate, the written decision shall state the Board's findings and conclusions, as well as supporting reasons or facts, whenever these regulations require the same as a prerequisite to taking action. 
Secs. 34-267-34-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER SEWER APPEALS 

Sec. 34-276. - Notice of appeal. 
    A customer dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager under the adopted fee resolution of these regulations may file an appeal on forms provided by the Administrator. The notice shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision complained of. This requirement is jurisdictional. 
Sec. 34-277. - Hearing and decisions. 
    No separate notice of publication shall be required for said appeal. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hear the appeal and determine if the Administrator's decision should be upheld or the appeal should be granted. The Board shall enter a written decision which shall be filed with the City and a copy mailed to the applicant. 
Secs. 34-278-34-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WAIVERS TO THE TECHNICAL MANUALS 

Sec. 34-286. - Applicability. 
    The Development Review Committee (DRC) may waive certain code requirements as noted in the City's technical manuals where alternative standards may promote flexibility, environmental soundness in layout and design where justified by need, hardship, physical constraint, best professional practices or to improve the overall layout and design of a development in the City. 
Sec. 34-287. - Submittal requirements. 
(a)  Waiver request application forms shall be submitted to the Community Development Department within thirty (30) days of an interpretation ruling from the Administrator. 
(b)  A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall accompany the application. The fee schedule is available at the Community Development Office and the City's web site. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  The waiver request form including citing the section of the DMU district regulations or the section number of the City's technical manuals and stating the reason, hardship, and justification for each waiver requested. 
(2)  A conceptual plan, at minimum, depicting what currently exists and what is being proposed on the property. 
(3)  A color aerial photo with the property contemplated for development outlined. 
Sec. 34-288. - Technical manual standards waiver criteria. 
(a)  The DRC, in reviewing development plans, may waive certain technical manual standards herein, where a developer can demonstrate the following: 
(1)  The alternative standards promotes flexibility and environmental soundness in layout and design; or 
(2)  The proposed new standards are appropriate to the proposed type of development; or 
(3)  The property exhibits physical constraints that prevent the implementation of provisions of the City's technical manuals and the waiver would allow the implementation of the code provision to the greatest extent possible; or 
(4)  The waiver would be based on the latest best professional practices that would not be possible in implementing the code provision. 
Sec. 34-289. - Review and approval procedures. 
(a)  The DRC shall review waiver applications with staff comments and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request by a majority of the attending committee members. Any appeals to a decision of the DRC shall be heard by the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. Said decision must be appealed within thirty (30) days after rendered. 
(b)  Waivers shall be listed on the cover sheet of the applicable site and /or building plans with approval dates and conditions of approval, if any. Approved waivers are valid only for the application submitted, the type of development being proposed, and related applications. 
Secs. 34-290-34-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WAIVERS TO THE DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 34-296. - Applicability. 
(a)  The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall have the authority to waive the following zoning district requirements on any project within the redevelopment district: 
(1)  Parking. 
(2)  Stormwater management: When any requirements above the SJRWMD permitting standards or, if on-site stormwater is required and there are regional retention, storage or detention options available, a waiver or payment in lieu of cost may be levied. 
(3)  Setbacks. 
(4)  Sign setbacks. 
(5)  Landscaping. 
(6)  One (1) story height increase in the Downtown sub-district. 
Sec. 34-297. - Minimum submittal requirements for zoning related regulations review for projects in the redevelopment district. 
(a)  At a minimum, the following shall be required for review of projects located within the redevelopment area: 
(1)  Completed application. 
(2)  A digital and paper copy of plot or site plan, drawn to scale, showing the variance requested. 
(3)  One (1) survey of the property. 
Sec. 34-298. - Review criteria. 
(a)  The DRC shall review waiver applications with staff comments and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request by a majority of the attending committee members. The criteria for granting such waivers shall be the following: 
(1)  The property exhibits physical constraints that prevent the implementation of the Code provision and the waiver would allow the implementation of the Code provision to the greatest extent possible; or 
(2)  The waiver would facilitate a greater adherence to the Urban Design Manual that would not be possible in implementing the Code provision as required; or 
(3)  The waiver would facilitate an agreement for participation in a regional stormwater or parking program with the Downtown; or 
(4)  The waiver would facilitate the provision of required landscaping within a public space. 
Sec. 34-299. - Appeals. 
    Any appeals to a decision of the DRC regarding DMU zoning regulation waivers regarding parking as it pertains to number of spaces and location; stormwater management; setbacks; landscaping with regards to location, amount, or type of placement; and one (1) story height increase in the Downtown sub-district may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Said decision must be appealed within thirty (30) days after rendered. The fee for the appeal to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be as adopted by the City. 
Sec. 34-300. - Completion and close out. 
    Waivers shall be listed on the cover sheet of the applicable plans with approval dates and conditions of approval, if any. Approved waivers are valid only for the application submitted, the type of development being proposed, and related applications. 
Secs. 34-301-34-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVERS TO SETBACKS 

Sec. 34-306. - Administrative waiver of setback requirements. 
(a)  In all zoning classifications, front, rear, side and side corner setbacks may be partially waived by the Administrator if the request meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The waiver shall only apply to setbacks imposed by the applicable zoning classification and Chapter 28, Article VIII pertaining to accessory use development standards. 
(2)  The waiver shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the required minimum setback(s) or one (1) foot, whichever is less. 
(3)  The waiver shall be utilized only where the lot is a conforming lot or a legal nonconforming lot of record. 
(4)  The waiver shall apply only to the principal structure or an accessory structure. 
(5)  The waiver shall not result in an encroachment into an easement. 
(6)  Total structural coverage of the lot shall not exceed the floor area ratio required by the applicable zoning classification or the performance standards set forth in Chapter 30 for the area of critical concern. 
(7)  The waiver shall not result in encroachment to a wetland. 
(b)  Applicants for the administrative waiver of setback requirements shall submit a letter to the Administrator setting forth the specific request and the need therefor, as well as the applicable fee. The letter shall include verification by a current certified survey of existing setbacks, and the percentage of the total structural coverage on the lot. For purposes of this section, a current certified survey shall be defined as a survey completed within six (6) months of the date of submittal. 
Secs. 34-307-34-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVERS TO LOT SIZE 

Sec. 34-311. - Administrative waiver of lot size, width or depth requirements. 
(a)  In all zoning classifications, a waiver of minimum lot size, width or depth may be partially waived by the Administrator if the requests meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The waiver shall apply to the minimum lot size, width or depth imposed by the applicable zoning classification. 
(2)  The waiver shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the required minimum lot size, width or depth as required in the specific zoning classification. 
(3)  The waiver shall be utilized only where the lot is a conforming lot or a legal nonconforming lot of record. 
(4)  Total structural coverage of the lots shall not exceed the floor area ratio required by the applicable zoning classification or the performance standards for the area of critical concern. 
(5)  A waiver shall not result in encroachment to a wetland. 
(b)  Applicants for the administrative waiver of lot requirements shall submit a letter to the Administrator setting forth the specific request and the need thereof, as well as the applicable fee. The letter shall include verification by a current certified survey of existing lot size and dimensions. For purposes of this section, a current certified survey shall be defined as a survey completed within six (6) months of the date of submittal. 
Secs. 34-312-34-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 34-316. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this section to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by providing an efficient and effective method of enforcing the various laws and codes in force in the City. 
Sec. 34-317. - Violation-Unlawful. 
(a)  It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity to violate any code, requirement or any provision of these regulations. It is further declared unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any provision of any code or regulation including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Failure to obtain a permit; 
(2)  Subdivide property in violation of this Code; 
(3)  Erect a sign without a permit or contrary to terms of any permit; 
(4)  Failure to obtain a development order; 
(5)  Failure to follow the terms of any development order; 
(6)  Failure to pay any required permit fee; 
(7)  Violation of the aquifer protective ordinance or environmental regulations; 
(8)  Destruction of natural vegetation without a required permit; 
(9)  Erection of any building or structure contrary to the terms of these [Land Development] Regulations; 
(10)  The use of any land or any structure contrary to any of these [Land Development] Regulations; 
(11)  The clearing of any land without a permit or contrary to the terms of any permit; 
(12)  Failure to abide by the regulations involving stormwater management, aquifer protection, streets, sidewalks, utilities or any other regulations. 
Sec. 34-318. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Officers have the primary responsibility of enforcing the provisions of these Codes and initiating enforcement proceeding pursuant to Chapters 162 and 166, Florida Statutes, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  If a violator of a code is alleged to exist, the Code Enforcement Officer may, unless subsection (c) applies, provide written notice to the alleged violator of the violation, and afford that person a reasonable time, in light of the nature of the violation, to correct it. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board and request a hearing. 
(c)  If the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed to a hearing, upon approval of the Director of Community Development without necessarily notifying the alleged violator and without necessarily giving him/her time to correct the violation; provided, however, where possible, the Code Enforcement Officer shall use his best efforts to ensure that reasonable notice shall be given to the alleged violator. 
Sec. 34-319. - Citations. 
(a)  The City Manager is hereby authorized to designate such code enforcement officers as he deems appropriate to enforce these regulations and the Code of Ordinances as authorized by Section 162.21, Florida Statutes (1989). Any violation of the Code of Ordinances and these regulations shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  A Code Enforcement Officer, as an alternative to the procedures set forth in Section 34-318 hereof, may issue a citation to a person when the Code Enforcement Officer upon personal investigation has a reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of a City Ordinance. A citation may be issued and a fine imposed for each separate act which would constitute a violation in and of itself even though each act may be a violation of the same Code provisions. 
(c)  Prior to issuing a citation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of the code or regulations and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than thirty (30) days. If, upon personal investigation, a Code Enforcement Officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a Code Enforcement Officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. The Code Enforcement Officer is not required to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(d)  The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be in a form prescribed by the City Manager and shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(11)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement Officer shall deposit the original citation and one (1) copy of the citation with the county court. 
(e)  A person who receives a citation from a Code Enforcement Officer for the violation of a City ordinance has committed a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  For a single citation by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  For a second citation, by a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(3)  For each additional citation, by a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  Any person who fails to pay the appropriate civil penalty within the time allowed or who fails to appear in court to contest the citation shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation, and judgment may be entered against the person for any amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  Any person may pay said citation and the amount specified in said citation based upon the above schedule within fifteen (15) days. In the event any person elects to contest said violation to the county court, the county court may impose a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any violation of these regulations. The processing of citations under this section through the county court shall be similar to that process and procedure provided for in Section 316.650, Florida Statutes (1989), for traffic citations. 
(6)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the City from enforcing its ordinances by any other means. 
Sec. 34-320. - Initiation of actions. 
(a)  If a violation of a code is believed to exist, a Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to the alleged violator of same, and give that person a reasonable time to correct it. 
(b)  Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, then the Code Enforcement Officer shall initiate an action before the Code Enforcement Board, by filing a request for hearing and statement of violation with the Clerk of the Board. 
(c)  The Code Enforcement Board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by the Sheriff or other Law Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or other person designated by the local governing body, or by leaving the notice at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of such notice. At the option of the Code Enforcement Board, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting. If the violation is corrected and then recurs of if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the Code Enforcement Officer, the case may be presented to the Code Enforcement Board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the Board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
Sec. 34-321. - Repeat violation. 
    In the case of a repeat violation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the violator but shall not be required to give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the violator of a repeat violation and schedule a hearing. The case may be presented to the Code Enforcement Board even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing. For the purposes of these regulations, a repeat violation shall mean a violation of a City of Titusville ordinance by a person whom the Titusville Code Enforcement Board has previously found to have violated the same provision. 
Sec. 34-322. - Other remedies. 
    The provisions and procedures contained in this section shall be in addition and supplemental to any other remedies now existing or subsequently provided for by law, regarding violations of municipal ordinances. 
Secs. 34-323-34-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES/VESTED RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 34-341. - Nonconforming uses-Continuation. 
(a)  Unless specifically prohibited elsewhere in these [Land Development] Regulations, nonconforming uses that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of these [Land Development] Regulations may be continued. 
(b)  All nonconforming uses of land without principal buildings, including open storage; building supplies; vehicle, implement or machinery storage, not on the same lot with a plant, factory, or sales facility; signs; billboards; junk yards; and commercial animal yards, and similar uses, shall comply with these regulations pertaining to uses permitted within one (1) year from the effective date of these regulations unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
Sec. 34-342. - Nonconforming uses-Extension, enlargement, or expansion. 
(a)  A use not in conformance with these [Land Development] Regulations shall not be extended, enlarged or expanded where such activity will result in: 
(1)  An increase in the amount of space devoted to the nonconforming use. 
(2)  An increase in the number of required parking spaces. 
(3)  An increase in the provision of public services (i.e. method and frequency of solid waste collection, a larger sized water meter, or similar demand for public facilities or service). 
Sec. 34-343. - Nonconforming uses-Discontinuance. 
    A use not in conformance with these [Land Development] Regulations shall not be changed to another nonconforming use or reestablished after discontinuance for a period of six (6) months. For the purposes of this section, this six-month period may be determined by a failure to maintain a valid occupational license, the cessation of water and or electric services, or any other method as may be deemed appropriate by the Administrator. 
Sec. 34-344. - Nonconforming structures-In general. 
    Nonconforming structures that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of these [Land Development] Regulations may be maintained and repaired except as provided in Sections 34-345 and 34-346 below. 
Sec. 34-345. - Nonconforming structures-Extension, enlargement, or expansion. 
    A structure not in conformance with these [Land Development] Regulations shall not be extended, enlarged or expanded where such activity will result in a greater nonconformity with respect to such standards as setback, height, lot coverage, or density. 
Sec. 34-346. - Nonconforming structures-Rebuild and repair. 
(a)  A structure not in conformance with these [Land Development] Regulations shall not be rebuilt or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure on the date of the damage, as determined and maintained by the Brevard County Property Appraiser's Office. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, a single-family or multifamily residential structure which is nonconforming in that said structure does not meet the necessary minimum square footage requirements or lot and building or setback requirements may be rebuilt or repaired in the same configuration as before damaged even if the damage is in excess of fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the single-family or multifamily residential structure. A single-family or multifamily residential structure which is a nonconforming use which is destroyed by more than fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure may not be rebuilt or repaired. 
Sec. 34-347. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Lots made nonconforming by the adoption of these [Land Development] Regulations shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Remedies. Where two (2) or more nonconforming lots with continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a nonconforming lot has continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lot or lots shall be combined to form one (1) or more building sites meeting the lot requirements of the district in which they are located. 
(2)  Dwellings on nonconforming lots. The building official may issue a building permit for a single-family dwelling on any nonconforming lot provided that the remedies set forth in this section cannot be complied with; that such use is permitted, and that the regulations of the district in which the lot is located are met and all other regulations are met. 
(3)  Variance for dwellings on nonconforming lots. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals may authorize the issuance of a building permit for a single-family dwelling on a nonconforming lot only after it has been determined that remedies as set forth in this section cannot be complied with and that the regulations for the district in which the lot is located cannot be met. The Board may also grant such variances on lot and building requirements in cases of hardships, so as not to create any condition detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
Sec. 34-348. - Nonconforming projects. 
    Any project made nonconforming by the adoption of these regulations shall be allowed to continue, provided such project is in receipt of an approved building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval granted prior to the effective date of these regulations and maintains the building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat approval in a current status as provided in the former regulations. 
Sec. 34-349. - Nonconforming antenna support structures, replacements and modifications of existing structures. 
(a)  In order to encourage and promote the use of sites which already have existing wireless communication facility (WCF) structures; in order to promote co-location of antennas and to minimize the adverse aesthetic impacts associated with the proliferation of ground mounted towers within the City of Titusville, the owner of any nonconforming WCF may replace, repair, and/or rebuild such WCF in order to accommodate co-located antennas or to improve the structural integrity of the facility to allow the said facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities. Modifications to or replacement of existing nonconforming WCF may occur subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Nonconforming antenna support structures: All antenna support structures legally installed at the time of initial construction, which, because of changes to the Code, no longer conform to the requirements of the Code, shall be considered legally permitted, nonconforming uses regardless of zoning district. Such facilities may be used or repaired and, may be replaced or modified subject to the reason for such act is to accommodate the following: 
a.  To allow the facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities. 
b.  To prevent the proliferation of WCFs. 
c.  To improve the structural integrity of the facility to allow the facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities. 
(2)  Modification or replacement of existing structures to accommodate co-location: 
a.  Modification or replacement of existing antenna support structures. An existing antenna support structure may be modified or replaced to accommodate the colocation of antenna(s) as follows: 
1.  The owner of any nonconforming WCF may replace, repair, rebuild and/or expand such WCF in order to allow the facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities, so long as such facilities are not increased in height. 
2.  The owner of any nonconforming WCF may replace, repair, rebuild and/or expand such WCF in order to allow the facility to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities, so long as such WCF and accessory structures (i.e. guy wire anchors, etc.) are setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the property line. 
3.  A facility which has an existing setback less that one hundred (100) feet shall not decrease their existing setback. If the applicant can document that there are no conceivable possibilities to replace the existing WCF and accessory structures without decreasing the existing setbacks due to the physical limitations of the site, the replacement tower setback may encroach no more that fifteen (15) feet from its present location. Any replacement WCF that is closer than one hundred (100) feet to a residential use and/or zoning shall be required to provide the following screening to the abutting residential zoning and/or uses. 
i.  The WCF and accessory structures (i.e. guy wire anchor area etc.) shall be required to provide a screening fence around all sides. A minimum six-foot chain link fence or masonry wall shall be installed around all sides. A six-foot masonry wall shall be required when said screening fence is located within ten (10) feet of the property line and abutting a residential zoning and/or use. 
ii.  Along the outside of the screening fence a landscape buffer shall be required to effectively screen the view of the WCF and accessory structures (i.e. guy wire anchor area, etc.). Screening planting/vegetation shall be required to be planted. This screen planting shall occupy a minimum five-foot wide area around the facility. Type of planting material is to be approved by the city's landscape inspector. This vegetative screening shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: 
A.  A row of shade trees a minimum of eight (8) feet tall at planting and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet apart (i.e. fifteen (15) feet on center) or as required by the City Landscape Inspector. 
B.  A continuous hedge at least twenty-four (24) inches in height at planting and capable of growing to a least thirty-six (36) inches in height in eighteen (18) months. 
C.  All landscaping shall be of the evergreen variety. 
D.  All landscaping shall be xeriscape tolerate or irrigated and properly maintained to ensure good health and viability. 
iii.  No existing trees/vegetation shall be removed unless the applicant can document that there is no conceivable way to replace the existing WCF without the removal of said trees/vegetation. 
iv.  The above noted screening requirements shall apply to all replacement WCF and accessory structures (i.e. guy wire anchor area, etc.) with a setback less than one hundred (100) feet, including situation where the exiting setbacks area not being decreased. 
4.  Antenna support structures which, when modified or replaced, will conform to the requirements of the Code, may be modified or relocated on the same parcel in accordance with the requirements of the Code; and 
5.  After the new/replacement antenna support structure is erected, as provided herein, the existing antenna support structure shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the replacement support structure obtains a certificate of occupancy/completion from the City of Titusville. 
6.  An antenna support structure, which is modified or replaced to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna(s), shall be either of the same type as the existing antenna support structure or a monopole. 
b.  Utilization of existing structures, other than antenna support structures. An existing structure, other than an antenna support structure, may be modified or replaced to accommodate both its prior function and antenna(s) as follows: 
1.  Such existing structures which, when modified or replaced, shall conform to the requirements of the Code for antenna support structures and shall meet all zoning requirements, may be modified or relocated in accordance to the requirements of the Code. 
2.  The modified or relocated structure shall comply with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations and applicable building codes. 
(3)  Nonconforming WCFs may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this section. 
(4)  Nonconforming WCFs may add additional antennas (belonging to the same carrier or other carriers) subject to administrative review. 
(5)  Nonconforming WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their former use, location and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit within ninety (90) days after said damage occurred. 
Sec. 34-350. - Nonconforming structure-Metal carports. 
(a)  Existing nonconforming freestanding carport structures that were existing on the effective date of this regulation [section] (November 9, 2004) shall be inspected to determine compliance or noncompliance with applicable setbacks and building code. These structures shall be permitted and shall be allowed to remain if they: 
(1)  Do not encroach into the public right-of-way; and 
(2)  Do not cause visual obstruction in the sight/vision triangle at road intersections; and 
(3)  Obtain a building permit and pay the applicable permit fees by March 1, 2005; and may be maintained and repaired except as provided in LDR Sections 34-120 and 34-121. 
(b)  The existing metal carports not meeting the above (Section 34-350(a), above) criteria shall be subject to code enforcement action. 
(c)  All new carports shall comply with the existing zoning setbacks for accessory structures and building permits shall be required prior to construction. There shall be no more than one (1) metal carport allowed on any lot for new carports authorized by the City. 
Sec. 34-351. - Nonconforming commercial uses with a residential zoning designation. 
(a)  The City finds that nonconforming commercial uses with a residential zoning designation are intended to be eventually used for residential purposes and are in areas designed and intended for residential uses. Therefore, certain outdoor activities of commercial uses that are a disruption to the peace and quality of life of residential neighborhoods shall be prohibited. Churches shall not be considered commercial uses in this section. 
(b)  Any nonconforming commercial use with a residential zoning district designation, specifically RHP, RE, RR, R1-A, and R1-B zoning districts, may not conduct the following organized entertainment activities on the property: 
(1)  Entertainment, such as amplified music, promotional activities, food service (unless on outdoor seating areas permitted prior to the use becoming nonconforming as provided below), or fundraisers, unless such entertainment activities, and all attendees and commercial business patrons, are completely within the enclosed principal structure. 
(2)  Special events, as defined by Section 11-500 of the Code of Ordinances, unless such event, and all attendees and commercial business patrons, are entirely within the enclosed principal structure. 
(c)  Furthermore, any provision of outdoor seating after the commercial business became a nonconforming use shall be considered an expansion of the use and will be in violation of Section 34-345. 
(d)  Enforcement of this section shall be processed through Section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances or the Code Enforcement provisions of Chapter 162, Florida Statutes. 
Sec. 34-352. - Preexisting conditions. 
(a)  Preexisting conditions. Existing conditions on improved parcels within the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Community Commercial (CC), Regional Commercial (RC), Light Industrial Service and Warehousing (M-1) or Industrial (M-2) zoning districts not meeting the standards described in Article VI shall be considered to be conforming and shall establish the standards for that parcel if: 
(1)  The improvements were complete prior to the adoption of this ordinance [article]. 
(2)  The parcel was administratively rezoned in order to implement this ordinance [article]. 
Sec. 34-353. - Nonconforming structures-Shipping containers. 
(a)  All nonconforming shipping containers, except as provided herein, shall be removed immediately. 
(b)  Existing nonconforming shipping containers on residentially zoned or residentially used property for which a permit was issued as of the effective date of this regulation (December 12, 2017) and remains valid, or for which a final inspection has been completed as of the effective date of this regulation, shall be permitted to continue for eighteen (18) months from the date of this regulation. During this eighteen-month period, such nonconforming shipping container shall be removed from the property within sixty (60) days of the change of ownership of the residentially zoned or residentially utilized property. 
(c)  Alternatively, existing nonconforming shipping containers on residentially zoned or residentially used property that have a valid, current building permit as of the effective date of this regulation will be considered legal nonconforming structures governed by Section 34-345 and 34-346 if the container is not visible from the property line(s) or is architecturally compatible within six (6) months of the effective date of this ordinance [regulation]. Architectural compatibility shall include a pitched roof, siding and paint color consistent with the primary residential structure on the property as determined by the Administrator. This period may be extended for an additional sixty (60) days to allow completion of improvements which are underway if the Administrator determines such extension is warranted due to hardship. 
(d)  Any shipping container remaining on residentially zoned or residentially used property shall be removed or be subject to code enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 44-2017, § 4, 12-12-17) 
Secs. 34-354-34-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMING USE 

Sec. 34-361. - Intent. 
    The owner of a property who wishes to establish that a use on the property is lawfully nonconforming, under the provisions of these [Land Development] Regulations, may submit an application for a certificate of nonconforming use. 
Sec. 34-362. - Application. 
(a)  The application for a certificate of nonconforming use may be obtained from the Community Development Department. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and addresses of adjoining property owners. 
(2)  Location map with the site identified. 
(3)  Site plan drawn to scale illustrating the location of all structures and parking. 
(4)  Current photographs of the property including all structures. 
(5)  Evidence sufficient to establish that the use was lawful when established and continues to be lawful, even though it no longer conforms to the requirements of the zone in which it is located because of zoning ordinance or zoning map changes. 
(6)  Evidence sufficient to show continuous use since initial establishment of the lawful use. 
Secs. 34-363. - Review of application. 
    Staff shall review the application for completeness prior to acceptance of the application. If the application is deemed complete, the application will be reviewed based on the information provided and the Administrator will make a determination. After the final determination is made by the Administrator, if the certificate is approved a formal letter will be sent to the applicant. This letter, along with the application will constitute the certificate of nonconforming use. 
Secs. 34-364-34-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VESTED RIGHTS DETERMINATION 

Sec. 34-371. - Intent. 
    Because a determination that a vested right exists could have a negative impact on the City Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulations, as amended from time to time, this article does not and shall not be construed to accord any rights or privileges to an applicant which would not otherwise be found to exist in a court of law or equity in the absence of this article. The finding that a vested right exists, or the issuance of a development order based upon such a finding, shall only be made to the minimum extent necessary to preserve and protect the legal rights of the applicant. The special permit review process shall be considered as a quasi-judicial proceeding. This article shall not be applicable to any impact fee adopted by the City. 
Sec. 34-372. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the following definitions shall mean: 
(1)  Applicant means any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity having a mortgage interest or an ownership interest, whether legal or equitable, in a parcel of land in the City, or his attorney-in-fact, who applies for a development order. 
(2)  Development shall be defined as set forth in Section 380.04, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(3)  Development order means any order granting, with or without conditions, a development permit including any building permit, zoning approval, rezoning, subdivision approval, site plan approval, conditional use, certification, variance or other official action of the City having the effect of permitting the development of a parcel of land. 
(4)  Investment-backed expectation means and refers to the expenditure of substantial sums of money by the applicant which cannot be recovered by the applicant, or an irreversible and substantial change of position that imposes on the applicant an obligation to expend sums of money in the future. 
(5)  Land Development Regulation means an ordinance that has an adverse and material effect upon the applicant's claim to a vested right to commence and construct a specific type, level, nature, density, or intensity of development and which said ordinance is for the regulation of any aspect of development, including any City comprehensive planning, zoning, rezoning, subdivision, building construction, site planning, sign regulation, or any other regulations controlling the development of land. 
(6)  Parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its locations and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner as land to be used, or developed, as a unit or which has been developed as a unit. 
(7)  Pending means the date on which a proposed change in the City Comprehensive Plan or a Land Development Regulation became pending. For a comprehensive plan or a land development regulation to be pending, it does not have to be before the City Council, provided the appropriate administrative department of the City is actively pursuing it. Mere thoughts or comments by City employees concerning the desirability of a change are not enough to make the provision pending. There must be active and documented efforts on the part of those authorized to do the work which, in the normal course of City actions, culminates in the comprehensive plan or land development regulation adoption or amendment. The City Council or local planning agency must at least be aware that these efforts are going forward. For a comprehensive plan or land development regulation to be pending, however, it is not essential that the property owners be advised of these activities. If the pending change in the comprehensive plan or a land development regulation is immediately preceded by a period in which a building, zoning or other moratoria, stop-gap or interim land development regulation existed which limited the ability of the applicant or the applicant's predecessor in interest to request changes in the pre-existing land development regulation, then the date on which the provision in the comprehensive plan or a land development regulation defeating the applicant's vested right shall be the date on which the proposed predecessor moratorium, stop-gap or interim land development regulations became pending. 
Sec. 34-373. - Application for vested rights special permit. 
    Upon application and review, the City Council may grant, as a special permit, an exception to the otherwise applicable provisions of the City Comprehensive Plan or any Land Development Regulations in the City Code, except for impact fees. Said special permit shall specify the specific type, density or intensity of development of a specifically described parcel of land or to any other person or legal entity. However, additional special permits may be issued to other persons or legal entities satisfying the requirements of this article. The special permit may be granted whenever the City Council finds that the applicant has demonstrated that the applicant has a pre-existing vested right to commence or complete construction on a specific development. The special permit may be granted with or without conditions depending upon presented evidence. 
Sec. 34-374. - Considerations for determination of vested rights. 
(a)  In determining whether a right to commence or complete construction of a specific type, density, or intensity of development has vested the following factors, as the evidence shall deem to be appropriate, shall be considered: 
(1)  Whether there has been an act or omission to act by the City which would give rise to a vested right, the date of such an act or omission, and the official position of the person responsible for the act or omission. 
(2)  With reference to the act or omission to act referenced in subsection (a)(1) above, whether the City Official acted or omitted to act within the course and scope of his personnel rank job duties and official position and had the authority to bind the City. 
(3)  Whether the applicant made a substantial change in position or has an investment-backed expectation, based upon an unexpired act, or omission to act, of the City including: 
a.  The nature of the applicant's change in position or investment-backed expectation. 
b.  Expenditure of money or obligation to expend funds. 
c.  The amount of funds spent or obligated. 
d.  Dates of expenditures or incurrence of the obligation, acts committed which represent a change in position and dates thereof. 
(4)  Good faith of the applicant in substantially changing its position or the incurring of extensive obligations and expenses based upon the City's actions or omissions to act. 
(5)  Any acts of the applicant (and the dates thereof) associated with physical improvements on the parcel of land in question such as grading, installation of utility infrastructure or public improvements, or any acts of the applicant (and the dates thereof), including dedication of and to the City or any other governmental entity, payment of fees such as but not limited to impact fees, design fees of specific buildings, and design fees for improvements to be constructed on the site. 
(6)  The extent to which the applicant has secured building permits for and commenced or completed the construction of subdivision improvements and buildings upon part but not all of the development project that was contemplated to extend over a period of months or years. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, prior to or on the date of the change in the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulation defeating the applicant's vested right, became pending, has made contractual commitments to complete structures or deliver title thereto or occupancy thereof and the dates of and amounts of money involved in said commitment. 
(8)  Whether prior to the date the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulation became pending, the applicant incurred financial obligations to a lending institution which the applicant will be unable to meet, and whether it would be inequitable and unjust to require the applicant to meet the new regulations, and therefore should be permitted to proceed with the previously permitted type, density or intensity of development. 
(9)  Whether enforcement of the terms of the currently effective Comprehensive Plan or any Land Development Regulation, claimed to defeat the applicant's right to develop a parcel of land will expose the applicant to substantial monetary liability. 
(10)  Whether the applicant has a vested right to commence and complete only a portion of a proposed development on all or a portion of the applicant's parcel of land. 
(11)  That the applicant owned an interest in the parcel of land proposed to be developed on the date of the change in the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulation and that the specific type, density, or intensity of development proposed for the parcel of land was lawful and permitted at that time. 
(12)  Whether the applicant has continuously owned the parcel of land since the date of the change in the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulation until the date of the public hearing before the City Council on the special permit application. 
(13)  Whether requiring that the applicant's parcel of land be developed in accordance with the currently effective City Comprehensive Plan or City Land Development Regulation restrictions will deprive the applicant of a reasonable rate of return on his investment or substantial change in position, or otherwise unjustly deprive the applicant of its vested rights. In determining the reasonableness of the projected rate of return, the following categories of expenditures shall not be included in the calculation of the applicant's investment: 
a.  Expenditures for professional services that are unrelated to the design or construction of the improvements proposed for the type, density or intensity of development claimed by the applicant to be vested. 
b.  Expenditures for taxes, except for any increases in tax expenditures which result from issuance of development order which would now be contrary to the currently existing City Comprehensive Plan or relevant Land Development Regulation. 
c.  Expenditures which the applicant has allocated to the particular proposed development but which the applicant would have been obligated to incur as an ordinary and necessary business expense (for example, employees, salaries, equipment rental, chattel mortgage payments) had the plan for the particular development not been formulated or a development order not been issued, for the type, density or intensity of development now claimed by the applicant to be vested. 
(14)  Any other information relevant to discerning the applicant's claim to vested rights to develop its parcel of land in a particular manner that may be pertinent under Florida or federal law, including the existence of an imminent peril to the public health, safety, welfare, economic prosperity, general order, aesthetics, or appearance which should preclude approval of a vested rights special permit. 
Sec. 34-375. - Vested rights criteria. 
(a)  The right of the applicant to commence or complete construction of development of a type, density, or intensity of development on the applicant's parcel of land or a portion thereof is vested, if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City by substantial, competent evidence that: 
(1)  The currently effective City Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof, or a Land Development Regulation, has a material and adverse effect upon the applicant's vested right to develop the subject parcel of land. 
(2)  By application of the considerations set out in section 34-374 hereof the applicant in good faith upon some act or omission of the City has made such a substantial change in position or has an investment-backed expectation that would make it inequitable and unjust to destroy the right of the applicant to commence or complete a certain type, density, or intensity of development upon all or a portion of the applicant's parcel of land. 
(3)  The fact that the parcel of land has been or is in a particular zoning or comprehensive planning land use district or classification under the currently effective, or any prior, City Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulation, shall not, in and of itself, establish that an applicant's right to commence or complete construction of a certain type, density, or intensity of development has vested. 
(4)  If it is determined that there is an imminent peril to the public health, safety, welfare, general order, economic prosperity, aesthetics or appearance or that the public costs outweighs the applicant's vested right, the special permit may be denied. 
(5)  The good faith reliance and change in position occurred before Comprehensive Plan or Land Development amendment was pending as defined above. 
Sec. 34-376. - Submittals/exhibits. 
(a)  Any applicant may file an application for a specific permit determining that the applicant's right to commence or complete a specific type, density or intensity of development on a parcel of land has vested. Such application shall be filed with the City Planning and Zoning Administrator and shall contain: 
(1)  A concise and complete recital of the facts, including dates of expenditures or obligation to expend funds, dollar amounts, the nature of expenditures or obligation to expended funds, and other factors which are claimed to support the claim to a vested right to commence or complete a specific type, density or intensity of development. 
(2)  A legal description of the parcel of land and survey thereof upon which the applicant claims to have vested development rights. 
(3)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of any attorney or agent who is or will be representing the applicant. 
(5)  A title opinion of a Florida attorney (which opinion is in a form acceptable to and in favor of the City), abstract of title, or other evidence demonstrating that the applicant has continuously held title to the parcel of land described in the application from the date on which the comprehensive plan or land development regulation change became pending until at least two (2) weeks prior to the date of application for a special permit together with a description of the event and quality of ownership of the parcel of land during said period. As of the date of final approval of any vested rights special permit, the applicant may be required by the City to update the foregoing information to the date of approval of any vested rights special permit. 
(6)  An affidavit under penalty of perjury verified or executed before a notary public (and thereafter subscribed to by said notary public), by the applicant attesting to the truth, accuracy and veracity of the application and all attachments thereto. 
(7)  Such other information relevant to the standards and factors in this article as the Planning and Zoning Administrator may specify. 
(b)  The applicant shall attach to the application original or photographically reproduced copies of all documents or other relevant evidence. Said attachments shall be deemed to be a part of the application. 
(c)  Application fee. Application fee shall be set forth in the adopted fee schedule. 
Sec. 34-377. - Local planning agency review. 
    A public hearing shall be held by the local planning agency on the application for a special permit for vested rights determination. Within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing, the local planning agency shall forward its recommendations to the City Council. A copy of the recommendations shall also be mailed to the applicant. Said findings of recommendation shall be advisory in nature. 
Sec. 34-378. - City Council review. 
    Within sixty (60) days of the date of the local planning agency has forwarded its findings of recommendations, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the application for a special permit. Within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing on the application for the special permit, the City Council shall vote on the vested rights request and shall file its written findings and order of determination of the existence or nonexistence of vested rights with the City Clerk. A copy will be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the applicant. The order shall either issue a special permit, issue the special permit with conditions or deny the special permit application. 
Sec. 34-379. - Application deadline. 
(a)  A person or legal entity shall have one (1) year after the effective date of the Comprehensive Plan amendment or Land Development Regulation amendment that effects a person's or legal entity's vested right to commence or complete a proposed development to file an application for vested rights. Failure to make such application shall be "interpreted" as waiver of a vested rights claim. 
(b)  Although the one-year time period may, in the opinion of the aggrieved person or legal entity, have passed, any person or entity who believes that its vested rights may be abrogated by any provision in the Comprehensive Plan or by a Land Development Regulation must, prior to seeking judicial relief, first, file a complete application for a vested rights permit so that a determination can be made whether the one-year application deadline has actually passed and whether other provisions of the Comprehensive Development Plan or Land Development Regulations may preserve the applicant's vested rights. 
Sec. 34-380. - Judicial review. 
    Any person or legal entity aggrieved by a determination of the City Council to deny, grant or grant with conditions a vested rights special permit may seek judicial review by filing a petition for writ of certiorari in the Circuit Court seeking review. Said petition must be filed within thirty (30) days after the date of rendition of the final order of the City Council and pursuant to the requirements of the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
Sec. 34-381. - Severability. 
    In the event a court of competent jurisdiction shall hold any provision of this article invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
Secs. 34-382-34-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 34-391. - Development agreements-Purpose and intent. 
    The City Council may enter into development agreements with the legal and/or equitable owners of parcels of land within City Limits, pursuant to Section 163.3220 et seq., Florida Statutes, or otherwise, provided the requirements set forth under the terms of this chapter are complied with. The entry into a development agreement by the City shall in no way whatsoever limit or modify any legislative power by the City to adopt ordinances, resolutions, regulations or to make executive, administrative or legislative decisions of any kind which it had the power to make prior to the entry of such development agreement, except to the degree that the development agreement, by its express terms and not by implication, gives vested rights to the landowner, and his successors and assignees in interest, as to certain development approvals. No development agreement shall, by its express terms or by implication, limit the right of the City Council to adopt ordinances, regulations, or to adopt policies that are of general application or specific as to the parcel of land subject to the development agreement in the City, except as is expressly provided by Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, or said development agreement. 
Sec. 34-392. - Site development agreement or binding development agreement. 
    May be used to confirm or establish via negotiation the form of on- or off-site improvements that are required to be performed by either an owner, developer, or stakeholder and the DCRA. Such agreements shall be adopted in accordance with these [Land Development] Regulations. 
Sec. 34-393. - Applicability of ordinance and resolutions of City to development. 
(a)  The ordinances and regulations of the city governing the development of the land at the time of the execution of any development agreement provided for hereunder shall continue to govern the development of the land subject to the development agreement for the duration of the development agreement, except as otherwise provided herein. At the termination of the duration of the development agreement, all then-existing codes shall become applicable to the development regardless of the terms of the development agreement, and, as appropriate, the agreement shall be modified accordingly. 
(b)  The City may apply ordinances and policies adopted subsequently to the execution of the development agreement to the parcel of land subject to the development agreement only if the City has held a public hearing noticed in the same manner as prescribed in Section 15-16 and further determined that: 
(1)  Such new ordinances or policies are not in conflict with the laws and policies governing the development agreement and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities or densities as allowed under the terms of the development agreement; 
(2)  Such new ordinances or policies are essential to the public health, safety or welfare, and the new ordinance or policies expressly state that they shall apply to a development that is subject to a development agreement; 
(3)  Such new ordinances or policies are specifically anticipated and provided for in the development agreement if contemplated at the time of execution of the development agreement; 
(4)  The City has demonstrated that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of the approval of the development agreement; or 
(5)  The development agreement is based on substantially inaccurate information supplied by the developer. 
(c)  In the event that state and federal laws are enacted after execution of a development agreement which are applicable to and preclude the parties' compliance with the terms of the development agreement, such agreement shall be modified or revoked as is necessary to comply with the relevant state or federal laws. Such modification or revocation shall take place only after proper public hearing and notice as is required for the adoption of a development agreement as provided for in Section 34-400. 
(d)  The City shall review all parcel(s) of land within the City subject to a development agreement not less than once every twelve (12) calendar months to determine if there has been demonstrated good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. The City Manager shall report his findings to the City Council. In the event that the City finds, on the basis of substantial competent evidence, that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the agreement may be revoked or modified by the City upon thirty (30) days' notice to the parcel of land owner as shown on the records of the property appraiser for Brevard County. Such termination or amendment shall be accomplished only after a public hearing and notice as is herein required for the adoption of a development agreement. Amendment or cancellation of the development agreement by mutual consent of the City and the owner of the parcel of land may be accomplished by following the notice requirements required for initial adoption of the development agreement as is above set forth: 
(e)  All existing ordinance and regulations governing the development of land at the time of the approval of a development agreement shall be applicable to the development. 
(f)  If a portion of the property included within the development agreement application includes lands that have a separate and distinct land use per the Comprehensive Plan and zoning, from other lands within the application, then in that event, said separate and distinct land uses and zoning will be reviewed separately in accordance with the Land Development Regulations of the City and each separate land use and zoning shall be considered the total area of a development or developer site and must comply separately with the Land Development Regulations of the City (including, but not limited to, parking, tree protection, stormwater, area of critical concern, percentage of impervious surface coverage, etc.) without including other lands from the other separate and distinct land use and zoning. 
Sec. 34-394. - Home rule powers development agreements. 
    Notwithstanding the City Council's right to enter into statutory development agreements pursuant to Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, and this chapter, the City Council shall also have the right to enter into development agreements pursuant to the Florida Municipal Home Rule Powers Act. Such agreements shall provide for terms and conditions deemed necessary by the City Council. Any agreement may also provide for variances or waivers from any applicable land development regulation of the City, provided the owner of real property demonstrates a bona fide need for the variance or waiver and agrees to provide significant enhancements to the subject property in exchange for the variance or waiver. The enhancements must significantly bring the overall quality of the proposed development above and beyond the minimum requirements set forth in the Land Development Regulations, must be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan, and must serve the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the City. 
Sec. 34-395. - Procedure for application of development agreement. 
(a)  Any person or entity desiring to enter into a development agreement with the City shall make a written request to enter into said development agreement by filing an application with the Planning Community Development Director, which application shall contain information as set forth in the Development Review Procedures Manual Section 16.1. 
(b)  The applicant shall attach to the application an original or photographically reproduced copies of all documents or other relevant evidence. Said attachments shall be deemed to be a part of the application. 
Sec. 34-396. - Fees. 
    Development agreements will be subject to the application and review fees established in the adopted fee schedule. 
Sec. 34-397. - Contents of development agreement. 
(a)  Development agreements shall contain all information as established in Section 16.2 of the Development Review Procedures Manual, and the information consistent with F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, as amended. 
(b)  At the City Council's discretion, the development agreement may provide that the entire proposed project or any phase thereof shall be commenced or be completed within any specific period of time and may provide for penalties in the nature of monetary penalties, the denial of future final development orders, the termination of the development agreement, or the withholding of building permits for the failure of the parcel of land owner to comply with any such requirement. 
Sec. 34-398. - Development agreement review procedures. 
    Development agreements shall be reviewed consistent with F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, as amended, and shall follow the procedures established in Section 16.3 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 34-399. - Recordation of development agreement. 
    Development agreements shall be recorded consistent with F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, as amended, and shall follow the procedures established in Section 16.4 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Sec. 34-400. - Execution of development agreement. 
    Development agreements shall be executed consistent with F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, as amended, and shall follow the procedures established in Section 16.5 of the Development Review Procedures Manual. 
Secs. 34-401-34-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FEES 
DIVISION 1. - LAND DEVELOPMENT FEES 

Sec. 34-411. - Establishment of a land development fee schedule. 
    A schedule of land development fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The schedule of fees shall establish the processing and review fees for various types of applications. The schedule of fees may be obtained from the Community Development Department or the City of Titusville website. Where not in conflict with State law, fees and costs may be adjusted, deferred, or waived at the discretion of the City Manager or his or her designee, on a case by case basis, to the extent provided for by City Council policy. 
Secs. 34-412-34-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 34-421. - Impact fee intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to provide for the assessment and collection of impact fees on all new development occurring within the City of Titusville so as to ensure that such new development pays its fair and proportionate share of the capital costs for road, park, fire, police protection, public works and City Hall improvements required to accommodate such new development. 
(b)  This chapter is intended to be consistent with and implement the provisions of the Titusville Comprehensive Plan, particularly those public facilities and services that require a minimum level of service to be concurrent with development, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the Titusville Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 34-422. - Impact fee definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this section, the following definitions shall apply. Unless otherwise stated, words in the present tense shall include the future tense, and words used in the singular shall include the plural: 
    Capital improvement: Includes not only the acquisition and/or construction costs of a capital item but also the costs of planning, engineering, inspecting and supervising the acquisition or construction which may include engineering, administrative, inspection and legal fees. 
    Development: Any land use activity which generates traffic or provides a need for parks or police and fire protection services. A single-family home or a single structure is a "development" under this definition. 
    Level of service "C": Describes a roadway condition of stable flow where volume and density levels are beginning to place restrictions on drivers' speed, lane changing and passing abilities. This level of service standard measured by volume to capacity ratio (v/c) of can be no greater than eighty (80) percent. 
    Off-site road improvements: All improvements required to be made to the public roads or rights-of-way, which are not site-related improvements, and includes, but is not limited to, the following (improvements to local streets and rights-of-way shall not be considered off-site road improvements): 
(1)  Dedication of right-of-way; 
(2)  Construction of bridges, road lanes, turn lanes, curbs, medians and shoulders; 
(3)  Construction or improvement of roadway drainage facilities; 
(4)  Purchase and installation of traffic signalization and traffic safety devices; and 
(5)  Relocating utilities to accommodate new roadway construction. 
    Person: Includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
    Site-related improvements: Capital improvements and right-of-way dedications for direct access improvements to the development in question. Direct access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Site driveways and internal roads; 
(2)  Right and left turn lanes leading to those driveways or internal roads; 
(3)  Traffic-control measures and devices for those driveways and internal roads; 
(4)  Median cuts; or 
(5)  Other improvements in the public right-of-way necessitated by the development to facilitate direct access to the development. 
    Unit: Each entity or occupancy within a building and not the entire building used for residential, hotel and/or motel uses. 
Sec. 34-423. - Imposition of impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who, after the effective date of this section, applies to obtain a certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval for any new development shall be required to pay the impact fees in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Impact fees shall be paid to the City and collected by the Administrator. 
Sec. 34-424. - Computation of impact fees. 
(a)  The amount of the impact fees may be determined from the "schedule of impact fees," below. 
(b)  The fee for a building, structure or new development containing mixed uses shall be determined by using the schedule of impact fees and apportioning the space committed to the uses specified on the schedule. 
(c)  If the land use type of the new development is not conducted within an enclosed building or is not specified on the schedule of impact fees, the Administrator shall use the fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the schedule. The Administrator shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip General, An Information Report (Fourth Edition). 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be assessed at the same fee rate as the primary or principal building or use. 
SCHEDULE OF IMPACT FEES BY LAND USE TYPE 
Impact Fees by Land Use Type Land Use Type Roads Police Fire Park City Hall Public Works Total Residential (per unit): * - $69.86 $332.66 - $8.68 $114.98 ** - Nonresidential (Commercial and industrial uses) per square foot * - 0.01 0.09 - 0.01 0.03 ** -  
* Brevard County Transportation Impact fee per Chapter 62, Article V, Division 6, Sections 62-801 through 62-819 of the Brevard County Code. 
** City fee plus County Transportation Impact Fee. 
Sec. 34-425. - Optional computation of impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who elects not to use the schedule of impact fees shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The person electing not to use the schedule shall prepare and submit to the Administrator an independent fee calculation report for the new development activity, which report shall contain a traffic engineering study showing the following: 
a.  Documentation of trip generation rates appropriate for the proposed new development activity; 
b.  Documentation of trip length appropriate for the proposed new development activity; 
c.  Documentation of per cent new trip data for the proposed new development activity; 
d.  Certification of the study by a Florida-registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering; 
e.  The independent fee calculation report shall contain all data required to determine impact fees under the formulas provided in this section and all such data shall be fully documented. 
(2)  At the time the independent fee calculation report is submitted, the person submitting the report shall pay to the City a review fee of three (3) percent of the amount of the impact fees determined from the schedule of impact fees up to a maximum of four thousand and eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00). These funds shall be used solely for review and processing the study and shall not be credited against the impact fee payment ultimately determined to be due. 
(3)  The Administrator shall review the data presented in the report and engineering study and accept the data if he determines that they meet sound engineering principles. The accepted data shall then be used by the Administrator in the formulas provided in the attached schedule of formulas, below, to determine the impact fee of the new development. 
(4)  In the event the Administrator shall not accept the data contained in the report and engineering study, he shall notify the submitting person in writing of the problems or deficiencies with the data and his reasons for rejection. 
(5)  Any person desiring to use this optional method of calculating the impact fee may obtain his certificate of occupancy, final inspection or final annexation approval by depositing with the City the full amount of the impact fees determined to be due from the schedule of impact fees. In the event it is determined that a lesser impact fee is appropriate, the excess amount deposited with the City shall be promptly refunded. No interest or other charge shall be due on any refund. If the required traffic engineering study is not submitted within six (6) months of the date of the deposit, it shall be conclusively presumed that such person has elected to pay the impact fee per the fee schedule and has waived the right to any optional calculation of impact fees. 
(b)  Schedule of formulas. The following formulas shall be used for the optional calculation of impact fees provided in Section 34-425(a), above: 
(1)  The formula for calculating the road impact fees shall be that as specified by Brevard County. 
(2)  The formula for calculating the police impact fee is: 
Cost per unit = persons per unit × cost per capita 
Net cost = cost per unit - available revenue 
Impact fee = net costs 
(3)  The formula for calculating the fire impact fee is: 
Cost per unit = persons per unit × cost per capita 
Net cost = cost per unit - available revenue 
Impact fee = net costs 
(4)  The formula for calculating the parks impact fee is: 
Cost per unit = persons per unit × (Acquisition cost per capita + improvement cost per capita) 
Net cost = cost per unit - available revenue 
Impact [fee] = net costs 
(5)  The formula for calculating the city hall and public works impact fee is: 
Cost per unit = persons per unit × (Acquisition cost per capita + improvement cost per capita) 
Net cost = cost per unit - available revenue 
Impact [fee] = net costs 
Sec. 34-426. - Impact fee credits. 
(a)  The following credits shall be applied to the impact fees determined to be due under this section: 
(1)  Redevelopment. In the case of a change of use, redevelopment, alteration, modification or improvement of an existing development or structure which does not involve an expansion of the structure, no impact fee shall be imposed for said change in use, redevelopment, alteration or modification provided that the existing land use type, i.e. residential or nonresidential, (Section 34-424) falls within the same category. For example, in the event the existing land use type is nonresidential office and the new land use type is nonresidential retail, then in that event no additional impact fee will be imposed. In the event the existing structure is expanded or the land use type is changed or modified for example from residential to nonresidential then in that event an impact will be imposed based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new development or land use as compared to the existing or any previous land use. 
(2)  Off-site road improvements. All off-site roadway improvements which add additional capacity or sidewalks/bikeways over that required for City development approval shall be credited against that portion of the impact fee attributable to road improvements, as set forth below: 
a.  Each person desiring to utilize such credit shall submit a written cost estimate to the Administrator. Cost estimates for right-of-way dedication shall be prepared and certified by a qualified MAI appraiser. Cost estimates for actual off-site improvements to be constructed shall be prepared and certified by a registered Florida professional engineer. The Administrator shall review the cost estimates and advise the applicant in writing of the amount of credit to be allowed. No credit shall be allowed for "site-related improvements." In lieu of an MAI appraisal, the person may use one hundred twenty (120) percent of assessed land value as shown on the Brevard County tax rolls. Credit for right-of-way dedication shall not exceed that portion of the total impact fee attributable to right-of-way acquisition. In addition, inclusion of the off-site road improvement in the "Schedule of Improvements" of the Comprehensive Plan and the City's Five-Year Capital Improvement Program shall be necessary for construction credit. Right-of-way credit must be consistent with the future traffic circulation map. 
(3)  Park improvements. A credit against the park impact fee may be obtained by the dedication of land for public parks and/or the construction of park improvements on land so dedicated in excess of any required recreation or open space areas within that zoning category or required as part of a development order. Each person desiring to utilize such credit shall prepare and submit to the Administrator the following: 
a.  An appraisal, certified by a qualified property appraiser, as to the value of all and [land] proposed to be dedicated for park use; 
b.  A survey of the property to be dedicated showing boundaries, dimensions and public access to the park; 
c.  A sketch plan showing general land conditions, lakes, natural water courses and all proposed improvements to the land; 
d.  A cost estimate of the proposed improvements certified by a licensed Florida general contractor. 
(b)  The Administrator shall determine whether the proposed land and improvements are acceptable to the city, and if so, the amount of the credit to be allowed against the park impact fee. The Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of their decision. 
(1)  Recreational improvements. A credit against the park impact fee shall be allowed for recreational improvements constructed as qualified in subsection (a)(3)c. above that is within and made a part of a residential development. A qualified recreational improvement shall mean only an active recreational facility which is provided as an amenity to the residents of the development. Passive recreational facilities, such as a clubhouse, which are not used primarily for active recreational pursuits do not qualify for this credit. The credit allowed for qualified recreational improvements shall be equal to the value of the land and qualifying improvements thereon up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the amount of the park impact fee for such development. 
(2)  Subdivision. For new developments consisting solely of unimproved lots or parcels, credits for off-site road improvements and park improvements as calculated in subsections (a)(3)b., c. and d. above, shall be computed on a pro rata basis for each lot or parcel within a subdivision and shall be allowed at such time as side lots are developed. 
(3)  [Maximum credit.] In no event shall any credit exceed the amount of the impact fee determined to be due under this chapter. 
Sec. 34-427. - Impact fee exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the payment of impact fees: 
(1)  Alterations to an existing building where no additional units are created, the use is not changed, and where no additional vehicular trips will be produced over and above that produced by the existing use; 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures or the expansion of an existing building or structure where said expansion is less than five hundred (500) square feet or five (5) percent of the existing building or structure, whichever is less; 
(3)  The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or structure, provided that no additional trips will be produced over and above those produced by the use of the land on the effective date of this chapter; 
(4)  Any new development owned by a nonprofit religious organization and used exclusively for bona-fide religious activities. A child care facility or school owned and/or operated by a religious organization is nonexempt. 
Sec. 34-428. - Use of funds (impact fees). 
(a)  Funds collected from impact fees shall be placed in the following special interest bearing funds: 
(1)  Road fund, for road impact fees; 
(2)  Park fund, for park impact fees; 
(3)  Fire fund, for fire protection impact fees; 
(4)  Police fund, for police protection impact fees; 
(5)  City hall fund, for city hall impact fees; 
(6)  Public works fund, for public works impact fees. 
(b)  Funds collected from the road impact fees shall be used for the purpose of capital improvements to and expansion of the City, county and state roadway network and transportation facilities within the City. Such improvements shall be of the type as are made necessary by the new growth and new development within the City and are intended to add capacity in order to keep the road system at the adopted level of service. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance, or for improvement of local streets, accessways, driveways or alleys as set forth in the Future Traffic Circulation Map. 
(c)  Funds collected from the park impact fee shall be used for the purpose of land acquisition, capital improvements to and expansion of the park services and facilities within the City. Such improvements are intended to accommodate new growth and new development so that the availability of park and recreation facilities can remain equal on a per unit or per capita basis to that required by the level of service set forth in Capital Improvements Element of the Titusville Comprehensive Plan. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance. 
(d)  Funds collected from the fire and police impact fees shall be used for the purpose of providing capital land, facilities and equipment for the Fire and Police Departments of the City. Such capital improvements are intended to accommodate the demand for new facilities and equipment generated by new growth and new development so that the level of service set forth in the Capital Improvements Element of the Titusville Comprehensive Plan can be maintained. No funds shall be used for salaries, periodic or routine maintenance or general operating expenditures. 
(e)  Funds collected from the public works funds shall be used for the purpose of providing capital land, facilities and equipment for the Public Works Department. Such capital improvements are intended to accommodate the demand for new equipment generated by new growth and new development so that the level of service set forth in the Capital Improvements Element of the Titusville Comprehensive Plan can be maintained. No funds shall be used for salaries, periodic or routine maintenance or general operating expenditures. 
(f)  Funds collected from the City Hall funds shall be used for the purpose of providing capital land, facilities and equipment for the City Hall expansion. Such capital improvements are intended to accommodate the demand for new facilities and equipment generated by new growth and new development. No funds shall be used for salaries, periodic or routine maintenance or general operating expenditures. 
(g)  In cases where jurisdiction overlaps, the City may enter into agreements with Brevard County, the State and the Federal government to ensure that funds expended shall be used as provided herein. 
Sec. 34-429. - Appeals, review, and refunds. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the Administrator pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the City Council. A written notice of intent to appeal and request for hearing before City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk with a copy to the Administrator within thirty (30) days of receipt by the appellant of the decision or determination being appealed. The City Council shall consider the appeal at public hearing at the next available regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be conveyed to the appellant in writing. 
(b)  Review and reevaluation. 
(1)  The impact fees collected and expended shall be reported annually to the City Council for review. 
(2)  The impact fee structures and methodology shall be reevaluated at least once every five (5) years to ensure that the intent and objectives of this section are being met. 
(3)  The schedule of impact fees shall be reviewed annually as part of the City's budget process to reflect changes in the cost of construction, levels of service and funding (credits). 
(c)  Refunds. Impact fees collected and not expended for the purposes for which collected within ten (10) years from date of payment shall be refunded to the current property owners of record. Expenditure of impact fee revenues shall be on a first-in first-out (FIFO) accounting basis. Expenditure, for the purpose of this provision, shall be deemed to occur at the time of appropriation. Any applicant eligible for said refund, shall apply for same to the Administrator within sixty (60) days of the tenth anniversary of the date of payment. If an application is not made within this time frame, all refund rights are forfeited. 
Secs. 34-430-34-440. - Reserved 
DIVISION 3. - WATER AND SEWER FEES 

Sec. 34-441. - Sewer capacity allocation permit (SCAP) fees. 
(a)  All connections to the sanitary sewerage system of the City shall be of a permanent character, shall conform with the plans and specifications as promulgated by the City Manager, and shall be under the direction of the City Manager or his designated representative. 
(b)  Every such owner or agent of improved property making connection with the City sanitary sewer system as required herein shall make such connection at his own expense after securing a permit from the City and paying the following service charge: 
(1)  For every development, the sewer tap-on fee shall be based on the following schedule based on number of ERCs × $2,070.00: 
Meter Size Inches ERC Sewer Tap-On Fees ?-3/4 1 $2,070.00 1 2.5 5,175.00 1.5 5 10,350.00 2 8 16,560.00 3 15 31,050.00 4 25 51,750.00 6 50 103,500.00 8 80 165,600.00  
(2)  The minimum sewer tap-on fee shall be two thousand seventy dollars ($2,070.00) and any meter size not covered by the above schedule shall be determined by the Water Resources Director based upon the number of ERCs × two thousand seventy dollars ($2,070.00). Any tap-on fee paid shall not be refundable. 
(3)  For multifamily tap-on fees, the fee shall be .85 ERC of the single-family rate for each unit of the multifamily complex. 
(c)  The aforementioned charges shall be imposed and collected in the case of new construction, at the option of the owner, at the time of the issuance of the building permit, at the time of the issuance of the plumbing permit, or at the time of final inspection and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as required in the Standard Building Code. In any event, the charges shall be paid prior to occupancy or utilization of the building or land in question. The Building Official, or his designated representative, shall have the authority to enforce the requirement for payment of the charges enumerated above prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or occupancy of the structure or building, and shall have the authority to disconnect or stop the connection of utility service to the property to be served, in the event the fee enumerated above has not been paid. In addition, the Building Official, or his designated representative, is authorized to enforce the provisions of this section by whatever legal or equitable remedies are available in a court of competent jurisdiction, including application for injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a structure in violation of the provisions stated above, and such violation shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
    With regard to existing structures, charges shall be paid at the time of application for the plumbing permit or as otherwise provided for. 
(d)  No sewer connection charge shall be required: 
(1)  With respect to property to which there has been a sewer connection charge or permit fee paid. 
(2)  With respect to structures connected to the system and permit fee paid. Existing structures connecting to the sanitary sewer system may elect at the time of application for permit to connect to the sanitary sewer system to pay the sanitary sewer fee in cash or in monthly installments (not to exceed twenty-four (24) months). In the event the property owner elects to pay the sanitary sewer fee in monthly installments, the monthly installments shall be included as part of the regular monthly utility bill. By electing to pay the sanitary sewer fee in monthly installments, the owner by such election authorizes the City to impose a lien and charge upon the property, which lien shall be a first and prior lien against the property, subject only to taxes due to the County of Brevard or the State of Florida, and of the same character as a lien of the City for municipal taxes. By electing the monthly installment plan, the owner agrees to pay any and all costs, charges and expenses for recording said lien, said amount to be added to the sewer fee. Upon failure of said property owner to pay the lien, it will be foreclosed in the same manner as tax liens in favor of the City are foreclosed, or foreclosed in the same manner as mortgages in the State of Florida. The suit for foreclosure may be brought at any time after the expiration of sixty (60) days after the owner is delinquent on monthly installments. In addition to the costs and expenses which constitute the lien, the City shall be entitled to collect its cost in prosecuting the foreclosure, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, abstract costs, publication costs, and other such costs as are assessable in foreclosure actions. 
(3)  As to property annexed to City and a structure is connected to an existing sewer system, either City-owned or subsequently acquired by the City, those structures are exempt. 
(c)  If the use of any property served by the City sewer system changes after the effective date of this section so as to change its classification for the purpose of computation of the ERC charge, then an additional charge resulting from the change in property use shall be due and payable at the time of the change in property use, regardless of whether any charge was ever imposed or paid at the time of initial connection to the system. The increased charge imposed by this subsection shall be included on and payable as part of the property owner's next utility service bill. 
Sec. 34-442. - Water charges; meter deposits; refunds. 
(a)  Each and every owner of property requesting water service shall pay the cost of extending the water line to his property or the proportionate share of the cost of extending said system with adjacent property owners benefited by said extension paying their proportionate share. If a major user is connected to an existing system, causing the need for enlargement of the existing line, the new user shall pay the cost of said enlargement. Council shall have the right to vary the aforementioned policy upon unusual circumstances. All extensions made shall be done in accordance with plans and specifications as promulgated by the City Manager or his designated representative. 
(b)  In addition to the aforementioned fee for the cost of meter installation, the City shall charge and each owner shall pay a charge as follows: 
(1)  For any development, the water (tap-on) fee shall be based on the following schedule based on number of ERCs × $1,500.00: 
Meter Size Inches ERC Sewer Tap-On Fees ?-3/4 1 $1,500.00 1 2.5 3,750.00 1.5 5 7,500.00 2 8 12,000.00 3 15 22,500.00 4 25 37,500.00 6 50 75,000.00 8 80 120,000.00  
(2)  The minimum water tap-on fee shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and any meter size not covered by the above schedule shall be determined by the Water Resources Director based upon the number of ERCs times one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(3)  For multifamily tap-on fees, the fee shall be .85 ERC of the single-family rate for each unit of the multifamily complex. 
(4)  All tap-on fees shall not be refundable. 
(c)  The aforementioned charges shall be imposed and collected in the case of new construction, at the option of the owner, at the time of the issuance of the building permit, at the time of the issuance of the plumbing permit, or at the time of final inspection and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as required in the Standard Building Code. In any event the charges shall be paid prior to occupancy or utilization of the building or land in question. The Building Official, or his designated representative, shall have the authority to enforce the requirement for payment of the charges enumerated above prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or occupancy of the structure or building, and shall have the authority to disconnect or stop the connection of utility service to the property to be served, in the event the fee enumerated above has not been paid. In addition, the Building Official, or his designated representative, is authorized to enforce the provisions of this section by whatever legal or equitable remedies are available in a court of competent jurisdiction, including application for injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a structure in violation of the provisions stated above, and such violation shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
    With regard to existing structures, charges shall be paid at the time of application for the plumbing permit. 
(d)  No water connection charge shall be required: 
(1)  With respect to property to which there has been paid a water connection charge or permit fee. 
(2)  With respect to structures connected to the system and permit fee paid. Existing structures connecting to the water system may elect at the time of application for permit to connect to the water system to pay the water tap fee in cash or in monthly installments (not to exceed twenty-four (24) months). In the event the property owner elects to pay the water tap fee in monthly installments, the monthly installments shall be included as a part of the regular monthly utility bill. By electing to pay the water tap-on fee in monthly installments, the owner by such election authorizes the City to impose a lien and charge upon the property, which lien shall be a first and prior lien against the property, subject only taxes due to the County of Brevard or the State of Florida, and of the same character as a lien of the City for municipal taxes. By electing the monthly installment plan, the owner agrees to pay any and all costs, charges and expenses for recording said lien, said amount to be added to the water tap-on fee. Upon failure of said property owner to pay the lien, it will be foreclosed in the same manner as tax liens in favor of the City are foreclosed, or foreclosed in the same manner as mortgages in the State of Florida. The suit for foreclosure may be brought at any time after the expiration of sixty (60) days after the owner is delinquent on any monthly installment. In addition to the costs and expenses which constitute the lien, the City shall be entitled to collect its costs in prosecuting the foreclosure, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, abstract costs, publication costs, and other such costs as are assessable in foreclosure actions. 
(3)  As to property annexed to City and a structure is connected to an existing water system, either City-owned or subsequently acquired by the City, those structures are exempt. 
(e)  If the use of any property served by the City water system changes after the effective date of this section so as to change its classification for the purpose of computation of the ERC charge, then an additional charge resulting from the change in property use shall be due and payable at the time of the change in property use, regardless of whether any charge was ever imposed or paid at the time of initial connection to the system. The increased charge imposed by this subsection shall be included on and payable as part of the property owner's next utility service bill. 
Secs. 34-443-34-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BENEFICIAL USE 

Sec. 34-451. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  If a landowner in the City has applied for and been denied a development permit and is of the opinion all beneficial use of the landowner's property has been denied by applying the LDRs and the landowner has exhausted all available administrative remedies, the procedures listed in this section shall be used by the landowner prior to seeking relief from the courts in order that any denial of beneficial use of property may be remedied through a non-judicial forum. 
(b)  The beneficial use determination is a process by which the City evaluates the allegation that no beneficial use remains and can provide relief from the regulations by granting additional development potential. 
Sec. 34-452. - Application. 
(a)  Application: All applications for beneficial use determinations shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee and shall include at a minimum, the following information. 
(1)  A description of the specific portions of the LDRs which allegedly eliminate all beneficial use of the property, together with all appraisals, studies, any other supporting evidence, and any actions taken by the City related to the property. Such supporting evidence may include documentation that the property has been listed for sale for at least six (6) months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives and originals or copies of all bids, offers to purchase, and other correspondence regarding the sale of such property. 
(2)  All factual information and knowledge reasonably available to the owner to address the deprivation standards set forth below. 
(3)  Documentation of the purchase date and price of the property. 
(4)  A description of the property's physical features, total acreage, and present use, as well as the use of the property on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(5)  A description of the use which the landowner believes represents the property's minimum beneficial use and all documentation, studies, and other evidence supporting that position. 
(b)  Review by Planning Department: Not later than forty-five (45) working days after receipt of a complete application, the Department shall review the application for compliance with the deprivation standards of this section, and sufficiency of the application. 
Sec. 34-453. - Deprivation criteria. 
(a)  In determining if a landowner has been deprived of beneficial use of property under this chapter, the local planning agency and the Council shall take into account the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulations in effect at the time of the filing of the beneficial use application substantially advances a legitimate government interest; and 
(2)  Whether the Comprehensive Plan or Land Development Regulations in effect at the time of the filing of the beneficial use application denies all reasonable economic use of the property. 
(3)  Relevant parcel. If an applicant owns more than one (1) platted lot, a question may exist as to whether more than one of applicant's platted lots should be considered as one (1) parcel for the beneficial use determination. In determining the relevant parcel, focus should be on "the parcel as a whole" and not on particular segments or portions for the parcel. Three (3) factors shall be considered to determine whether individual platted lots should be combined and considered as one (1) parcel for the purpose of the beneficial use determination: 
a.  The "physical continuity" of the lots or parcels; and 
b.  The "unity of ownership" of the lots or parcels (i.e. does the applicant own all of the lots or parcels in question); and 
c.  The "unity of use" between the lots or parcels, i.e. platted urban lots should generally be considered as separate uses, but can be combined for purposes of a beneficial use determination if the lots are part of a larger parcel. For platted lots, this determination should be based on an analysis of the following factors established by the Florida Supreme Court, which must be applied to the particular facts and circumstances on a case-by-case basis; 
1.  Was it the intent of the landowner to use the lot as a single use?; 
2.  What is the adaptability of the property to be used as a single or separate use versus a combined use?; 
3.  Whether the lots are dependent on each other for the ability to have a single use?; 
4.  Whether unity of the lots is the highest, best use of the parcel?; 
5.  What is the current zoning of each tract?; 
6.  What is the physical size and appearance of the land and what uses exist on surrounding land (for example what types of structures presently exist on the lot(s) and surrounding parcels)?; 
7.  What is the actual use of the land?; and 
8.  What is the possibility of the lots being combined in the reasonably near future? 
(4)  Once the relevant parcel is determined, the following factors must be analyzed: 
a.  The economic impact of the regulation on the applicant; and 
b.  The extent to which the regulation has interfered with the applicant's investment-backed expectations, including any relevant factors such as: 
1.  The history of the property (i.e. When was it purchased? How much land was purchased? Where was the land located? What was the nature of title? What was the composition of the land and how was it initially used?); 
2.  The history of the development of the property (i.e. What was built on the property and by whom? How was it subdivided and to whom and at what price was it sold? What plats were filed? What infrastructure is in place?); 
3.  The history of zoning and regulation (i.e. How and when was the land classified? How was the use proscribed? What changes in classifications occurred?); 
4.  How development changed when title was passed?; 
5.  What is the present nature and extent of the property?; 
6.  What were the reasonable expectations of the landowner under state common law?; 
7.  What were the reasonable expectations of the neighboring landowners under state common law?; 
8.  What was the diminution in the investment-backed expectations of the landowner, if any, after passage of the regulation?; and 
9.  What was the appraised fair market value immediately before and immediately after the effective date of the regulation? 
Sec. 34-454. - Granting of relief. 
(a)  Local planning agency review. A public hearing shall be held by the local planning agency on the application for a beneficial use determination. Within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing, the local planning agency shall forward its recommendations to the City Council. A copy of the recommendations shall also be mailed to the applicant. Said findings of recommendation shall be advisory in nature. 
(b)  City Council review. Within sixty (60) days of the date of the local planning agency has forwarded its findings of recommendations, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the application for a beneficial use determination. The public hearing shall be noticed pursuant to Chapter 166, Florida Statutes. Within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing on the application for the beneficial use determination, the City Council shall vote on the request and shall file its written findings and order of determination regarding the beneficial use determination with the City Clerk. A copy will be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the applicant. 
(c)  Forms of relief. In order to avoid an unconstitutional result and to provide a landowner with an economically viable use of property pursuant to this section, the local planning agency may recommend and the Council may allow for additional uses, density, or relief beyond that allowed by a literal application of the land development regulations or comprehensive plan on the particular property, including: 
(1)  Redesignation of the property on the future land use map; 
(2)  Permits for development despite the literal application of the land development regulations and comprehensive plan, although permits issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to applicable construction deadlines and expiration dates; 
(3)  Transfer of development rights (TDRs); 
(4)  Repeal or amendment of the Land Development Regulations or Comprehensive Plan policy affecting the property owner; 
(5)  Any other economically beneficial use of the property or relief Council determines appropriate and adequate under this section. 
(6)  Any combination of subsections (c)(1)-(5) of this section. 
(d)  Minimum Increase. In granting relief, the landowner may be given the minimum increase in use intensity or other possible concessions from this chapter to permit a beneficial use of the land. The highest use is not required or intended as the appropriate remedy, but shall be limited to the minimum economic use of the property necessary to avoid a taking within a reasonable period of time as established by applicable law. 
Sec. 34-455. - Final determination by council. 
    In approving, denying or modifying recommendation from the local planning agency, granting or denying an applicant beneficial use, the Council will ensure that evidentiary hearing was conducted in a manner that is consistent with this article and the comprehensive plan. The Council will approve or reject the recommendation from the local planning agency during a public hearing. The public shall be given the opportunity to be heard and make arguments for or against the determination during the Council's public hearing. 
Secs. 34-456-34-465. - Reserved. 
Chapter 37 - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 37-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly defined within the context of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply to the words and phrases in the Land Development Regulations: 
    A-weighted sound level: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network, designated dbA. 
    Abandoned well: A well which does not have a properly functioning valve; the use of which has been permanently discontinued; that does not meet current well construction standards; that is discharging water containing greater than five hundred (500) milligrams per liter of chlorides into a drinking water aquifer; that is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used for its intended purpose without having an adverse impact upon an aquifer which serves as a source of drinking water or which is likely to be such a source in the future; or that does not have proper flow control on or below the land surface. 
    Access: The principal means of ingress and egress to a parcel from a public right-of-way, private roadway/right-of-way, or common parking area. 
    Accessory building/accessory structure: A subordinate detached building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building on the same lot or parcel. 
    Accessory use: A use on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principle use of a structure. 
    Accessway: See Street. 
    Accident potential hazard area (airport clear zone): An area within five thousand (5,000) feet of a runway or in a defined proximity to an airport in which aircraft may maneuver after takeoff or before landing, which is subject to the greatest crash potential. 
    Accommodations: Any hotel, motel, tourist court rooming house, rental or time share unit intended to be used for transient persons or tourists. 
    Adjacent: That which lies near or close to and may be separated by adjoining streets, easements, pipelines, power lines, conduits, railroads or rights-of-way under ownership of the applicant or a governmental agency, subdivision, public or private utility. The adjacent parcel in question shall be located no more than one hundred (100) feet and be easily accessible. 
    Adjoining: That which is joined, united, or actually touching. 
    Administrator: The City Manager or their designee. 
    Adult congregate living facility (ACLF): An establishment, institution, building or buildings, residence, private home, boarding house, home for the elderly, or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which through its operation provides one (1) or more personal services for four (4) or more persons not related by blood or marriage to the owner or operator, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours. Personal services are in addition to housing and food service and include, but are not limited to: Personal assistance with bathing, dressing, housekeeping, supervision, eating, supervision of self-administered medication, and assistance in securing health care from appropriate sources. 
    Agency or Community Redevelopment Agency: A public agency created by Section 163.356 or Section 163.357, Florida Statutes. 
    Agricultural lands: A tract or parcel of land in agricultural use that has been or is eligible for an agricultural tax exemption. 
    Airpark: A tract of leveled land where aircraft can take off and land, usually equipped with hard surfaced landing strips, hangars, aircraft maintenance and refueling facilities, which are predominantly used for recreational purposes. 
    Airport: A tract of leveled land where aircraft can take off and land, usually equipped with hard-surfaced landing strips, a control tower, hangars, aircraft maintenance and refueling facilities, and accommodations for passengers and cargo. The Space Coast Regional Airport is the airport in the city limits. 
    Airport authority: The Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority. 
    Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from above mean sea level (MSL). 
    Airport height notification zone: The area surrounding each licensed public use airport extending outward twenty thousand (20,000) feet from the ends and each side of all runways depicted on an approved airport layout plan. 
    Airport obstruction: Any structure or object of natural growth or use of land which would exceed the federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR Part 77 or which obstruct the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in taking-off, maneuvering or landing at an airport or may otherwise interfere with the taking-off, maneuvering or landing of aircraft. 
    Airport noise impact zone: An area defined by the Florida Department of Transportation for airports not having an official Federal Aviation Regulation, Part 150 Study as being impacted by aircraft related noise. This zone is contiguous to a publicly licensed airport and measures one-half (1/2) the length of the longest runways depicted on an approved airport layout plan along either side of, and off the ends of each runway depicted on an approved airport layout plan centerline including future runways approved per Chapter 333, Florida Statutes, and pursuant to FAA regulations. For land use control purposes, this boundary is considered to be consistent with the sixty-five (65) to seventy (70) DNL zone determined by an official Part 150 Noise Study. 
    Airport runway protection zone: An area at ground level which begins at the end of a primary surface (as defined in 14 CFR part 77) and extends with the width of each approach surface (as defined in 14 CFR part 77) to terminate directly below each approach surface slope at the point, or points, where the slope reaches a height of fifty (50) feet above the elevation of the runway or fifty (50) feet above the terrain at the out extremity of the protection zone, whichever distance is shorter. This area is depicted on the airport layout plan drawings of the respective airports. 
    Alternate (Boards and Commissions): [Reserved.] 
    Animal kennel: An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are temporarily boarded for pay; provided, however, this definition shall not apply to animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law. 
    Animal shelter: A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
    Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the applicable approach zone height limitation slope set for in Section 59-972 of these Land Development Regulations. 
    Arcade: A place or facility where pinball or other similar electronic games are played for amusement only. Shall not be construed so as to include bingo games nor shall it be construed so as to include gambling devices or any other devices prohibited by law. 
    Arcade amusement centers: Adult arcade amusement centers are any place of business having at least fifty (50) coin-operated amusement games or machines on premises which are operated for the entertainment of the general public and tourists that are over eighteen (18) years of age as a bona fide amusement facility, and comply with Section 849.161, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. This definition shall include those arcade amusement centers which seek to restrict admission to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
    Art studio: A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by artisans engaged in any visual and performing arts, including, but not limited to, dance, music, photography, and painting. 
    Assisted living facility (ALF): An, institution, building or buildings, or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which through its operation provides one (1) or more personal services for four (4) or more persons not related by blood or marriage to the owner or operator, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours for primary purpose of elderly care. Personal services are in addition to housing and food service and include, but are not limited to: personal assistance with bathing, dressing, housekeeping, supervision, eating, supervision of self-administered medication, and assistance in securing health care from appropriate sources. ALFs shall be licensed by the Agency for Healthcare Administration and under Chapter 408, Part II, Florida Statutes, Chapter 429, Part I, Florida Statutes, Chapter 58A-5, Florida Administrative Code. 
    Automatic vending or transaction machine: Any unattended self-service device that upon insertion of coin(s), token(s), or by similar means dispenses any item or conducts a transaction. These self-service devices may be attached, contained within, or adjacent to another structure or detached (freestanding and not adjacent to another building or structure). 
    Automobile repair: Any building, structure, or improvements used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or similar vehicles including, but not limited to, body, fender, muffler, or upholstery work, oil change and lubrication, painting, tire service and sales, or installation of automobile electronics, but excludes dismantling or salvage. 
    Automobile sales: The use of any building or portion thereof for the display, sale, rental, or lease of motor vehicles and any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
    Bakery, retail: A place for preparing, cooking, baking, and selling of products on the premises. 
    Bar: A structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverage by the drink. 
    Base flood elevation: The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also known as the 100-year floodplain as set forth in the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), flood insurance rate maps, as most recently amended. 
    Bed and breakfast inns: A bed and breakfast inn is a structure originally built as a single-family residence, or a new structure, which is designed as and appears externally as a single-family residence, where short-term lodging rooms and meals (usually breakfast only) are provided to overnight guests. The use is an accessory use to the primary use as a single-family residence of the operator who shall live on the premises. 
    Billboard: See "Signs." 
    Blighted area: Either: 
(a)  An area in which there are a substantial number of slum, deteriorated, or deteriorating structures and conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes or one (1) of [or] more of the following factors which substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of a county or municipality and is a menace to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare in its present condition and use: 
(1)  Predominance of defective or inadequate street layout; 
(2)  Faulty lot layout in relation to size, delicacy, accessibility, or usefulness; 
(3)  Unsanitary, unsightly, or unsafe conditions; 
(4)  Deterioration of site or other improvements; 
(5)  Tax or special assessment delinquency exceeding the fair value of the land; 
(6)  Diversity of ownership or defective or unusual conditions of title which prevent the free alienability of land within the deteriorated or hazardous area; or 
(7)  Economic or functional obsolescence of structures. 
(b)  An area in which there exists faulty or inadequate street layout; inadequate parking facilities; or roadways, bridges, or public transportation facilities incapable of handling the volume of traffic flow into or through the area, either at present or following proposed construction. 
    Block: All of the property lying within and abutting upon and being completely enclosed by existing or proposed street or public rights-of-way, or upon easements, waterways, or natural physical barriers. 
    Board of adjustment: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Titusville. 
    Boardinghouse: A building other than a hotel, and/or motel where for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, lodging, or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more boarders. 
    Bookstore: A retail establishment that, as its primary business, engages in the sale, rental, or other charge-for-use of books, magazines, newspapers, greeting cards, postcards, videotapes, or computer software. 
    Brackish water: Water with "total dissolved solids" greater than one thousand (1,000) ppm. 
    Breezeway: An unobstructed corridor, excluding fences or signs under four (4) feet and landscaping, across the full depth of properties located in the Titusville Shoreline Area Overlay District, which shall include all land from the mean low-water line to the closest dedicated public right-of-way running parallel to the water. 
    Buffer: A visual break in the landscape of approximately thirty (30) inches in height. Said buffer may be attained through the use of earth berms, planters, hedges, fences, or any combination thereof. 
    Building: Any manmade structure required to be affixed to the ground and constructed or used for residence, business, industry or other public or private purposes or accessory thereto and including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, sheds, garages, carports, animal kennels, storerooms, billboards, signs, gasoline pumps, and similar structures whether stationary or movable. The above is not all inclusive, only representative of type of structure. 
    Building area: The area within and bounded by the building lines established by required setbacks. 
    Building height: The vertical distance from grade to the average height of the highest roof surface. In the case of sloped roofs, the average height which is the mid-height between the roof eave and roof ridge, regardless of the shape of the roof, would be used to determine building height. In the case of buildings with multiple roof levels, the highest of the various roof levels shall be used to determine the building height. 
    Building inspector: The Administrative Officer with the City who will inspect the acoustical design of building constructed within noise zones to ensure that they meet the requirements of this subchapter. 
    Building line: The line established by setback requirements outside of which no building may be erected. 
    Building Official: The person or persons duly authorized by the City Manager of the City of Titusville responsible for the administration and enforcement of building codes. 
    Building trades services: Building trades services include: construction, plumbing, electrical, heating and air-conditioning, landscaping, well drilling, and similar services. 
    Bulkhead: A permanent structure which serves as a retaining wall for land at the water's edge and prevents the deposition of fill materials beyond the bulkhead line. 
    Bulkhead line: A fixed line along the shoreline beyond which fill cannot occur; solid fill construction may be permitted shoreward. 
    Business service: A commercial activity, primarily conducted in an office, not involving the sale of goods or commodities and not dispensing a personal service and including, but not limited to, such businesses as real estate brokers, insurance agents, accountants, consultants, financial institutions, or a similar use. 
    Camper trailer: A movable living unit or similar portable structure having no foundation other than wheels, or jacks, designed to be moved from one (1) location to another by passenger automobile, may be collapsible and customarily used for recreational and camping pursuits, not in excess of fourteen (14) feet in length. 
    Campground: A place on which sites for recreational vehicles and tents are rented for use as temporary living quarters. 
    Capital improvement: Includes the acquisition and/or construction costs of a capital item and the costs of planning, engineering, inspecting, administration, legal fees and supervising the acquisition or construction. 
    Car wash: A structure or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing automobiles. This activity may consist of using production line method with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices and may employ some hand labor. This activity may also include automated or semi-automated methods for washing, cleaning, polishing, or waxing of automobiles whether or not employing a chain conveyor, blower, steam-cleaning or similar mechanical devices. 
(a)  Self-service car wash: A car wash where equipment and/or facilities are provided for the self-service cleaning and/or washing of automobiles solely by the customer. 
(b)  Full-service car wash: A car wash where equipment and/or facilities and employees are providing fully automated exterior and interior washing and cleaning service for automobiles. 
(c)  Automatic exterior drive thru car wash: A self-service car wash where only exterior cleaning and/or washing services are provided on a drive thru or roll over basis by the customer in which power driven or steam cleaning machinery is used to clean and/or wash automobiles. 
    Cargo trailers: A two (2) or four (4) wheel trailer designed to be towed by a motor vehicle for the purpose of hauling or moving cargo. 
    Caterer: Food or drink prepared in a licensed kitchen and served at another location. 
    Cemetery: Any one (1) (or a combination) of the following places designated for disposition of human or pet remains: 
(a)  Burial park for earth interment. 
(b)  A mausoleum: A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the entombment of remains of a deceased person(s). 
(c)  A columbarium: A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the inurnment of the cremated remains of a deceased person(s). 
    Central Business district: That portion of the City of Titusville that encompasses the Community Redevelopment Area created per Ordinance 66-1982 and further refined under Section 28-30(b) of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
    Certificate of occupancy: Document issued by the City to allow the use of a structure which has been fully inspected and approved by the City. 
    Child care facility: As defined by Section 402.302, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
    Church: A building or groups of building that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
    Circulation area: That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to parking or loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other maneuvering areas (other than parking spaces) comprise the circulation area. 
    City: The City of Titusville, Florida. 
    City Council: The governing body of the City. 
    City Attorney: The City Attorney of the City of Titusville, Florida as appointed by the City Council. 
    City Manager: The City Manager of the City of Titusville, Florida as appointed by the City Council. 
    City staff: The administrative officers and agencies responsible for administering the policies and legislation enacted by the City Council. 
    Clearing: The removal of trees and other vegetation from the land but shall not include mowing. 
    Cluster development: A design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for stormwater management, recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. 
    Collector street: See "Street." 
    College/university: See "School." 
    Commercial: Includes all business services, professional services, personal services, retail sales and services, automotive service stations, hotels and motels. 
    Commercial accessory structure and use: Any structure with a use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use, and located in a commercial zoning district listed in Chapter 28, Article III, Division 3 or the CBD district. Commercial accessory structures can be either detached structures or structures attached or adjacent to the principal structure(s). Examples of commercial accessory structures include ticket booths, automatic teller machines, water, ice (fifty (50) square feet or less) and other vending and transaction machines, and permanent storage containers. 
    Commercial advertising sign: See "Signs." 
    Commercial area: Any area zoned commercial, tourist, office, business or professional, including commercial areas in approved PD districts. 
    Common area: Those areas available for common use by all tenants, groups of tenants and their invitees. 
    Common open space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a site designated or planned as open space and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development and/or the general public. Such common open space may be in the form of active or passive recreational area, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, golf courses, nature trails and lakes. A common open space shall be improved to the extent necessary to complement the residential, commercial, industrial or other uses and may contain compatible structures for the benefit and enjoyment of the users. Parking areas, road rights-of-way, or minimum yards and spacing between dwelling units shall not be included in determining common open space. 
    Community garden: Any portion of a lot or parcel managed and maintained by a group of people to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops for personal or group use, consumption or donation. Community gardens do not include portions of lots or parcels utilized to grow food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops for the purpose of commercial wholesaling. 
    Community redevelopment area: An area which the City Council designates as appropriate for a community redevelopment project. 
    Community redevelopment plan: A plan, as it exists from time to time, for a community redevelopment plan. 
    Community redevelopment project: Undertakings and activities of the Community Redevelopment Agency in a community redevelopment area for the elimination and prevention of the development or spread of slums and blight and may include slum clearance and redevelopment in a community redevelopment area, rehabilitation or conservation in a community redevelopment area, or any combination or part thereof in accordance with the community redevelopment plan. 
    Community residential home: A dwelling unit licensed to serve clients of the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, which provides a living environment for seven (7) to fourteen (14) unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and special needs of the residents. 
    Community service: Uses of public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing ongoing education, training counseling to the general public on a regular basis, without a residential component. Facilities used for recreational, social, education, library, meetings and cultural activities, open to the public. Activities which include, but are not limited to, museums, gallery exhibitions or works of art, or library collections of books, manuscripts, etc., for preservation, study and reading. Community service activities do not include commercial galleries. Accessory uses include recreation facilities, meeting rooms, and offices and storage facilities used by staff. 
    Conditional use: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or the general welfare is permissible. Such uses may be permissible in such zoning districts as conditional uses as outlined in the applicable zoning district. 
    Condominium: A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    Cone of depression: An area of reduced water levels which results from the withdrawal of groundwater from a point of collective source such as a well, wellfield, dewatering site or quarry. The areal extent and depth of the cone of depression is a function of the hydraulic properties of the aquifer, the pumpage rates, and recharge rates. 
    Contaminant: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in the water. 
    Contamination: The presence of any harmful or deleterious substances in the water supply. 
    Convenience store: As defined by Section 500.03, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
    Corner lot: See "Lot." 
    Courtyard: An uncovered area partly or wholly enclosed by buildings or walls and used primarily for supplying access, light, and air to abutting buildings. 
    Craft brewery: A small brewery in which less than twenty-five (25) percent of the brewery is owned or controlled (or equivalent economic interest) by an alcoholic beverage industry member that is not itself a craft brewer. Craft brewers have a majority of its total beverage alcohol volume in beers whose flavor derives from traditional or innovative brewing ingredients and their fermentation. Craft breweries may operate a tasting room which allows for the sales of beer and wine as defined in Florida Statutes. 
    Craft distillery: A licensed distillery as defined by Section 565.03, Florida Statutes. 
    Critical habitat: Threatened or endangered species (stated function). 
    Cul-de-sac: See "Streets." 
    Cybercafé: See "Electronic gaming establishment." 
    Decibel (dB): See "Sound level." 
    Dedication: The deliberate gift or donation of land by its owner to the City for any public purpose and acceptance thereof by the City. 
    Density: The number of residential dwelling units permitted per gross acre of land. In the determination of the number of residential dwelling units to be permitted on a specific parcel of land, a fractional unit shall not entitle the developer to an additional unit or units. 
    Detention or to detain: The collection and temporary storage of stormwater in such a manner as to provide for treatment through physical, chemical or biological processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater. 
    Developer: Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation, who owns or has a proprietary interest in land which is subject to a development activity and who is actually involved in the construction and/or creation of a development project. 
    Development or development activity: Any land use activity which generates traffic or provides a need for public facilities and services. Also included as a "development" under this definition: 
(a)  The construction, installation, demolition or removal of a structure, impervious surface or drainage facility; 
(b)  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, killing or otherwise removing the vegetation from a site; and 
(c)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, mud, sand or rock of a site. 
    Development schedule: A comprehensive statement showing the type and extent of development to be completed within the various practicable time limits and the order in which development is to be undertaken. A development schedule shall contain an exact description of the specific buildings, facilities, common open space and other improvements to be developed at the end of each time period. 
    Dimensional nonconformity: A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size, or minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an existing building or buildings and other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located. 
    Discharge point: The approved point, location or structure where storm water runoff exits from a storm sewer to a receiving conveyance facility or body of water (receiving body). 
    Distribution center: A use where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to the ultimate customer at remote locations. 
    Drainage system: The system through which water flows, including water courses, water bodies and wetlands, including artificial drainage systems. 
    Dredging: A process of extracting soil from a river or lake bottom. 
    Drinking establishment: A drinking establishment is a business whose primary function is the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, which may include bars, taverns, and lounges. Some establishments may also serve food, or have entertainment, but their main purpose is to serve alcoholic beverages. 
    Drive-in establishments: Includes drive-in restaurants, or any retail sales or services facilities in which persons received goods, or services in the automobile for consumption or use outside the confines of the principal building, or in vehicles parked upon the premises 
    Drive-through: An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
    Driveway: A private vehicular access, stabilized to prevent soil erosion, which is used to provide access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, carport, dwelling or structure. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area. 
    Dry cleaner: An establishment that cleans or renovates fabrics, textiles, or other material on the premises with solvents other than water. 
    Dry-cleaning plants: A building, portion of a building, or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only, in volatile solvents including, solvents of the petroleum distillate type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental thereto. 
    Dwelling: A house, apartment, or building, used primarily for human habitation. 
    Easement: A grant of land reserved for public utilities, drainage, or other public facilities or services, the title to which shall remain in the name of the property owners, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of servitude. 
    Eaves: The extension or overhang of a roof, measured from the outer face of the supporting wall or column to the farthest point of the overhanging structure. 
    Economic Opportunity district: A type of conditional use intended to address the transitional need of a new or expanding business within the City. The Economic Opportunity district will permit the temporary use of large, vacant buildings while permanent facilities are being constructed or remodeled to meet the needs of an economic development project. 
    Educational facility: For purposes of the airport zoning ordinance, a building, equipment, structure, or special educational use area built, installed, or established to serve primarily for educational purposes and which is lawfully authorized by the Brevard County School District Board, a community college board of trustees, a university board of trustees or the Board of Trustees for the Florida School for the Deaf and the Blind as defined in Chapter 1013, Florida Statutes. No other use shall be deemed an educational facility for purposes of the airport zoning ordinance. 
    Electronic gaming establishment: A business operation, whether a principal use or accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines or devices, including, but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance and/or a game promotion pursuant to Section 849.094, Florida Statutes, including sweepstakes, and where cash, prizes, merchandise or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such redeemed or distributed items are determined by the electronic games played or by predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes cafés, cybercafés, sweepstakes cafes, or arcade amusement centers. 
    Emergency clinic: A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors. The term "clinic" includes immediate care facilities, where emergency treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility. 
    Emergency hazardous situation: Exists whenever there is an immediate and substantial danger to human health, safety or welfare or to the environment. 
    Emergency works: Activities required for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage or to mitigate an existing or imminent peril. 
    Enforcement Officer: The Administrator or his designee as further defined under Chapter 31, Article II of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
    Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall also include the painting of wall signs. 
    Erosion: Is the wearing or washing away of soil by the action of wind or water. 
    Existing: The average condition immediately before development or redevelopment commences. 
    Existing use: Any (i) existing residential or non-residential development, structure, or use; or (ii) any subsequent modification to an existing development, structure, or use that does not cause a permitted use under the comprehensive plan land use or zoning designation in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance to become a non-permitted use under the same comprehensive plan land use or zoning designation; or (iii) any subsequent development, construction, use of land that is a permitted use under the comprehensive plan land use or zoning designation in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance. (This definition applies to the airport zoning regulations.) 
    Expenditure: A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to fulfill some obligation. The term also includes binding contractual commitments to make future expenditures, as well as any other substantial changes in position. 
    Extended care facility: A long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged or a governmental medical institution. 
    Extremely hazardous substances: Those hazardous substances of equal to or greater than the Threshold Planning Quantity as defined in the List of Extremely Hazardous Substances, Title 40 CFR 353 (Section 302 and 304), as amended from time to time. 
    FAA: Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Façade: The entire area of a building facing or side extending from the roof or parapet to the ground and from one (1) corner of the building to another but does not include any structural or nonstructural elements which extend beyond the roof of a building. 
    Family: One (1) or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Family day care home: An occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for children and which receives a payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. A "family day care home" shall be allowed to provide care for one (1) of the following groups of children: 
(1)  A family day care home may care for a maximum of five (5) preschool children from more than one (1) unrelated family and a maximum of five (5) elementary school siblings of the preschool children in care after school hours. The maximum number of five (5) preschool children includes preschool children in the home and preschool children received for day care who are not related to the resident care giver. The total number of children in the home may not exceed ten (10). 
(2)  When the home is licensed and provisions are made for substitute care, a family day care home may care for a maximum of five (5) preschool children from more than one (1) unrelated family, a maximum of three (3) elementary school siblings of the preschool children in care after school hours, and a maximum of two (2) elementary school children unrelated to the preschool children in care after school hours. The maximum number of five (5) preschool children includes preschool children in the home and preschool children received for day care who are not related to the resident care giver. The total number of children in the home may not exceed ten (10). 
(3)  When the home is licensed and provisions are made for substitute care, a family day [care] home may care for a maximum number of seven (7) elementary school children from more than one (1) unrelated family in care after school hours. Preschool children shall not be in care in the home. The total number of elementary school children in the home may not exceed seven (7). 
    Farmers' market: Involves the sale of farm, horticultural, floricultural and grove products offered for sale by the farmers or growers of said produce, or offered for sale by dealers in said products. It is contemplated that each farmer, or dealer, will rent stalls in said market for the sale of the products within the confines of a central market area. 
    Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of materials or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
    Final development plan: The development plan approved by the City Council and recorded with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Brevard County according to the provisions of Chapter 28, Article III of these regulations. 
    Financial institution: A facility providing financial and banking services to consumers. Walk-in and/or drive-thru services are generally provided on-site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and automated teller machines (ATMs). 
    Fitness center: A place or building where active exercise and related activities are performed utilizing weight control or muscle building equipment or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness. Also, a place or building that provides massage, exercise, and/or related activities with or without such equipment. 
    Flag lot: See "Lot." 
    Flea market: Is defined as an open or enclosed market involving the sale of used or secondhand merchandise or other products sold by various tenants within the market. 
    Florist: Retail business whose principal activity is the selling of plants which are not grown on the site and conducting business within an enclosed building. 
    Frontage: Linear distance measured along abutting public rights-of-way. 
    Front yard: See Yard, front. 
    Funeral establishment: As defined in Section 497.005, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
    Grade: Grade shall be the average ground level of the portion of the lot adjoining and within ten (10) feet of the building. 
    Green: An open space available for unobstructed recreation, its landscaping consisting of grassy areas and trees. 
    Greenbelt: A linear park, alternative transportation route, or open space conservation area that provides passive recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and/or the conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
    Greenway: A linear park, alternative transportation route, or open space conservation area that provides passive recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and/or the conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
    Gross floor area (GFA): The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
    Ground cover: Low growing plants planted in such a manner as to form a low, continuous cover over the ground, such as English Ivy, low growing varieties of honeysuckle, confederate jasmine, etc. 
    Guest room: Any room, with a private bath, and a private entrance from the outside, hall, corridor, or lobby, which may be rented as a single rental unit. 
    Groundwater: Water that fills all the unblocked voids of materials below and water table, which is the upper limit of the zone of saturation. Groundwater below the zone of saturation is under greater than atmospheric pressure. 
    Handicapped person: Any person with permanent mobility problems who has been issued an exemption entitlement parking permit pursuant to Section 320.0844, Florida Statutes-vision, hearing, etc. 
    Hazardous substances: Including, but not limited to, a substance that has one (1) or more of the following characteristics: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity: 
    Heavy industrial use: Uses not enumerated elsewhere in the Land Development Regulations that use unique materials, processes, or equipment for specialized materials. These uses may be newly created processes that have not been incorporated into the Land Development Regulations. 
    Heavy manufacturing: The fabrication of products from raw materials; for example: pharmaceuticals, vehicle parts, and musical instruments. 
    Highways: See "Streets." 
    Home improvement center: Lumberyards, paint, glass and wallpaper retail stores. 
    Home occupations: A work activity carried on for profit or for nonprofit purposes, where all or part of the activity takes place within a structure where the principal use is for residential purposes. 
    Hotel/motel: A facility offering short-term lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. 
    Hydrograph: A graph illustrating the level of water in water courses or aquifers or the rate of flow of water during a period of time. 
    Ice vending building: An unmanned retail vending building, larger than fifty (50) square feet in size, that automatically dispenses ice to customers at any time. 
    Impervious surface: A surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes semipervious surfaces such as compacted clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar surfaces. 
    Industry: Any activity involving the manufacturing or treatment of any commodity including the assembly, packaging, canning, bottling or processing of any item. To change any commodity in composition, form, size, shape, texture, or appearance is deemed to be an industrial process. 
    Laboratory (medical): A laboratory where examinations are performed on materials or specimens taken from the human body to provide information or materials for use in the diagnosis, prevention or treatment of a disease or the assessment of a medical condition. 
    Laboratory (research and testing): A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigations, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
    Landscaping materials: Consist of any of the following or combination thereof: Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms; and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
    Landscape yard: Landscaped area measured from the property line to a depth as prescribed in the Code. The term includes landscape strip, landscape buffer, buffer yard, and landscape screen. 
    Laundromat: An establishment providing washing and drying machines for clothing on the premises for rental use to the general public. 
    Legal positive outfall: Stormwater discharge into a publicly accepted and maintained drainage system or directly to the Indian River Lagoon, St. Johns River, South Lake or Fox Lake. Wetlands and other water bodies that are connected to a publicly accepted and maintained drainage system or one (1) of the water bodies named above may be used as a positive outfall when it can be demonstrated that there will not be any unreasonable impact to downstream private property by such surface water or the diversion on water for storm events up to and including the 100-year storm. 
    Light manufacturing: Establishments engaged in the design, assembly, finishing, processing, and packaging of products without the processing of raw materials; for example: bottling plants, welding shops, and vehicle assembly establishments. 
    Liquid waste: Sludge, septic, or other liquid waste from wastewater treatment plants, septic tanks, grease traps or sediment traps. 
    Live-work unit: Buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
    Living area: That area of a dwelling unit, enclosed, which is protected from the elements and heated and/or cooled, including interior halls, closets, utility and storage areas, but excluding garages, carports, screened porches, unenclosed and unheated and/or cooled areas. 
    Living unit: A room or rooms comprising the essential elements of a single housekeeping unit. Facilities for the preparation, storage and keeping of food for consumption within the premises shall cause a unit to be construed as a living unit. 
    Loading and unloading area: That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to satisfy the requirements of Chapter 30, Article III, Division 9 and designed for the transfer of materials from vehicle to building. 
    Local street: See "Streets." 
    Lot: A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a legal unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. General lot typologies are illustrated by the graphic below. Includes the terms "plot" or "parcel," and is further defined as follows: 

(a)  Corner lot: A lot that has frontage on more than one (1) intersecting street, and where the lot frontages intersect. A street that curves with angles that are one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less, measured from the center line of the street, is considered two (2) intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner lot, as illustrated below. 

(b)  Double frontage lot: A lot of the same depth as the width of a block and which is accessible from both of the streets upon which it abuts. Also includes the term "reverse frontage lot." 
(c)  Interior lot: Any lot bound on both sides by other lots. 
(d)  Lot depth: The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rear most points of the side lot lines in the rear. For concave shaped lots located on a curve, lot depth shall be measured from the midpoint of a straight line drawn tangent to the curved right-of-way line and connecting the side lot lines to a midpoint of a straight line connecting the rear most points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(e)  Lot line: Any line defining the exact location and boundary of a lot. 
(f)  Lot width: The distance between straight lines connecting the front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the front building line. 
(g)  Reverse frontage lot: See "Double frontage lot." 
(h)  Single tier lot: A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a physical barrier such as a canal or waterway, or a nonresidential use and to which vehicular access from the rear is usually prohibited. 
(i)  Flag lot: Any lot, plot, tract or parcel of land having a relatively narrow, deeded, strip of land connecting the main body of said lot, plot, tract or parcel to a dedicated and accepted road. For such lots, the lot width, lot depth, and front, side and rear lot lines shall be established by the boundaries of the main body of such lot exclusive of the narrow connector strip of land. 
(j)  Visibility triangle: The sight area which shall include that portion of the public right-of-way and that portion of any lot within a triangle formed by a diagonal line extending through points on the property line(s) thirty-five (35) feet from the street corner. Visibility triangles are located at street corners and driveways. 
    Lot coverage: That portion of the area of a lot expressed as a percentage, occupied by all buildings or structures which are roofed or otherwise covered. 
    Lot split: Is the simple division of a single parcel of land into two (2) parcels meeting the requirements of Chapter 34, Article III, Divisions 2, 3, and 4. 
    Lumber and building supplies sales: Retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures, nursery stock, and lawn and garden supplies. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. 
    Lumber yard: Manufacturing, processing, and sales uses involving the milling of forest products to produce rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other manufacturing, craft, or construction processes. 
    Machine shop: Shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other wood- and metal-working machines are used such as blacksmith, tin-smith, welding, and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating, and electrical repair shops; and overhaul shops. 
    Major arterials: See "Streets." 
    Manufactured housing unit (MHU): Designed and built in accordance with the Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. A mobile structure manufactured upon a chassis or undercarriage which is an integral part of the structure and which is transported to the site on wheels; comes fully equipped with flush toilet, tub or shower and kitchen facilities; is ready for immediate occupancy upon its arrival to the site and its connection with utilities; and is designed for long-term use as a single-family residence. 
    Manufactured housing unit (MHU), park: Any plot or parcel of land, under single ownership, which has been improved for purposes of locating MHUs as dwellings. 
    Manufactured housing unit (MHU), site: A parcel of land within an MHU park designed and improved for the accommodation of not more than one (1) MHU as a single-family residence. 
    Manufacturing of boat parts and equipment: Building boats and equipment using closed mold (fiberglass) manufacturing, within an enclosed building with no long-term outdoor storage. 
    Marginal access streets: See "Streets." 
    Marijuana: All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Marijuana cultivation: The planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing, or storage of one (1) or more marijuana plants or any part thereof in any location, excluding those activities related to licensed and approved medical marijuana dispensing facilities as described herein. 
    Marina: A water-oriented commercial facility which provides facilities for berthing, supplying, and servicing all types of recreational and/or commercial watercraft. 
    Mechanical service and repair: Any building, premises and land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered. 
    Medical marijuana: All parts of any plant of the genus Canniabis , whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin, including low-THC cannabis, which are dispensed from a medical marijuana treatment center for medical use by a qualified patient. 
    Medical marijuana dispensing facility: A facility licensed by the State of Florida Department of Health to dispense medical marijuana and medical marijuana delivery devices, as defined by F.S. § 381.986. 
    Medical office/clinic: A facility operated by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis. 
    Mini-warehouse: An enclosed building or buildings having individual compartmentalized units, stalls or lockers, not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet which are to be rented for storage use. 
    Minor arterials: See "Streets." 
    Mixed-use: The development of a tract of land or building or structure with two (2) or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form. 
    Mobile vendor: A person, corporation, company or business that sells or offers for sale goods, wares, merchandise, beverages or foodstuffs of any kind or nature whatsoever from a vehicle capable of movement. 
    Monitor well: A well used primarily to monitor hydrologic parameters such as water levels or water quality. 
    Mulch: Nonliving, small, aggregate material such as wood chips or bark. 
    Multifamily: Any area zoned or used as residential for more than single-family development. 
    Multifamily dwellings: A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
    Native vegetation: Plants that are indigenous to the local ecosystem, including trees, shrubs, herbs and grasses. 
    Natural buffer yard: Landscaping that uses existing native vegetation to obstruct the view of an adjacent property. 
    Natural flow pattern: The rate, volume and direction of the surface, or ground water flow occurring under natural condition for any given site or area. 
    Neighborhood business: Those businesses providing a limited commercial facility of a convenience nature, intended to service residential neighborhoods within a one-half-mile radius, and located on at least a collector street as defined under "streets" and in the Future Traffic Circulation Map of the City of Titusville. 
    Neighborhood group home: A community residential home of six (6) or fewer residents as further defined in Chapter 419, Florida Statutes. 
    New development: 
(1)  Any construction which did not receive a building permit prior to the effective date of these [Land Development] Regulations; 
(2)  The alteration, repair, modification or change in use of an existing development which did not obtain a building permit prior to the effective date of these [Land Development] Regulations; 
(3)  Annexations of improved property, which improvements were permitted after the effective date of these [Land Development] Regulations. 
    Noise level reduction (NLR): Reduction in sound level decibels between two (1) designated locations or rooms for a stated frequency or band, also known as sound level reduction (SLR). 
    Noise zones: Noise zones are established as shown on the airport noise impact zone map at Section 29-52(c). 
    Nonconforming situation: A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of these regulations, an existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one (1) or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum size requirements, because structures exceed maximum height limitations, because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with these regulations, or because land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by these regulations. Also includes signs that are in nonconformity with these regulations. 
    Nonconforming lot: A lot that, at the time of its establishment, met the minimum lot size requirements for the zone in which it is located but which, because of subsequent changes to the minimum lot size applicable to that zone, is not smaller than that minimum lot size. 
    Nonconforming sign: A sign that was lawfully established but, because of changes to any ordinance regulating signs, no longer fully complies. 
    Nonconforming structure: A structure that complied with zoning and development regulations at the time it was built but which, because of subsequent changes to the zoning and/or development regulations, no longer fully complies with those regulations. 
    Nonconforming use: Any existing structure, object or object of natural growth or use of land that is inconsistent with the provisions of Sections 29-44, 29-45, or 29-46 of these regulations as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Nonpotable water supply: Any water supply not included in potable water supply. This includes aesthetic, agricultural, commercial, industrial and recreational use. 
    Nonresidential land use or activity: Any land use or activity regulated by this Code which occurs in any building, structure, or open area which is not used primarily as a private residence or dwelling. Any land use or activity which produces, stores, uses or handles more than one hundred ten (110) gallons or one thousand one hundred (1,100) pounds of a hazardous substance is presumed to be a nonresidential land use or activity. 
    Nursing homes: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advance age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
    Off-street parking area: Any area excepting public rights-of-way used for the purpose of parking, storing or display of vehicles, boats, trailers and mobile homes, including car lots, but not including parking structure or garages. 
    One hundred-year storm: That storm which has a one-in-one-hundred probability (or a one-percent chance) of occurring in any given year. 
    Open-air market: A business including the sales or display of retail merchandise or services outside of a permanent structure. 
    Open space area: Any unencumbered space, park, or public or private spaces otherwise committed to preservation or recreation (active or passive) but not including areas required for stormwater management (retention or detention) unless expressly permitted herein. 
    Other vehicular use areas: All land upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use(s). 
    Outbuilding: A separate building or accessory structure not physically connected to the principal building(s). 
    Outdoor storage: The exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of materials, products, merchandise, vehicles, trailers, and the like on commercial or industrial properties. Outdoor storage may be enclosed by a structure that includes a roof, but no side walls, in which case the structure shall be deemed outdoor storage; outdoor storage may involve fencing or screening without a roof in which case fencing or screening shall be deemed outdoor storage. Parking lots do not qualify for outdoor storage. Outdoor storage does not involve any product representation or signage except for those emergency or safety-related signs specifically approved by the City. Automatic vending or transaction machines accessory to allowable uses do not constitute outdoor storage. The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours does not constitute outdoor storage. 
    Outparcel: A tract of land of any size or dimension which is not included in a land development proposal or site plan and is specifically indicated as such on the proposal or plan. 
    Overlay district: A set of zoning district requirements that is described by a purpose and intent statement, is mapped and is imposed in addition to those of the underlying district. Development within the overlay district must conform to the requirements of the underlying and overlay zone or the more restricted of the two (2). 
    Owner: Any person, including, but not limited to, a lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager or agent, having the authority to sell or lease any building or parcel of land. 
    Pain management clinic: As defined by Section 458.3265, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
    Parcel: Any legally described piece of land designated by the owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or that has been developed as a unit. 
    Park (private): A tract of land presently owned or controlled and used by private or semi-public persons, entities, groups, etc. for active and/or passive recreation. These include commercial recreation premises consisting of woodlands, watercourses, and fields used for active recreational activities that do not require modifying the existing setting, including paintball, laser tag, and orienteering. 
    Park (public): A tract of land, designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation. 
    Parking area aisles: That portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces. 
    Parking structures: A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking garages, deck parking, and underground or underbuilding parking areas. 
    Parking space: A portion of the vehicle accommodation area set for the parking or storage of one (1) vehicle. 
    Patio home: A one-family dwelling on a separate lot with setbacks on three (3) sides. 
    Personal service: A commercial activity providing services involving the care of a person or his apparel. Such services may include, but are not be limited to: spas, salons, beauty or barber shops, tattoo parlors, or any similar use and which may involve the sale of associated retail products as an accessory use. 
    Persons: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    Pervious concrete pavement: A cast-in-place, Portland cement based concrete pavement surface designed to permit the percolation of a percentage of stormwater through its surface. 
    Pharmacy: A business substantially devoted only to the sale of pharmaceutical items, supplies, and equipment such as prescription drugs. 
    Planned Office park: A development which contains a number of separate office buildings, accessory and supporting uses, and open space all designed, planned, constructed and maintained on a coordinated basis. 
    Planned Unit Development (PUD): An area of land developed as a single entity, or in approved stages in conformity with a final development plan which is planned to provide for a variety of residential environments and compatible uses, and common open space. 
    Planting area: A designated landscape area on a site plan or subdivision plat. 
    Plat: A plan or map drawn to scale of a parcel of land, pursuant to Chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
    Playground: An outdoor area provided for recreational use primarily by children. 
    Plaza: An open space, which may be improved and landscaped; usually surrounded by streets or buildings. 
    Principal building: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residence district any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which same is situated. An attached carport, shed, garage or any other structure shall comprise a part of the building and be subject to all regulations applicable to the principal building. A detached and structurally independent carport, garage, or other accessory building, if attached in any way to the principal building shall cause the entire structures to be considered as part of the principal building and shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the principal building. 
    Private road or driveway: Any privately owned way or place used for vehicular travel by the owner of such way or place and those having express or implied permission from the owner of such way or place, but not by other persons, and not accepted by the City for repair or maintenance. 
    Private club: A building or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, fraternal, civic, religious or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    Professional offices: A commercial activity involving the conduct of business in any of the following related categories: architecture, engineering, law, medicine, excluding pain management clinics and cash-only pharmacies, music, art, interior design, dentistry, accounting, insurance, real estate, finance and securities investment and any similar profession. 
    Prohibited use: A use that is not specifically listed as a permitted or permissible use in any zoning district. 
    Protected trees: Any tree which does not fit the criteria for removal in Section 30-32. 
    Portable sign: See "Signs." 
    Potable water supply: Sources of water that meet county, state or federal drinking water standards and are limited for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes. 
    Public body: Any government or governmental agency of the City of Titusville, Florida, Brevard County, State of Florida, or of the United States government. 
    Public use: The use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body or board, council or authority, or the state or federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
    Public utility: A privately owned, municipally owned or county owned system providing water or wastewater service to the public which has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily. 
    Rear yard: See "Yard, rear." 
    Recovery/halfway house: A place where persons are aided in readjusting to society following a period of imprisonment, hospitalization, or institutionalized treatment. 
    Recreation and commercial amusement (indoor): A recreational land use conducted entirely within a building, including areas, art galleries, arts center, assembly hall, auditorium, bowling alley, club or lounge, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, movie theater, museum, performance theater, skating rink, swimming pool, and tennis courts. 
    Recreation and commercial amusement (outdoor): A recreational land use conducted outside of a building, characterized by potentially moderate impacts on traffic, the natural environment, and the surrounding neighborhood, including athletic fields, miniature golf, skateboard park, swimming, batch, wading and other therapeutic facilities, tennis handball, basketball courts, batting cages and trampoline facilities. 
    Recycling and mulching/composting facility: Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper, rags, tires, bottles, and other such materials. 
    Regulated substance: Those deleterious substances and contaminants, including degradation and interaction products which, because of quality, concentration, or physical, chemical (including ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity and toxicity), or infectious characteristics, radioactivity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, bioaccumulative effect, persistence (nondegradability) in nature, or any other characteristic, may cause significant harm to human health and environment (including surface and ground water, plants, and animals). 
    Regulated substances: Shall include, but are not limited to, those substances set forth in the lists, as amended from time to time, entitled, Lists of Hazardous Wastes (40 CFR Part 261, Subpart D), 40 CFR, Part 261, Appendix VIII Hazardous Constituents, and EPA Designation Reportable Quantities and Notification Requirements for Hazardous Substances Under CERCLA (40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986). 
    Repair and service for small equipment items: An establishment whose primary activity is the repair and service of household appliances, lawn maintenance equipment and other similar items. 
    Residential coach or motor home: See "Mobile home." 
    Residential/professional uses: Business services and professional services (excluding the general retail sales of goods and commodities. However, incidental retail sales directly related to the business or primary professional use shall be allowed. Examples of such accessory retail sales and their primary uses shall include, but not be limited to: hairdresser/beautician-hair care products; optometrists/opticians-eye care products; dentists/oral hygienists-dental care products, etc.). 
    Residential treatment centers for children and adolescents: These centers shall provide twenty-four-hour residential programs, including therapeutic group homes, under contract with the Department of Children and Families (DCF) or the Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA). These centers are designed to provide mental health treatment and services to children under the age of eighteen (18) who have been diagnosed as having mental, emotional, or behavioral disorders. These facilities shall meet the regulations in Chapter 394 Part IV, Florida Statutes, Chapter 65E-9, F.A.C. and Chapter 408, Part II, Florida Statutes. 
    Residential treatment facilities (RTF): A facility providing residential care and treatment to individuals exhibiting symptoms of mental illness who are in need of a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day-a-week structured living environment, respite care, or long term community placement, and are licensed by the Agency for Healthcare Administration and under Chapter 394, Part IV, Florida Statutes, Chapter 408, Part II, Florida Statutes, and Chapters 65E-4.016, Florida Administrative Code. Such facility is provided for developments of licensed fifteen (15) beds or more and do not meet the definition of a neighborhood group home or a community residential home as defined in Section 28-76(b) of the Land Development Regulations. 
    Residential use: For purposes of the airport zoning ordinance, single-family dwellings, condominiums, townhouses, multifamily dwellings, including mobile homes, but not including hotels, motels, timeshares, transient lodgings, or employer-owned dwellings or other facilities primarily used by the employer's employees or contractors. 
    Restaurant: An establishment where food and beverages are ordered, prepared and served for pay. 
    Retail sales and services: Those business activities that customarily provide retail convenience goods. Such uses may include: department stores, variety stores, including retail pharmacies, however, excluding cash-only pharmacies, restaurants, delicatessens, cafeteria, grocery and markets, gift shops, wearing apparel, home and auto supply, furniture and appliances, hardware, package stores, cocktail lounges, taverns, newsstands, book and stationery stores, shoe repair shops, luggage shops, bakeries and candy shops (provided that products made on the premises are sold on the premises), camera and photo supply shops, radio and television sales and services, floor coverings, sporting goods, florists, jewelers, music and piano sales and services, art shops, pawnshops, electrical and lighting, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, coin-operated or self-service laundry, farm and garden supplies excluding farm machinery and equipment, pet shops, and similar uses. 
    Retention, stormwater: Facilities that prevent the discharge of a given volume of stormwater runoff into surface waters or the act of preventing same, by complete on-site storage of the given volume, which may only be reduced by a decrease of stored water caused only by percolation through soil, evaporation or evapotranspiration. 
    Right-of-way: Land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway, drainage facility or other public use or service purpose and the title to which is in public ownership. 
    Roadway: That portion of a right-of-way improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a right-of-way includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Road tractor: Any motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either independently or as to any part to the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    School: Any building or group of buildings or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for educational or instruction of any branch of knowledge. 
(a)  School; college/university: An educational institution authorized by the State of Florida, to award baccalaureate or higher degrees. 
(b)  School; elementary: Any school licensed by the State of Florida and which meets the State of Florida requirements for elementary education. Elementary school shall be from kindergarten to sixth grade. 
(c)  School; high school and/or secondary: Any school licensed by the State of Florida, which is authorized to award diplomas for high school and/or secondary education. High School and/or Secondary school shall be from ninth to 12th grades. 
(d)  School; Jr. high and/or middle: Any school licensed by the State of Florida and which meets the State of Florida requirements for Jr. high and/or middle school education. Jr. high and/or middle school shall be from sixth to ninth grades. 
(e)  School; parochial: A private school supported and controlled by a church or religious organization. 
(f)  School; private: Any building or group of buildings the use of which meets State of Florida requirements for elementary, Jr. high and/or middle, high/secondary school or higher education and which does not secure the major part of its funding from any government agency. 
(g)  School; vocational, trade and business: A higher educational facility above secondary school, teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the State of Florida requirements as a vocational facility. Such schools shall also include adult educational schools, business schools or professional schools. 
    Screen: A visual barrier which is one hundred (100) percent opaque to a height of at least six (6) feet. Said screen may be attained through the use of earth berms, hedges, fences, walls or any combination thereof. 
    Screened porch: An enclosure, at least one (1) wall of which is a common wall to the principal building, the remaining wall surface area consisting of screen mesh with no more than a thirty-two-inch splash wall. All walls, except those common to the principal building, shall provide for the free flow of air between the outside and the interior of the enclosure. 
    Seasonal high groundwater table: The highest level to which groundwater is expected to rise during the wet season. This level usually occurs between August and September and is often identified in the subsurface by soil staining. 
    Self-propelled mobile home: A self-propelled vehicle containing living facilities and includes the term "house-car" or "motor home." 
    Setback: The open space existing on the same lot with a principal building unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky, between the lot line and building line. Specific yard definitions as contained in these [Land Development] Regulations are defined as follows: 
(a)  Front setback: The area measured from the front lot line extending across the entire width of the lot. The lot line of a lot abutting a public street shall be deemed the front lot line. The front setback of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street with the least frontage, unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. The front setback of a lot existing between two (2) streets not intersecting at a corner of the lot shall be that area abutting the street on which adjoining properties face, unless determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. 
(b)  Rear setback: The area measured from the rear lot line extending across the entire width of the lot. The rear lot line shall be the lot line farthest removed from the front lot line. 
(c)  Side setback: The area measured from the side lot line extending from the front setback to the rear lot line. 
(d)  Corner setback: The side yard area abutting a public or private street and extending from the front setback line to the rear lot line. 
    Setback line: The line established by setback requirements outside of which no building may be erected. 
    Shipping container: A standardized, reusable metal vessel that originally was designed for, or used in, packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods for commodities by commercial trucks, trains and/or ships. 
    Shrub: Any low, self-supporting woody plant as normally grown in Brevard County, Florida. 
    Side yard: See Yard, side. 
    Sign: See Chapter 32, Signs, Article, I, General sign regulations, Division 1, General provisions, Section 32-2, Definitions. 
    Single-family residential area: Any portion of the City divided into lots intended to contain a single dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one (1) family. 
    Single-family dwelling (detached): A detached building on a single lot containing one (1) dwelling unit, or a factory assembled structure constructed to state building code standards. 
    Site plan: The plan required to acquire a development, construction, building or stormwater permit or development order which shows the means by which the developer will conform with these regulations. 
    Site-related improvements: Capital improvements, landscaping, grading and roadway improvements to the development in question. Direct access improvements, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Site driveways and internal roads; 
(2)  Right and left turn lanes leading to those driveways or internal roads; 
(3)  Traffic-control measures and devices for those driveways and internal roads; 
(4)  Median cuts and landscaping; 
(5)  Drainage and stormwater management systems; and 
(6)  Other improvements in the public right-of-way necessitated by the development to facilitate direct access to the development and compliance with these regulations. 
    Skateboard ramps: An outdoor structure whether or not permanently affixed to the ground that has a semi-circular, or semi oval shape, or more than one (1) surface and that is intended or used to permit persons on skateboards or roller skates to move continuously from one (1) side to another. 
    Sketch plat: A rough sketch map of a proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification, meeting the requirements of Section 34-152, "Required submittals and exhibits". 
    Small-scale plat: The division of a single parcel of land into three (3) but less than ten (10) lots meeting the requirements of Section 34-143. Per Chapter 177, Florida Statutes, the division of land into three (3) or more lots requires the subdivider to follow the platting process. 
    Solid wastes: Garbage, rubbish, refuse, bulky items and other discarded materials, including materials resulting from residential habitation, industrial, commercial and/or agricultural operations, and from community activities. The term "waste" shall be synonymous with "solid waste," and shall include recyclable materials. 
    Sound level: The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a metering characteristic and weighting A, B or C, as specified in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specification for sound level meters, and measured in decibels (db) (ANSI 551.4-1979). If not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. (Also includes sound pressure level.) 
    Stage: A specified portion of the planned unit development that may be developed as an independent entity that is delineated in the preliminary master density plan and final master development plan and specified within the development schedule. 
    Stormwater management system: Refers to all public facilities, manmade structures, and all natural watercourses which collect, convey, store, constrain or divert the movement of stormwater to reduce flooding and water quality degradation. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
    Street: Any public or private right-of-way set aside for public travel thirty (30) feet or more in width. The word "street" shall also include the words "road, avenue, boulevard, lane, drive, circle, court, way, arterial and highway." For the purpose of this definition the word "street" shall also include "street system" a group of public rights-of-way functionally classified on the future traffic circulation map as follows: 
(a)  Accessway: An improved area intended to provide ingress and egress of vehicular traffic between a public street and required off-street parking areas serving more than one (1) residential unit. 
(b)  Alley: Any public or private right-of-way set aside for public travel less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
(c)  Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street, terminated by a turnaround, which provides access only to abutting properties. 
(d)  Highways: Those traffic routes officially designated as federal or state highway routes. 
(e)  Local streets: Those streets which function primarily to provide access and service to abutting properties. This includes access and service to residential, business, industrial and public uses. 
(f)  Major arterials: Those routes intended to carry relatively heavy volumes of traffic for major distances through the Titusville area. Also includes the term "principal arterial" and are generally state and federal numbered roadways. 
(g)  Major collectors: Those streets designed to carry medium volumes of traffic, provide access to major and minor arterials, and collect traffic from intersecting local streets. 
(h)  Marginal access streets: Those streets parallel to and adjacent to limited access highways and arterials which provide access to abutting properties. These streets are designed to protect the abutting properties from the danger of rapid arterial traffic and to protect the arterials and highways from the danger created by numerous points of conflict created by driveways and individual access to abutting properties. 
(i)  Minor arterials: Those routes intended to carry relatively heavy volumes of local traffic for intermediate distances. 
(j)  Minor collectors: Those streets designed to carry lower volumes of traffic and provide access to other streets as well as some access to abutting properties. 
(k)  Private streets: Those streets not located in a public right-of-way and not accepted by the city for repair or maintenance, as may be permitted by these regulations. 
    Street furniture: Any manmade, above-ground items that are usually found in street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, plants, canopies, shelters and phone booths. 
    Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and required to be affixed to the ground; but shall not include fences or signs. 
    Subdivider: Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation who owns land which is divided or developed into a subdivision as herein defined. The term "subdivider" shall include the term "developer," his duly authorized agent or representative, and shall include the word "person" as defined herein. 
    Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions of land. The term "subdivision" includes re-subdivision (minor adjustment or vacation of property lines which reallocates or consolidates land area of contiguous lots or parcels), and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, provided, however, that the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to these [Land Development] Regulations: 
(a)  The combination (consolidation into fewer number) or recombination (new configuration or consolidation) of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased, the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the City as required by these regulations and necessary adjustments in utilities and site improvements meet the approval of the Public Works Official. 
(b)  The public acquisition of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets. 
    Major subdivision: The division of land (parcels or tracts) into three (3) or more lots in conformity with the requirements of the zoning district applicable to the lots created. This shall also include the creation, opening or dedication of public streets, or any change in an existing public street. The following shall not be considered subdivisions: 
(a)  Lot split. 
(b)  The combination or recombination of lots or parcels, when the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(c)  The public acquisition of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets pursuant to official action of the City Council. 
    Submerged lands: Any naturally occurring or manmade water bodies, including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and canals, generally characterized as any area within a clearly defined literal [littoral] zone containing water on a year-round basis. 
    Take-out/non-seating restaurant: An establishment that offers take-out or delivery of food or beverages but does not permit customers to dine in. 
    Temporary (or portable) storage units: Transportable units designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, personal items and other materials for use on a limited basis on residential and commercial properties. This definition does not include storage sheds authorized by the Florida Building Code pursuant to Section 553.73, Florida Statutes. Truck bodies and semi-trailers are prohibited. 
    Temporary use: A use established for a fixed period of time, with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
    Tree: Any self-supporting, woody plant or palm having at least one (1) well-defined stem of a minimum dbh caliper of two (2) inches. 
    Townhomes: A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located above or below another unit. 
    Toxic substances: Hazardous wastes as defined in Chapter 17-730, F.A.C., hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Pub. L, No. 96-510, 94-510, 94 Stat. 2767; a pollutant as defined in Chapter 376, Florida Statutes; a substance which is or is suspected to be carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, or toxic to human beings, or to be acutely toxic as described in Rule 17-3.021(1) F.A.C.; or a substance which poses a serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
    Trailers: Any portable or movable structure or vehicle including trailers designated for living quarters, offices, storage or for moving or hauling freight, equipment, or merchandise of any kind. 
    Transient accommodation: A dwelling unit or other accommodation used as a dwelling unit or other place of human habitation with sleeping accommodation which is rented, leased or subleased for less than monthly periods or which is subject to time sharing pursuant to applicable law for less than monthly time share periods. Transient accommodations shall include hotels, motels and similar uses if used as dwelling units and/or residence for more than one (1) month. A transient accommodation shall be considered a residential use. An accommodation is not a transient accommodation if it is rented, leased or subleased for periods longer than one (1) month. 
    Transitional area: A setback area which acts as a buffer between two (2) land uses of different intensity. 
    Transit oriented development: Mixed-use villages and centers that promote pedestrian and transit travel being located within walking distance of a transit stop and core commercial area. 
    Travel trailers: A vehicular, portable structure having no foundation other than wheels, or jacks, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling unit for travel, recreational and vacation uses, which: 
(1)  Is identified on the unit or classified by the manufacturer as a travel trailer; and 
(2)  Is not more than eight (8) feet in body width; and 
(3)  Is of any weight provided its body length does not exceed thirty-two (32) feet; or 
(4)  Is of any length provided its gross weight, factory equipped for the road, does not exceed five thousand (5,000) pounds; and 
(5)  Also, see "camper trailer." 
    Travel trailer park: A place in which sites are rented for the placement of travel trailers, camper trailers, or other recreation vehicles (including tents) for use as temporary living quarters. 
    Tree caliper: A measurement used in purchasing or planting trees which is the diameter of a tree measured twelve (12) inches above the ground. 
    Truck stop plaza: A site oriented to the service of trucks, including the sale of fuel to truck drivers, and provision for support facilities for truck drivers. They may also be utilized by non-truck traffic and the interstate traveler. Business activities which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the truck stop or travel plaza, may include, but not be limited to: scales, truck wash, tire repair and sales, barber shop, restaurant with or without alcohol service, shower facility, convenience store, truckers lounge (for services such as television, exercise, internet access, et cetera), laundry, and vehicle fuel. The facility may allow for overnight parking (excluding for the loading and unloading of cargo) of commercial motor vehicles which are en-route to or from a destination along an interstate freeway system, for free or a fee that may be independent of any other use on the premises. The term "truck" shall mean a commercial vehicle driven by an operator who is required to have a Class "A" CDL (Commercial Driver's License) or equivalent. 
    Twenty-five-year storm: That storm which has a one-in-twenty-five probability or a four-percent chance of occurring in any year. 
    Unity of title: A document recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County, stipulating that a lot, lots, or parcel of land shall be held under single ownership, shall not be eligible for further subdivision, and shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold, or divided, in any unit other than in its entirety. 
    Urban plazas: An area used for passive recreational activities and relaxation. Plazas may be improved, landscaped, or paved areas typically provided with amenities, such as seating, drinking, ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by pedestrians. 
    Vacant: A building or parcel of land shall be deemed vacant when it is neither occupied nor used, or when it is in a nonoperative status. 
    Variance: A relaxation of the terms of these regulations where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardships. 
    Vehicle accommodation area: That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access, circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, and parking areas (spaces and aisles). 
    Vehicle-for-hire establishments: An establishment where vehicles-for-hire are stored and maintained. These establishments may include administrative and dispatch offices and areas for vehicle repair and maintenance. 
    Vehicle sales: The use of any building, land area or other premise for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles, as defined in Section 320.01, Florida Statutes. 
    Vehicle service and repair: Any building, structure, improvements, or land used for the repair and maintenance of vehicles including, but not limited to, body, fender, muffler, or upholstery work, oil change and lubrication, painting, tire service and sales, and installation of car alarms or stereo equipment. 
    Veterinarian: As defined by Section 474.202, Florida Statutes. 
    Videogame arcades: Any electric or electronic machine (e.g. pinball, videogames) which provides amusement, enjoyment, or entertainment and which may be operated upon the insertion of a coin or token. This shall not include arcade amusement centers or electronic gaming establishments. 
    Vine: Any group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by twining, by means of aerial rootlets or tendrils, or which may simply sprawl over the ground. 
    Vocational school: See "School." 
    Warehousing/wholesale: The display, storage, and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment, including truck terminal or bus servicing facilities, motor freight transportation, moving and storage facilities, warehousing, and storage activities. 
    Water detention structure/water management structure: A facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Water table aquifer: An aquifer with an unconfined upper surface, that is, a free surface where the fluid pressure equals atmospheric pressure or zero gage pressure; also known as a phreatic or unconfined aquifer, it is the uppermost aquifer and can receive direct recharge by infiltration from the ground surface. 
    Well: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is to conduct ground water from a source bed to the surface, by pumping or natural flow, when ground water from such excavation is used or to be used in a public utility potable water supply wellfield. 
    Wetlands: Land with either, fresh or salt water marshes, swamps, bogs, and wet woodlands, whether flooded at all times, flooded only seasonally, or having a water table within six (6) inches of the ground surface for at least three (3) months of the year. Also defined as areas which support a dominance of wetland vegetation type listed in the rules of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Chapter 17-4.02(17) and (19) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Wetland Maps. 
    Yard, front: A space extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. 
    Zoning map: Shall mean the official zoning map of the City of Titusville, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 30-2017, § 2, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 44-2017, § 6, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 5-2018, § 3, 2-13-18; Ord. No. 33-2018, § 4, 7-24-18; Ord. No. 50-2018, § 2, 11-13-18) 
Secs. 37-2-37-10. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1990 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
This table gives the location within the Land Development Regulations of those sections, updated through July 14, 1992, which are included herein. Sections of the 1990 Land Development Regulations, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1963 Code Section 
this LDR 5-8-5-10 39-232-39-234 29-75(a) 39-231 29-76, 29-77 39-231 29-78 39-235  
1990 LDR 1992 LDR 1.10 27-1 1.20 27-2 1.30 27-3 1.40 27-4 1.50 27-5 2.10 27-51 2.20 27-52 2.30 27-53 2.40 27-54 3.10 27-21 3.20 27-22 5.00 27-11 10.10 31-1 10.20 31-2 10.30 31-3 10.40 31-4 10.50 31-5 10.60 31-6 11.10 31-16 11.20 31-17 11.30 31-18 11.40 31-19 12.10 31-31 12.20 31-32 12.30 31-33 12.50 31-34 13.10 31-51 13.20 31-52 13.30 31-53 13.40 31-54 13.50 31-55 14.10 31-66 14.20 31-67 14.30 31-68 14.40 31-69 15.10 31-81 15.20 31-82 15.30 31-83 15.40 31-84 16.10 31-96 16.20 31-97 16.30 31-98 17.10 31-111 17.20 31-112 18.10 31-121 18.20 31-122 18.30 31-123 20.10 47-1 20.20 47-2 20.30 47-3 20.40 47-4 20.50 47-5 21.10 47-16 21.20 47-17 21.30 47-18 21.40 47-19 21.50 47-20 21.60 47-21 22.10 47-31 22.11 47-32 22.12 47-33 22.13 47-34 22.20 47-35 22.21 47-36 22.31, 22.32 47-46, 47-47 23.10 47-61 23.20 47-62 23.31-23.34 47-71-47-74 23.35 47-63 23.36 47-64 24.10 47-86 24.20 47-87 25.10 47-101 25.20 47-102 25.30 47-103 25.40 47-104 25.50 47-105 26.10 47-116 26.20 47-117 26.30 47-118 26.40 47-119 26.41 47-120 26.51, 26.52 47-131, 47-132 27.10 47-141 27.20 47-142 27.30 47-143 27.40 47-144 27.50 47-145 28.11-28.15 47-176-47-180 28.21, 28.22 47-191, 47-192 28.40 47-166 28.40 47-167 28.50 47-167 28.61-28.65 47-161-47-165 29.10 47-201 29.11 47-202 29.12 47-203 29.13 47-204 29.14 47-205 29.15 47-206 30.10 47-221 30.15 47-222 30.20 47-223 30.21 47-224 30.30 47-225 30.40 47-226 30.41 47-227 31.10, 31.11 47-241 31.12, 31.13 47-242, 47-243 31.20 47-244 31.22, 31.23 47-245, 47-246 31.30 47-247 31.40 47-248 32.10 47-261 31.11 47-262 32.21-32.28 47-271-47-278 32.30 47-263 33.11-33.19 47-291-47-299 33.21-33.29 47-311-47-319 33.30 47-331 33.60 47-332 40.10 35-1 40.21-40.23 35-21-35-23 40.30 35-2 40.40 35-3 40.50 35-4 40.60 35-5 40.70 35-6 40.80 35-7 40.90 35-8 41.10 35-31 41.20-41.27 35-32-35-39 42.00 35-51 42.10 35-52 42.11 35-53 42.20 35-54 42.30 35-55 42.41, 42.42 35-61, 35-62 43.10 35-71 43.11 35-72 43.12 35-73 44.10 35-81 44.11 35-82 44.12 35-83 44.18 35-84 44.19 35-85 44.20 35-86 44.30 35-87 44.40 35-88 44.60 35-89 44.70 35-90 44.80 35-91 45.10 35-101 45.11 35-102 45.12 35-103 45.20 35-104 45.30 35-105 45.40 35-106 45.50 35-107 45.60 35-108 45.70 35-109 46.01 35-121 46.02 35-122 46.03 35.123 46.10 35-124 46.20 35-125 46.30 35-126 46.40 35-127 46.50 35-128 46.60 35-129 51.10 39-31 51.20 39-32 51.21 39-33 51.22 39-34 51.23 39-35 51.24 39-35 51.25 39-37 51.26 39-38 51.27 39-39 51.30 39-40 51.40 39-41 51.41 39-42 51.42 39-43 51.43 39-44 51.50 39-45 51.60 39-46 51.70 39-47 51.75 39-48 51.80 39-49 52.10 39-61 52.11 39-62 52.20 39-63 52.30 39-64 52.40 39-65 52.41 39-66 52.50 39-67 52.60 39-68 52.70 39-69 52.80 39-70 52.90 39-81 53.01 39-91 53.11 39-92 53.20 39-93 53.21 39-94 53.30 39-95 53.40 39-96 53.51-53.55 39-111-39-115 53.60 39-131 53.61 39-132 53.62 39-133 53.63 39-134 53.64 39-135 54.01 39-151 54.02 39-152 54.03 39-153 54.04 39-154 54.10 39-155 54.20 39-156 54.30 39-171 54.31 39-172 54.32 39-173 54.33 39-174 54.34 39-175 54.40 39-191 54.50 39-192 54.60 39-193 54.70 39-194 54.71 39-195 57.10 39-211 57.20, 57.21 39-212 57.22 39-213 57.30 39-214 57.40 39-215 60.10 59-1 60.20 59-2 60.30 59-3 60.40 59-4 60.50 59-5 60.60 59-6 60.70 59-7 61.00 59-21 62.01 59-31 62.02 59-32 62.03 59-33 62.04 59-34 62.05 59-35 62.06 59-36 62.07 59-37 62.08 59-38 62.09 59-39 62.11-62.17 59-41-59-47 62.21-62.27 59-61-59-67 62.31-62.37 59-81-59-87 62.41-62.47 59-101-59-107 62.51-62.57 59-121-59-127 62.61-62.68 59-141-59-148 62.71-62.78 59-161-59-168 62.81-62.88 59-181-59-188 62.91-62.99 59-201-59-209 63.01 59-261 63.02 59-262 63.03 59-263 63.04 59-264 63.05 59-265 63.06 59-266 63.07 59-267 63.08 59-268 63.11-63.18 59-281-59-288 63.21-63.28 59-301-59-308 63.31-63.39 59-321-59-329 63.41-63.49 59-341-59-349 63.51-63.59 59-361-59-369 63.61-63.69 59-381-59-389 63.71-63.79 59-401-59-409 64.01 59-461 64.02 59-462 64.03 59-463 64.04 59-464 64.05 59-465 64.06 59-466 64.07 59-467 64.11-64.19 59-481-59-489 64.21-64.29 59-501-59-509 64.31-64.39 59-521-59-529 64.41-64.49 59-541-59-549 65.01 59-601 65.02 59-602 65.03 59-603 65.04 59-604 65.11-65.18 59-621-59-628 65.21-65.28 59-641-59-648 65.31-65.39 59-661-59-669 65.41-65.49 59-681-59-689 65.51-65.59 59-701-59-709 65.61-65.69 59-721-59-729 65.71-65.79 59-741-59-749 65.81-65.89 59-761-59-769 67.11-67.19 59-921-59-929 67.41-67.47 59-941-59-947 67.51-67.55 59-961-59-965 67.61-67.66 59-981-59-986 67.71-67.75 59-1001-59-1005 67.81-67.84 59-1021-59-1024 67.91-67.94 59-1041-59-1044 70.10 51-1 70.20 51-2 70.30 51-3 70.40 51-4 71.10 51-31 71.20 51-32 71.30 51-33 71.40 51-34 71.50 51-35 71.60 51-36 72.01 51-71 72.02 51-72 72.03 51-73 72.11, 72.12 51-91, 51-92 72.21, 72.22 51-101, 51-102 72.31-72.34 51-111-51-114 73.10 51-131 73.20 51-132 81.00 Ch. 63, Art. I 82.00 Ch. 63, Art. II 83.10 63-101 83.20 63-102 83.30 63-103 83.40 63-104 83.50 63-105 83.60 63-106 83.70 63-107 84.10 63-131 84.20 63-132 84.30 63-133 84.40 63-134 84.50 63-135 84.60 63-136 84.70 63-137 84.80 63-138 84.81 63-139 84.82 63-140 84.83 63-141 84.84 63-142 84.85 63-143 84.90 63-144  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1992 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
This table gives the location within the Land Development Regulations of those sections, updated through February 28, 2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 1992 Land Development Regulations, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1992 LDR 2017 LDR Chapter 27 27-1 27-1 27-2 27-2 27-3 27-3 27-4 27-4 27-5 27-5 27-6-27-10(Reserved) 27-6-27-10(Reserved) 27-21 27-11 27-22 27-12 - 27-13-27-20(Reserved) - 27-21 59-266 27-26 59-349 27-27 - 27-28 - 27-29 - 27-30 59-321 27-31 Chapter 28 59-1 28-1 59-2 28-2 58-3 28-3 59-5 28-4 59-6 28-5 - 28-6 59-8 28-7 59-10 28-8 59-12 28-9 59-13 28-10 59-14 28-11 59-602 28-12 59-37.5 28-13 59-265 28-14 59-266 28-15 47-251 28-16 59-268 28-17 - 28-18 28-19, 28-20(Reserved) 59-810, 59-811, 59-813(f) 28-21 - 28-22-28-25(Reserved) 59-1431 28-26 59-1432 28-27 59-1433 28-28 59-1434 28-29 59-1435 28-30 59-1436 28-31 59-1438 28-32 59-1439 28-33 59-1440 28-34 59-1441 28-35 59-1442 28-36 59-1443 28-37 - 28-38-28-40(Reserved) 59-1444 28-41 59-1445 28-42 59-1447 28-43 59-1449 28-44 - 28-45-28-50(Reserved) - 28-51 - 28-52 - 28-53 - 58-54 - 28-55-28-60(Reserved) 59-42, 59-44, 59-62, 59-64, 59-82, 59-84, 59-102, 59-104, 59-122, 59-124, 59-142, 59-144, 59-162, 59-164, 59-182, 59-184, 59-202, 59-204, 59-282, 59-284, 59-302, 59-304, 59-322, 59-324, 59-342, 59-344, 59-362, 59-364, 59-382, 59-384, 59-482, 59-484, 59-502, 59-504, 59-522, 59-524, 59-542, 59-544, 59-622, 59-624, 59-642, 59-644, 59-682, 59-684, 59-702, 59-704, 59-722, 59-724, 59-742, 59-744, 59-781(a), 59-792, 59-801, 59-802, 59-812(b), 59-813(b) 28-61-28-300 59-41, 59-45, 59-46 28-301 59-61, 59-65, 59-66 28-302 59-81, 59-85, 59-86 28-303 59-101, 59-105, 59-106 28-304 59-121, 59-125, 59-126 28-305 59-141, 59-145, 59-146 28-306 59-161, 59-165, 59-166 28-307 59-181, 59-185, 59-186 28-308 59-201, 59-205, 59-206 28-309 59-721, 59-726, 59-727 28-310 59-281, 59-286, 59-287 28-311 59-301, 59-306, 59-307 28-312 59-321, 59-326, 59-327 28-313 59-341, 59-346, 59-347 28-314 59-361, 59-366, 59-367 28-315 59-381, 59-386, 59-387 28-316 59-481, 59-486, 59-487 28-317 59-501, 59-506, 59-507 28-318 59-521, 59-527, 59-528 28-319 59-541, 59-546, 59-547 28-320 59-621, 59-626, 59-627 28-321 59-641, 59-646, 59-647 28-322 59-741, 59-746, 59-747 28-323 59-1460 28-324 59-681, 59-686 28-325 59-701, 59-706, 59-707 28-326 59-780, 59-785, 59-786 28-327 59-800, 59-804, 59-805 28-328 59-813(a), (g) 28-329 59-812(a), (g) 28-330 - 28-341 - 28-341 - 28-343-28-350(Reserved) - 28-351 59-32(h) 28-352 59-32 28-353 59-269(i) 58-354 59-269(i) 58-355 59-643(a) 58-356 59-32 28-357 - 28-358 - 28-359 - 28-360 59-1459.11 28-361 59-1459.11 28-362 - 28-363 - 28-364 20-58 28-365 59-38(b) 28-366 - 28-367 - 28-368 59-466 28-369 - 28-370 59-37(b) 28-371 59-32 28-372 59-11 28-373 - 38-374-38-390(Reserved) 59-31 28-391 59-269 28-392 - 28-393 59-686, 59-812(g), 59-813(g) 28-394 Chapter 29 - 29-1 - 29-2-29-20(Reserved) 59-941 29-21 59-942 29-22 59-943 29-23 59-944 29-24 59-945 29-25 59-946 29-26 59-947 29-27 59-948 29-28 63-102 29-29 59-949-59-960 29-30-29-40 59-961, 59-971 29-41 59-962 29-42 59-963 29-43 59-964, 59-972 29-44 59-965, 59-973 29-45 59-966, 59-974 29-46 59-967, 59-975 29-47 59-968, 59-976 29-48 59-969, 59-977 29-49 59-970, 59-978 29-50 59-979 29-51 63-103 29-52 - 29-53-29-70(Reserved) 59-981 29-71 59-982 29-72 59-983 29-73 59-984 29-74 59-985 29-75 59-986 29-76 - 29-77-29-90 59-1001 29-91 59-1002 29-92 59-1003 29-93 59-1004 29-94 59-1005 29-95 63-105 29-96 - 29-97-29-110(Reserved) 48-1 29-111 48-2 29-112 48-3 29-113 48-4 29-114 48-5 29-115 48-6 29-116 48-7 29-117 48-8 29-118 48-9 29-119 48-10 29-120 - 29-121-29-130(Reserved) Ord. 9-2014 29-131 - 29-132 - 29-133 59-344, 59-364, 59-484 29-134 - 29-135-29-140(Reserved) 59-266 29-141 59-484(h) 29-142 - 29-143 Chapter 30 - 30-1 - 30-2 - 30-3 - 30-4 59-797, 59-808 30-5 59-797(h) 30-6 - 30-7 - 30-8-30-20(Reserved) 47-3 30-21 - 30-22-30-30(Reserved) 35-1 30-31 35-2 30-32 35-3 30-33 35-4 30-34 35-5 30-35 35-6 30-36 35-7 30-37 35-8 30-38 35-21 30-39 35-22 39-40 - 30-41-30-50(Reserved) - 30-51 - 30-52 - 30-53 - 30-54-30-60(Reserved) - 30-61 - 30-62 - 30-63 - 30-64-30-70(Reserved) 59-945 30-71 35-121 30-72 35-122 30-73 35-127 30-74 35-128 30-75 35-129 30-76 - 30-77-30-80(Reserved) 35-71 30-81 35-72 30-82 35-73 30-83 - 30-84-30-90(Reserved) 35-81 30-91 35-82 30-92 35-83 30-93 35-84 30-94 35-85 30-95 35-86 30-96 35-87 30-97 35-88 30-98 35-89 30-99 35-90 30-100 35-91 30-101 35-92 30-102 35-93 30-103 35-94 30-104 35-95 30-105 35-96 30-106 35-97 30-107 35-98 30-108 - 30-109-30-120(Reserved) 35-101 30-121 - 30-122-30-130(Reserved) - 30-131 - 30-132 59-6 30-133 39-44 30-134 - 30-135 - 30-136 - 30-137 - 30-138 27-11 30-139 - 30-140 39-44 30-141 - 30-142-30-150(Reserved) 39-231 30-151 39-232 30-152 39-233 30-153 39-234 30-154 39-235 30-155 - 30-161 - 30-162 59-188(b), 59-209, 59-209(b), 59-209(c), 59-389, 59-529, 59-529(g), 59-549, 59-549(k), 59-529(i)(1), 59-529(i)(2), 59-797, 59-780(b)(4), 59-788, 59-808, 59-49 30-163 - 30-164 - 30-165-30-180(Reserved) 59-34, 59-8(a)(3), 59-34(a) 30-181 59-34(a), 59-34(b), 59-263, 59-464, 59-549(h) 30-182 59-263(f), 59-464(a) 30-183 - 30-184-30-190(Reserved) - 30-191 39-93 30-192 - 30-193 59-545 30-194 - 30-195-30-200(Reserved) 35-51 30-201 35-52 30-202 35-53 30-203 47-61 30-204 35-55 30-205 35-56 30-206 35-59 30-207 35-61 30-208 35-60 30-209 35-62 30-210 35-63 30-211 47-41 30-212 47-72 30-213 35-66 30-214 47-74 30-215 35-69 30-216 - 30-217-30-225(Reserved) 39-33 30-226 39-34 30-227 39-35 30-228 39-36 30-229 39-37 30-230 39-39 30-231 39-40 30-232 39-41 30-233 39-42 30-234 39-43 30-235 39-45 30-236 39-46 30-237 39-47 30-238 39-48 30-239 39-49 30-240 63-136 30-241 - 30-242-30-250(Reserved) 39-91 30-251 39-92 30-252 39-95 30-253 39-96 30-254 39-111 30-255 39-112 30-256 39-113 30-257 39-114 30-258 39-115 30-259 - 30-260-30-265(Reserved) 39-131 30-266 39-132 30-267 - 30-268-30-270(Reserved) - 30-271 39-61 30-272 39-62 30-273 39-63 30-274 39-64 30-275 39-65 30-276 39-66 30-277 39-67 30-278 39-68 30-279 39-69 30-280 39-70 30-281 39-71 30-282 - 30-283-30-290(Reserved) 59-1462-59-1467 30-291 - 30-292-30-300(Reserved) 59-1578 30-301 - 30-302 35-32, 35-39, 31-1(a), 35-31(c), 35-33 30-303 - 30-304 - 30-305 35-31 30-306 - 30-307 35-31 30-308 - 30-309 - 30-310-30-320(Reserved) 35-34 30-321 35-36(c) 30-322 35-36 30-323 35-36(b) 30-324 - 30-325-30-330(Reserved) - 30-331 - 30-332 - 30-333 35-31, 35-36(c) 30-334 35-36(c) 30-335 - 30-336 35-31 30-337 35-31(5) 30-338 - 30-339 35-38 30-340 - 30-341 - 30-342-30-350(Reserved) 35-36 30-351 - 30-352-30-360(Reserved) - 30-361 35-31 30-362 - 30-363-30-370 35-33(b) 30-371 35-35(a), 35-33, 35-35 30-372 35-33 30-373 35-35(d) 30-374 - 30-375-30-380(Reserved) - 30-381 35-57 30-382 - 30-383-30-390(Reserved) 59-1578, 59-1435.2 30-391 59-1579 30-392 59-1580 30-393 59-1581 30-394 59-1582 30-395 - 30-396-30-400(Reserved) 59-1469.13 30-401 - 30-402-30-410(Reserved) 39-211 30-411 39-212 30-412 39-215 30-413 39-216 30-414 - 30-415-30-420(Reserved) Chapter 31 31-1 31-1 31-2 31-2 31-3 31-3 31-4 31-4 31-5 31-5 31-6 31-6 31-7-31-15(Reserved) 31-7-31-15(Reserved) 31-16 31-16 31-17 31-17 31-18 31-18 31-19 31-19 31-20-31-30(Reserved) 31-20-31-30(Reserved) 31-31 31-31 31-32 31-32 31-33 31-33 31-34 31-34 31-35-31-50(Reserved) 31-35-31-50(Reserved) 31-51 31-51 31-52 31-52 31-53 31-53 31-54 31-54 31-55 31-55 31-56-31-65(Reserved) 31-56-31-65(Reserved) 31-66 31-66 31-67 31-67 31-68 31-68 31-69 31-69 31-70-31-80(Reserved) 31-70-31-80(Reserved) 31-81 31-81 31-82 31-82 31-83 31-83 31-84 31-84 31-85-31-90(Reserved) 31-85-31-90(Reserved) - 31-91 - 31-92 - 31-93 - 31-94-31-110(Reserved) 31-111 31-111 31-112 31-112 31-113-31-120(Reserved) 31-113-31-120(Reserved) 31-121 31-121 31-122 31-122 31-123 31-123 Chapter 32 39-151 32-1 39-152 32-2 39-153 32-3 39-154 32-4 39-155 32-5 39-156 32-6 39-157 32-7 39-171 32-8 39-172 32-9 39-173 32-10 39-174 32-11 39-175 32-12 39-176 32-13 - 32-14-32-20(Reserved) 39-191 32-21 39-192 32-22 39-193 32-23 39-194 32-24 39-195 32-25 39-196 32-26 39-197 32-27 39-198 32-28 39-199 32-29 - 32-30-32-40(Reserved) 11-1 32-41 11-655 32-42 11-681 32-43 59-8 32-44 59-549 32-45 59-269 32-46 - 32-47, 32-48(Reserved) 59-1469.1 32-49 59-1469.2 32-50 59-1469.3 32-51 59-1469.4 32-52 59-1469.4.1 32-53 59-1469.4.6 32-54 59-1469.4.8 32-55 59-1469.5 32-56 59-1469.6 32-57 59-1469.7 32-58 59-1469.8 32-59 59-1469.9 32-60 Chapter 33 59-790 33-1 59-791 33-2 59-792 33-3 59-793 33-4 59-795 33-5 59-796 33-6 - 33-7 59-798 33-8 59-799 33-9 - 33-10-33-20(Reserved) 59-541 33-21 59-542, 59-543, 59-544 33-22 59-549 33-23 59-549 33-24 54-549 33-25 - 33-26-33-30(Reserved) 59-389 33-31 59-389 33-32 59-389 33-33 59-389 33-34 59-389 33-35 - 33-36-33-40(Reserved) 59-780 33-41 59-781 33-42 59-785 33-43 59-786 33-44 59-788 33-45 - 33-46-33-50(Reserved) 59-800 33-51 59-801 33-52 59-805 33-53 59-804 33-54 59-807 33-55 59-808 33-56 59-809 33-57 - 33-58-33-60(Reserved) - 33-61 - 33-62 - 33-63 - 33-64 - 33-65 - 33-66 - 33-67-33-80(Reserved) - 33-81 59-48 33-82 59-49 33-83 59-50 33-84 - 33-85-33-100(Reserved) - 33-101 - 33-102 - 33-103 - 33-104 - 33-105 - 33-106 - 33-107 - 33-108 - 33-109, 33-110(Reserved) 47-333 33-111 47-334 33-112 47-335 33-113 47-336 33-114 47-337 33-115 47-338 33-116 - 33-117-33-130(Reserved) Chapter 34 - 34-1 - 34-2 47-16 34-3 47-17 34-4 47-18 34-5 47-19 34-6 47-21 34-7 47-1 34-8 47-2 34-9 47-3 34-10 47-4 34-11 47-4 34-12 - 34-13-34-20(Reserved) 47-261 34-21 47-263 34-22 47-279 34-23 47-272 34-25 - 34-26 - 34-27-34-35(Reserved) 47-102 34-36 47-103 34-37 - 34-38 47-102 34-39 47-102 34-40 47-102 34-41 47-105 34-42 - 34-43-34-50 - 34-51 - 34-52 - 34-53 59-794, 59-806 34-54 59-799 34-55 - 34-56 - 34-57 - 34-58 - 34-59 - 34-60 - 34-61 - 34-62 - 34-63-34-70(Reserved) - 34-71 47-117 34-72 47-119 34-73 47-131 34-74 47-132 34-75 47-119 34-76 47-119(f) 34-77 47-105, 47-120 34-78 - 34-79-34-85(Reserved) 47-86 34-86 51-1 34-87 51-2 34-88 51-3 34-89 51-4 34-90 51-71 34-91 47-87 34-92 51-74 34-93 51-132 34-94 - 34-95 - 34-96-34-110(Reserved) 51-31 34-111 51-33 34-112 51-32 34-113 51-34 34-114 - 35-115-34-125(Reserved) - 34-126 - 34-127 - 34-128 - 34-129 - 34-130 - 34-131 - 31-132-34-140(Reserved) 51-31 34-141 51-33 34-142 51-32 34-143 51-34 34-144 51-35 34-145 - 34-146-34-150(Reserved) 51-91 34-151 51-92 34-152 - 34-153-34-160(Reserved) 51-101 34-161 51-101 34-162 51-102 34-163 51-101 34-164 - 34-165-34-170(Reserved) - 34-171 51-111 34-172 51-112 34-173 - 34-174-34-180(Reserved) 51-113 34-181 51-114 34-182 51-114 34-183 51-114 34-184 - 34-185-34-195(Reserved) - 34-196 - 34-197-34-200(Reserved) 51-131 31-201 - 34-202-34-205(Reserved) 47-31 34-206 47-32 34-207 47-33 34-208 47-34 34-209 47-20 34-210 47-35 34-211 47-36 34-212 47-46 34-213 47-22 34-214 47-47 34-215 47-48 34-216 - 34-217-34-225(Reserved) 47-144 34-226 - 34-227 47-145 34-228 47-142 34-229 47-143 34-230 47-141 34-231 - 34-232-34-240(Reserved) 47-161 34-241 47-162 34-242 47-163 34-243 47-164 34-244 47-165 34-245 47-166 34-246 47-167 34-247 47-49 34-248 47-176 34-249 47-177 34-250 47-178 34-251 47-179 34-252 47-180 34-253 - 34-254-34-260(Reserved) 47-201 34-261 47-202 34-262 47-203 34-263 47-204 34-264 47-205 34-265 47-206 34-266 - 34-267-34-275(Reserved) 47-191 34-276 47-192 34-277 - 34-278-34-285(Reserved) - 34-286 - 34-287 - 34-288 - 34-289 - 34-290-34-295(Reserved) 59-1440.2.2.3 34-296 59-1439.4 34-297 59-1440.2.2.4 34-298 59-1439.3, 59-1440.2.2.5 34-299 - 34-300 - 34-301-34-305(Reserved) 59-13 34-306 - 34-307-34-310(Reserved) 59-14 34-311 - 34-312-34-315(Reserved) 47-221 34-316 47-222 34-317 47-223 34-318 47-224 34-319 47-225 34-320 47-226 34-321 47-227 34-322 - 34-323-34-340(Reserved) 47-241 34-341 47-242 34-342 47-243 34-343 47-244 34-344 47-245 34-345 47-246 34-346 47-247 34-347 47-248 34-348 47-249 34-349 47-250 34-350 47-251 34-351 - 34-353-34-360(Reserved) - 34-361 - 34-362 - 34-363 - 34-364-34-370(Reserved) 47-350 34-371 47-351 34-372 47-352 34-373 47-352 34-374 47-352 34-375 47-352 34-376 47-352 34-377 47-352 34-378 47-352 34-379 47-352 34-380 47-353 34-381 - 34-382-34-390(Reserved) 59-816 34-391 59-1439.5 34-392 59-820 34-393 59-823 34-394 59-817 34-395 47-299 34-396 59-819 34-397 59-818 34-398 59-821 34-399 59-822 34-400 - 34-401-34-410(Reserved) 47-291 34-411 - 34-412-34-420(Reserved) 47-311 34-421 47-312 34-422 47-313 34-423 47-314 34-424 47-315 34-425 47-316 34-426 47-317 34-427 47-318 34-428 47-319 34-429 - 34-430-34-440(Reserved) 47-331 34-441 47-332 34-442 - 34-443-34-450(Reserved) 47-375 34-451 47-376 34-452 47-378 34-453 47-379 34-454 47-380 34-455 - 34-456-34-465(Reserved) Chapter 37 27-11 37-1  
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Land Development Regulations of those ordinances adopted since the 1990 Land Development Regulations, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since the publication of the 1990 Land Development Regulations, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
  [] 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 49-1990  1-22-91 1 31-121 5-1991  1-22-91 4 Original Adopting Ordinance, § 4 10 Adopting Ordinance, § 10 14-1991  5-28-91 1 Original Adopting Ordinance, § 4 20-1991  6-11-91 1 35-101(c), (d) 2-9 35-102-35-109 10(A)-(T) 27-11 33-1991  9-10-91 1 47-332(c)(1), (2) *7-1992  4-16-92 1-10 Readopting Ordinance, p. ix 39-151-39-156, 39-171-39-175, 39-191-39-195, 47-102, 47-119, 51-1-51-4 51-31-51-36, 51-71-51-73, 51-91, 51-92, 51-101, 51-102, 51-111-51-114, 59-21, 59-31-51-39, 59-41-59-47, 59-61-59-67, 59-81-59-87, 59-101-59-107, 59-121-59-127, 59-141-59-148, 59-161-59-168, 59-181-59-188, 59-201-59-209, 59-261-59-268, 59-281-59-288, 59-301-59-308, 59-321-59-329, 59-341-59-349, 59-361-59-369, 59-381-59-389, 59-401-59-409, 59-461-59-467, 59-481-59-489, 59-501-59-509, 59-521-59-529, 59-541-59-549, 59-601-59-603, 59-605, 59-621-59-628, 59-641-59-648, 59-661-59-669, 59-681-59-689, 59-701-59-709, 59-721-59-729 13-1992  7-14-92 1 59-387(c)(1) 2 59-761-59-769 3 59-781-59-789 16-1992  8-25-92 1 29-132 3-1993  1-26-93 1 47-246 6-1993  2- 9-93 1 27-11 2 59-8 3 59-661, 59-666, 59-668 9-1993  2- 9-93 1       Rpld 59-1021-59-1025 2       Added 35-88(3)-(6) 3       Added 35-86(6) 4       Added 35-82(3) 5       Added 35-644(c) 6 59-981 7 59-985(e)3. 8 59-986(a) 9 59-482(a) 10       Added 59-484(f) 11 59-8(a) 12 27-11 26-1993  8-24-93 2       Rpld 31-96-31-98 3 59-669(a)(1), (b)(2), (c)(2) 4 59-669(h)3) 5 59-669(i)(2), (3) 6 59-669(j)(1) 27-1993  8-24-93 1 39-131 28-1993  8-24-93 1 35-107(l) 39-1993 10-26-93 1 35-61(d) 40-1993 10-26-93 1 39-32(a)(3)(e) 41-1993 10-26-93 1 39-42(e)(1) 42-1993 10-26-93 1 39-61(d)(3), (4), (11)       Added 39-61(d)(20)       Rnbd 39-61(d)(20)       as 39-61(d)(21) 4-1994  1-25-94 1 63-137 7-1994  2-22-94 1 47-295 13-1994  4-12-94 1 59-382 15-1994  4-26-94 1 31-121 14-1994  6-14-94 1 47-316(a) 20-1994  6-14-94 1 35-21 22-1994  7-26-94 1 31-121 2 31-122 24-1994  8-23-94 1 35-1, 35-2 2 35-21 30-1994  9-27-94 1 47-314 32-1994 10-25-94 1 59-8 2       Added 59-304(l) 3       Added 59-344(n) 4       Added 59-404(i) 36-1994 12-13-94 1 39-131 1-1995  1-10-95 1 59-301 2-1995  1-10-95 1, 2 47-311-47-317(note) 5-1995  2-28-95 1 47-272(c), 47-274(d) 7-1995  3-14-95 1       Rpld 39-154(a)(6)       Rnbd 39-154(a)(7)-(13)       as 39-154(a)(6)-(12) 2 39-157 9-1995  3-14-95 1 59-362(w) 13-1995  5- 9-95 1 39-171(a) 2 39-191(k) 21-1995  8- 8-95 1 59-502 2 59-222 25-1995  9-12-95 1 51-111 33-1995 10-24-95 1 51-111 2 59-928 1-1996  1- 9-96 1-4 47-311(note) 5-1996  2-27-96 1 35-83 2 35-88 7-1996  3-14-96 1 39-152 2 39-191(f) 3 39-174(f) 10-1996  5-14-96 1 59-327(c), (d) 2 59-347(c), (d) 3 59-387(c), (d) 23-1996  9-10-96 1 59-186(b) 2 59-32(e) 19-1997  7-22-97 1       Added 59-209(j) 20-1997  7-22-97 1       Added 59-210 24-1997  8-26-97 1       Added 59-10 26-1997  8-26-97 1 27-11 2 59-42 2a 59-44 3 59-62 3a 59-64 4 59-82 4a 59-84 5 59-102 5a 59-104 6 59-122 6a 59-124 7 59-142 7a 59-144 8 59-162 8a 59-164 8b-8d 59-166-59-168 9 59-182 9a 59-184 10 59-202 10a 9-204 28-1997  9- 9-97 1 35-54 29-1997  9- 3-97 9 47-295 38-1997 10-28-97 1 59-35(d)(2) 1-1998  1-13-98 1 47-291 2 47-293 3-7 47-295-47-299 2-1998  1-27-98 1 31-122 4-1998  1-27-98 1, 2 59-38 6-1998  1-27-98 1       Added 59-40 7-1998  1-27-98 2       Added 59-410 4, 5       Added 59-411, 59-412 7-9       Added 59-413-59-415 13-1998  3-24-98 1 31-52(a) 19-1998  6-23-98 1 59-144(i) 2 59-144(j) 3 59-164(f) 4 59-164(j) 5 59-282(b) 6 59-284(a) 21-1998  7-28-98 1 27-11 2       Added 59-302(k) 3       Added 59-342(r) 4 59-342(u) 5 59-482(q) 6 59-502(n) 7 59-522(l) 8       Added 59-664(q) 9       Added 59-1400 10       Added 59-1410 34-1998 10-13-98 1, 2       Rpld 39-132, 47-331(1) 35-1998 10-13-98 1       Rpld 39-133, 13-135 2 47-331(4), (6), (7) 47-332(c), (e), (f) 47-1998 12- 8-98 1 59-409 2-1999  4-13-99 1 59-34 2 59-263 3 59-464 4 59-603 3-1999  2- 9-99 1 47-249 8-1999  4-27-99 1 51-1(e) 9-1999  4-27-99 1 59-302 2 59-304 3 59-306 4 59-662(w) 5 59-664 6 59-666 7 59-702(l) 8 59-704(h) 9 59-706 10 27-11 11 39-61(d) 10-1999  4-27-99 1 Ch. 31, Art. IX (tit.) 31-121-31-123 11-1999  7-13-99 1-7 39-151-39-157 8-10 39-171-39-173 11       Dltd 39-174 11a 39-175 12, 13 39-191, 39-192 14 39-193(a) 15 39-194 16       Dltd 39-195 16a 39-195 17 39-196 18 59-549(f) 19 39-669(c) 12-1999  6-22-99 1 31-32 2 31-34 14-1999  8-24-99 1       Added 59-780-59-789 20-1999 10-12-99 1 27-11 2 59-44(f), (g) 3 59-64(d), (e) 4 59-84(a), (e) 5 59-104(a), (e) 6 59-124(a), (e) 7 59-144(a), (e) 8 59-164(a), (e) 9 59-282(i), (j) 10 59-322(j) 11 59-324(l)-(n) 12 59-325(j) 13 59-342 14 59-344 15 59-362(z), (aa) 16 59-364(l) 17 59-382(j), (k) 18 59-384(i) 19 59-385(b) 20 59-402(g) 21 59-624(a) 22 59-662(ee), (gg) 23 59-664(c) 24 59-682(s), (t) 25 59-684(a) 26 59-702(o), (p) 27 59-704(j) 28 59-742(b) 29 Ch. 59, Art. X, Div. 3 (tit.)       Added 59-1420 1-2000  1-11-00 1 39-194 11-2000  4-11-00 1       Added 39-61(22) 12-2000  5- 9-00 2 31-69 30-2000  9-12-00 1 59-504 2 59-484 3 59-524 32-2000 10-17-00 1 39-47 44-2000 11-14-00 1 47-117(d), (e) 2 47-145 51-2000  1- 9-01 1 59-34 2 59-263 3 59-464 4 59-603 2-2001  2-27-01 1 59-702 2 59-707 3 59-708 3-2001  2-27-01 1 59-106 4-2001  3-27-01 I 39-152 II 39-155 III 39-196 15-2001  6-12-01 1 59-466 21-2001  8-28-01 1 59-142 2 59-162 3 59-662 4 59-682 5 59-702 6       Added 59-40.5 22-2001  8-14-01 1       Added 59-37.5 23-2001  7-24-01 1 47-298 25-2001  8-14-01 1 59-382 43-2001  1- 8-02 1 59-34 2, 3 59-263, 59-264 44-2001 12-11-01 1 47-311(note) 2-2002  1-22-02 1 47-295 20-2002  5-28-02 1, 2 47-331, 47-332 27-2002  6-11-02 1 39-32, 39-33, 39-40-39-42 2 39-211-39-213 3 47-262(b)(3) 4 47-279 5 59-141, 59-161, 59-281, 59-301, 63-136, 63-138 30-2002  7- 9-02 1 59-665 2 59-669 41-2002  9-24-02 1 59-522 42-2002  9-24-02 1 59-542, 59-549 57-2002 12-10-02 1 47-102 2 47-131 3 47-272 4 47-274 17-2003  4-12-03 1 59-664 2 59-704 20-2003  5-27-03 1 47-311(note) 27-2003  8-12-03 1 27-11 2 59-961 3 59-971-59-980 33-2003  8-26-03 1 59-706, 59-707 45-2003  9-23-03 1 39-65 2 59-302 3 59-304 4 59-322 5 59-324 6 59-342 7 59-344 8 59-362 9 59-364 10 59-382 11 59-384 12 59-544 13 59-662 14 59-664 15 59-702 16 59-704 55-2003  9-23-03 1 47-298 66-2003 11-11-03 1 59-790-59-797 79-2003 12- 9-03 1 59-40.6 14-2004  2-24-04 1 47-311-47-319 2 47-311(note) 16-2004  3-23-04 1 47-105 17-2004  3-23-04 1 31-32, 31-34 20-2004  3-23-04 1, 2 47-101, 47-102 3 47-131 24-2004  5-11-04 1 59-48-59-50 36-2004  6- 8-04 1 59-501-59-509 43-2004  7-13-04 1 59-661-59-669       Rnbd 59-669       as 59-670       Added 59-669 59-2004  9-28-04 2 47-298 60-2004  9-28-04 6 47-331(4) 7 47-332(c) 63-2004  9-28-04 6 39-132 7 47-291-47-299 8 51-112 67-2004  9-28-04 1 27-11 2 59-34 68-2004  9-28-04 1 39-61-39-71 75-2004 11- 9-04 1 47-250 01-2005  1-11-05 1 59-926(d) 2 59-668 3 59-708 4 59-688 3-2005  2- 8-05 1-4       Added 59-948 15-2005  3-22-05 1       Added 59-794(e) 14-2005  4-26-05 1 59-542 21-2005  5-10-05 1 35-51-35-53       Rnbd 47-61, 47-62       as 35-54, 35-55       Rnbd 35-55       as 35-56       Rnbd 35-54       as 35-57 35-58       Rnbd 35-61, 35-62       as 35-59, 35-60 35-61, 35-62       Rnbd 47-64       as 35-63       Rnbd 47-71-47-74       as 35-64-35-67 35-68, 35-69 32-2005  5-24-05 1 27-11 II 59-504(b) 30-2005  6-14-05 1 59-704 2 59-707 33-2005  6-14-05 1 47-246 42-2005  8-23-05 47-311-47-319 66-2005  9-22-05 2 47-298 67-2005  9-27-05 1 39-212 68-2005  9-27-05 1 35-59 87-2005  1-10-06 1 59-661-59-670 5-2006  4-11-06 1       Added 59-816-59-825 2       Rpld 59-921-59-929 3 59-142 59-146-59-148 4 59-162 59-166-59-168 6-2006  2-28-06 1 35-31, 35-32 2 35-33 3 35-34 4 35-35 5 35-36 6 35-37 7 35-38 8 35-39 9 35-63 10 59-209 7-2006  2-28-06 1 47-119 8-2006  2-28-06 1 47-101 2 47-102(a) 3 47-102(b) 4 47-117 5 47-118 6 47-142 7 47-271 8 47-272 9 47-273(a) 10 47-274 11 47-275 12 63-134, 63-135 10-2006  3-14-06 1 39-34 11-2006  3-14-06 1 39-44 33-2006  6-27-06 1 47-1-47-5 2 47-16-47-22 3 47-31-47-35 47-46-47-49 4 47-86, 47-87 5 47-291-47-298       Dltd 47-299 6 51-71-51-74 51-91, 51-92 51-101, 51-102 51-111-51-114 7 39-32 8 27-11 37-2006  9-26-06 1 27-11 2 39-61 3 59-344 59-364 38-2006 10-10-06 1 27-11 2 39-61(d) 3       Added 59-269 4 59-364 5 59-663 6 59-482 46-2006  9-26-06 2 47-297 50-2006 10-24-06 2       Added 59-800-59-809 3       Rnbd 59-790-59-799       as 59-816-59-824       Rnbd 59-816-59-825       as 59-790-59-799 4       Added 63-108-63-110 51-2006 10-24-06 1 27-11 2       Rpld 59-40.6 3       Added 59-11 96-2006 11-14-06 1 63-132 98-2006 11-28-06 1       Added 39-216 5-2007  3-13-07 1 47-102 2 47-131 3 47-263 4 47-17 12-2007  3-27-07 1 59-704 2 59-707(a) 3 59-945 4 59-946 25-2007  6-26-07 1 27-11 2, 3 59-961-59-965       Added 59-966-59-970 4 59-971-59-978 5       Added 63-103 26-2007  7-24-07 1       Added 47-333-47-338 29-2007  6-26-07 1 47-46 30-2007  7-10-07 1       Added 47-350-47-353 31-2007  6-26-07 1       Added 47-375-47-380 32-2007  6-26-07 1       Added 39-197 2       Added 39-198 3       Added 39-199 34-2007  7-10-07 1 27-11 37-2007  7-24-07 1 47-293 2-4 47-296-47-298 5       Added 47-299 46-2007  9-25-07 1       Added 59-12 61-2007 10-23-07 1 59-662 59-2007  9-25-07 2 47-297 1-2008  1-22-08 1 59-781 9-2008  3-11-08 1 39-154(a)(6) 2 39-157 13-2008  4- 8-08 1 39-214 2 47-119 17-2008 11-11-08 1 27-11 2 59-164 3 59-284 25-2008  9-23-08 1 39-152 2 39-175 3       Added 39-176 34-2008  8-28-08 1 59-85 2 59-105 3 59-125 2-2009  2-10-09 2       Added 59-270 3-2009  2-10-09 1       Added 59-344(l) 23-2009  5-12-09 1 51-114(a) 26-2009  7-14-09 1 47-20, 47-22, 
47-35(a), 47-291, 
47-294, 47-295 33-2009  9- 8-09 1 47-293 49-2009 12- 8-09 1 59-681, 59-682, 
59-684-59-686 2       Rpld 59-689 31-2010 10-26-10 1       Added 59-1431-59-1470 4-2011  2- 8-11 3 27-11 4       Added 59-305(b), 59-325(k), 
59-345(b), 59-365(b), 
59-385(c), 59-665(n), 
59-685(b), 59-705(b), 
59-784(b), 59-803(c) 5 59-284 7-2011  4-26-11 1 31-81-31-84 13-2011  7-26-11 1 39-49 14-2011  7-26-11 1       Added 59-1469 19-2011  8-23-11 1 59-793(a) 29-2011 10-11-11 1 59-144(i) 35-2011 12-13-11 1 47-291 4-2012  1-24-12 1 59-32 16-2012  5- 8-12 1 27-11 2 39-61 3 59-344 4 59-364 20-2012  7-10-12 1       Added 47-251 22-2012  7-10-12 1       Added 59-1578-59-1582 23-2012  7-24-12 1 39-154 25-2012  8-16-12 1       Added 59-810-59-813 29-2012  8-28-12 1       Added 48-1-48-10 35-2012 11-27-12 1 59-382, 59-384 37-2012 11-27-12 1 47-297 44-2012 12-13-12 1 39-49 2-2013  2-14-13 1 59-971       Added 59-979 5-2013  2-14-13 2 39-47 6-2013  2-14-13 2 39-48 10-2013  3-12-13 1 35-59(e) 23-2013  7-23-13 1 59-481-59-489 33-2013 11-26-13 1, 2       Added 59-13, 59-14 34-2013 12-10-13 1 59-1439.3 2 59-1454 3 15-1459 4 15-1462 5 15-1463 1-2014  1-28-14 1 59-813(a) 8-2014  2-11-14 2       Rpld 35-81-35-91       Added 35-81-35-98 9-2014  2-25-14 1 27-11 2       Added 59-344(l) 3       Added 59-364(m) 4       Added 59-484(g) 16-2014  4- 8-14 1 39-157 21-2014  5-27-14 1 59-342(e)       Rpld 59-342(f) 22-2014  5-27-14 1 59-1469.4.1., 59-1469.6.(3) 23-2014  6-10-14 1 27-11 2       Added 59-482(t)-(v) 3 59-484(b), (f)       Added 59-484(h) 24-2014  6-10-14 1 59-32(e)(1), (2)(h)       Added 59-32(i) 32-2014  8-12-14 1 47-119 33-2014  7-22-14 1 39-176(a)(1)b.1., (2), (5)c. 2 39-196(b)(3), (7), (8), (11) 37-2014  9- 9-14 2 27-11 3       Added 59-35(c), 59-285(b), 59-305(c), 59-325(l), 59-345(c), 59-365(c), 59-385(d), 59-405(c), 59-485(b), 59-505(b), 59-525(b), 59-545(b), 59-622(b), 59-625(b), 59-665(n), 59-685(c), 59-705(c), 59-725(b), 59-745(b), 59-784(c), 59-803(d), 59-812(e), 59-813(e) 59-1457.3.4. 38-2014  8-27-14 1 59-1454 2       Dltd 59-1459.16(d)(3)       Rnbd 59-1459.16(d)(4)-(8)       as 59-1459.16(d)(3)-(7)       Rnbd 59-1459.16(f)(6)-(9)       as 59-1459.16(g)(1)-(3) 43-2014  9- 9-14 1 59-801(h) 50-2014 10-28-14 1 59-504 2 59-505(a) 51-2014 10-28-14 1 27-11 2       Dltd 59-44(b) 59-44(h) 3       Dltd 59-64(b) 59-64(h) 4       Dltd 59-84(d) 59-84(h) 5       Dltd 59-104(d) 59-104(h) 6       Dltd 59-124(d) 59-124(h) 7       Dltd 59-144(d), (h) 59-144(k) 8       Dltd 59-164(d) 59-164(j) 9       Dltd 59-184(c) 59-184(e) 10       Dltd 59-204(c) 59-204(f) 11       Added 59-282(k)       Dltd 59-284(b) 12       Added 59-302(l)       Dltd 59-304(a) 13       Added 59-322(k) 59-354(e) 14       Added 59-342(u) 59-344(d) 15       Added 59-362(bb), (cc)       Dltd 59-364(d) 16 59-382(i), 59-384(c)       Added 59-384(i) 17 59-482(h)       Added 59-484(i) 18       Added 59-502(p) 19       Added 59-522(n) 20       Added 59-622(f)       Dltd 59-622(h), 59-624(d) 21 59-664(f) 22 59-704(b) 61-2014 12- 9-14 1 47-297(a) 63-2014 12- 9-14 1 31-67(a), (b) 64-2014 12- 9-14 1 31-82(d)(2) 2 31-83(b) 3       Added 48-5(p) 4 48-7(i)(4) 2-2015  1-27-15 1       Added 59-730 6-2015  3-10-15 1 27-11 2 59-304 3 59-364 9-2015  3-24-15 1 59-817 2 59-819 10-2015  3-17-15 1 27-11 2 37-46 3 47-22 4 47-295 5 51-3 6-8 Ch. 51, Art. II, title, 51-31-51-33 9       Dltd 51-34 10       Rnbd 51-35, 51-36       as 51-34, 51-35 12-2015  4-14-15 1 27-11 2 59-362 18-2015  8-25-15 1 59-780 2 59-781 3       Rpld 59-782 4 59-783 5 59-784 6 59-785 7 59-786 8 59-788 21-2015  6- 9-15 1 59-702 25-2015  7-28-15 1 59-126 29-2015  9- 8-15 1 59-482 2 59-502 30-2015  9- 8-15 1 39-49 52-2015  2- 9-16 1       Added 59-362(ee) 1-2016  1-26-16 1 59-266¶, (b) 3-2016  3- 8-16 1 39-32(g) 2 59-49(10) 5-2016  4-12-16 1 47-119 10-2016  8- 9-16 1       Added 59-15 2       Added 59-45(e) 3       Added 59-62(e) 4       Added 59-82(e) 5       Added 59-102(e) 6       Added 59-122(e) 7       Added 59-142(g) 8       Added 59-162(g) 9       Added 59-182(f) 10       Added 59-202(f) 11       Added 59-342(f) 12 59-682 13       Added 59-722(b) 14       Added 59-812(b) 15 59-813(b) 13-2016  8-23-16       Added 59-801(q) 14-2016  8-23-16 1 59-1454 2, 3 59-1459.11.a., f. 16-2016  9-13-16 2 47-297(a) 23-2016  9-27-16 8 39-216(e)(3) 9 Ch. 47, Art. XIV, Div. 1 10       Dltd 47-291-47-299 11       Dltd 59-11(a)(8)       Rnbd 59-11(a)(9)-(11)       as 59-11(a)(8)-(10) 25-2016 10-25-16 1       Added 51-1(f) 2 Ch. 51, Art. II, title, 51-31-51-45 27-2016 10-25-16 3(Exh.)       Rpld Chs. 2, 27, 31, 35, 39, 43, 47, 48, 51, 55, 59, 63       Added Chs. 27-34, 37 2-2017  1-10-17 3       Dltd 59-462 3-2017  1-10-17 3       Dltd 39-71 10-2017  2-28-17 2 30-34 11-2017  2-28-17 3, 4 30-238, 30-239 15-2017  6-13-17 1 28-54 2 28-72 19-2017  8- 8-17 1 28-54 2 28-98 3 28-363(c)(1), (k) 30-2017 10-24-17 1 28-167(b) 2 37-1 31-2017 10-24-17 4-7       Added 27-13-27-16 8       Added 28-21(d)-(f) 9       Dltd 28-36 10 28-54 11 28-75 12       Added 28-101(c)(3) 13 28-112(c)(1), (d) 14 28-128(c) 15 28-151(c), (d) 16 28-167(c) 17 28-236(a) 18 28-271(c)(4)e., g. 19 28-342 20 28-353(a) 21 28-357(c)(2) 22 28-361 23       Dltd 28-362 24 28-363(b) 25 28-364(c) 26 30-335(a) 27 32-41 28       Dltd 32-46 29 33-45(b) 30 33-56(a) 31       Dltd 34-89 32 34-145 33 34-201 35-2017 10-10-17 1 32-2 2       Added 32-46 3       Rnbd 32-46       as 32-47 37-2017 11-14-17 1 28-54 2 28-73(a), (c) 3 28-91(a)       Dltd 28-91(c) 4 28-95(a)       Dltd 28-95(c) 5 28-96(a)       Dltd 28-96(c) 6 28-99(a), (c) 7 28-100(a), (c) 8 28-101(c)(1)b., f. 9       Added 28-101.1 10 28-109(a)       Dltd 28-109(c) 11 28-111(a)       Dltd 28-111(c) 12 28-112(c)(3) 13 28-115(a)       Dltd 28-115(c) 14 28-117(a), (c), (d) 15 28-123(c) 16 28-124(a), (c) 17 28-127(a)       Dltd 28-127(c) 18 28-133(a)       Dltd 28-133(c) 19 28-135(a)       Dltd 28-135(c) 20 28-136(a)       Dltd 28-136(c) 21 28-139(a)       Dltd 28-139(c) 22 28-160(a)       Dltd 28-160(c) 23 28-162(c) 24 28-164(a)       Dltd 28-164(c) 25 28-167(c)(4) 26 28-170(c)(1) 27 28-172(a)       Dltd 28-172(c) 28 28-174(a)       Dltd 28-174(c) 29 28-177(a), (c) 30 28-182(a)       Dltd 28-182(c) 31 28-243(a)       Dltd 28-243(c)       Rltd 28-243(d)       as 28-243(c) 32 28-325 33       Added 28-283 38-2017 11-14-17 2 30-182(c)-(e) 3 30-183 44-2017 12-12-17 1       Added 28-357(c)(3) 2       Added 28-365(c)(2) 3 28-373 4       Added 34-353 6 37-1 45-2017 12-12-17 1       Added 28-19 49-2017 12-12-17 1 30-207 5-2018  2-13-18 1 28-54 2       Added 28-144.7 3 37-1 6-2018  2-27-18 1 29-71 8-2018  2-27-18 2(28-19)       Added 28-20 9-2018  2-27-18 1 34-77(c) 12-2018  2-27-18 1 28-324(c) 17-2018  3-13-18 1 28-54 2 28-167(a), (c)(5)       Added 28-167(d) 18-2018  3-27-18 1 29-25 2 Ch. 30, Art. II, Div. 4, title 3 30-61 4 30-62 5 30-63 6       Added 30-64 7       Added 30-65 8       Added 30-66 9       Added 30-67 10       Added 30-68 11       Added 30-69 12 30-71(title), (a)(5) 23-2018  7-10-18 1 28-54 2 28-236(c)(1), (d)(1)a. 3 28-275 24-2018  7-10-18 1 28-54 2 28-238 25-2018  7-10-18 1 29-44 2 29-45 3 29-46(a) 4 29-47 5 29-48 6 29-49(b), (g) 7 29-52 31-2018  7-24-18 1 31-121 2 31-122(a) 32-2018  7-24-18 1 28-381(f) 33-2018  7-24-18 1 30-139 2 30-181(a)(3) 3 30-182(a)(3) 4 37-1 34-2018  7-24-18 2 28-309 35-2018 10- 9-18 1 32-1 2 32-2 3 32-4 4 32-5 5       Dltd 32-7 6 32-8(d) 7 32-21(f), (g) 8 32-26 37-2018  8-28-18 1 28-54 2 28-215(a)       Added 28-215(d) 38-2018  8-28-18 1 28-328 39-2018  8-28-18 1       Added 34-217 50-2018 11-13-18 1       Added 29-160-29-164 2 37-1 51-2018 11-13-18 1 28-342 2 28-353(a) 52-2018 11-13-18 1 30-21 2 30-83 53-2018 11-13-18 1 28-307 2 30-151 54-2018 12-11-18 1 30-331(b) 2 30-332(a) 3 30-333(a)(7) 4 30-337(c)       Added 30-337(f) 3-2019  2-26-19 1 28-54 2 28-149 4-2019  2-26-19 1 29-71 2 29-72 3 29-74(a), (b) 4 29-76 5-2019  2-26-19 1 27-21 12-2019  4- 9-19 1 28-342 2       Added 28-367.1 3 28-391(e)  
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note- See the Readopting Ordinance, p. ix for repealed sections. 

