CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TEMPLE TERRACE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2012 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TEMPLE TERRACE 
____________ 
Mel Jurado 
Mayor 
____________ 
James Chambers 
Frank M. Chillura 
Cheri Donohue 
Andrew R. Ross 
Gil Schisler 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles Stephenson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Pamela Cichon 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cheryl A. Mooney 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TEMPLE TERRACE 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Frank M. Chillura 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert M. Boss 
Alison Fernandez 
David Pogorilich 
Grant Rimbey 
Edward M. Vance 
City Council 
____________ 
Kim D. Leinbach 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mark Connolly 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Melissa (Lisa) E. Small 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2001 Code, as updated through August 15, 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2001 Code, as updated, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Lisa Small, City Clerk; Mr. Mark Connolly, City Attorney; and the entire city staff for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 2012. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1336 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF TEMPLE TERRACE, FLORIDA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    WHEREAS, in recent years, attempts to address various issues within the City Code of Ordinances were very difficult and largely unsuccessful, primarily due to the cost and time associated with reviewing and codifying the current Code; therefore problems were addressed on an "as needed basis" and then not dealt with comprehensively throughout the entire Code; and 
    WHEREAS, in an effort to address Code inconsistencies and issues, the Administration and the City Clerk discussed a systematic two-step approach to organize and update sections of the City Code of Ordinances; and 
    WHEREAS, the first step of the process would commence with the hiring of an independent expert in the field of editing and publishing codes for municipalities; and 
    WHEREAS, the initial task would be to research, review and edit the current Code for consistency with State law, identify and eliminate redundancies, inconsistencies and ambiguities within the Code; this would also include review of Zoning and Land Use provisions of the Code; additionally, tasks would consist of editing, proofreading, and analyzing the structure of the Code; and 
    WHEREAS, the second step of the process would involve administration meeting with City Council, City Departments, and Code users to identify sections of the Code that need updating and/or modernization, prioritize the identified sections, and update as required; and 
    WHEREAS, Municipal Code Corporation, a Florida-based company located in Tallahassee, which is currently under a continuing contract to work with the City in managing its LaserFiche public records archival and management program, was contracted to accomplish the initial step and has performed substantial work with the assistance of the City Clerk, the City Attorney and City staff to accomplish same; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council finds it in the best interest of the citizens of Temple Terrace to adopt a new Code of Ordinances entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Temple Terrace, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 22, each inclusive and including Ordinances adopted on or before October 16, 2012. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TEMPLE TERRACE, FLORIDA: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Temple Terrace, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 22, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 16, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. In addition to the penalty prescribed in this section, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. Unless expressly provided: 
(1)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to other violations of the Code, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 16, 2012, which amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. If any part of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such part or parts shall be severable and the remaining parts hereof shall continue to be in full force and effect. 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and being posted or published as required by law. 
    PASSED AND ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TEMPLE TERRACE, FLORIDA, THIS 19 DAY OF MARCH, 2013. 
    APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS 19 DAY OF MARCH, 2013. 
(CORPORATE SEAL) 
      FRANK M. CHILLURA, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
      MELISSA E. SMALL, MMC 
      CITY CLERK   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Date Included/Omitted Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 1336  3-19-2013 Included 1 1340  4-16-2013 Included 1 1341  5-21-2013 Included 1 1346  7- 2-2013 Included 1 1347  7- 2-2013 Included 1 1352 11-19-2013 Included 1 1353 12- 3-2013 Included 1 1354 12- 3-2013 Included 1 1355  1- 7-2014 Included 1 1356  4-15-2014 Included 1 Supp. No. 2 1359  7-15-2014 Included 2 Supp. No. 3 1362  9-16-2014 Included 3 1364 11-18-2014 Included 3 Supp. No. 4 1365  4-21-2015 Included 4 1368  6- 2-2015 Included 4 1369  6-16-2015 Included 4 Supp. No. 5 1374  9-15-2015 Included 5 1375  9-15-2015 Included 5 1381 12- 1-2015 Included 5 1383 12-15-2015 Included 5 Supp. No. 6 1399  7-19-2016 Included 6 1401  8-16-2016 Included 6 Supp. No. 7 1417  4- 4-2017 Included 7 1418  4- 4-2017 Included 7 Supp. No. 8 1419  5-16-2017 Included 8 1420  7-18-2017 Included 8 1421  7-18-2017 Included 8 1422  7-18-2017 Included 8 1423  7-18-2017 Included 8 1424  7-18-2017 Included 8 1426  8-15-2017 Included 8 Supp. No. 9 1451  5- 1-2018 Included 9 1454  6- 5-2018 Included 9 1455  6-19-2018 Included 9 1460  8- 7-2018 Included 9 Supp. No. 10 1477  3-19-2019 Included 10  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the city Charter, which Charter was proposed by Ord. No. 363, adopted May 5, 1978, and ratified and approved by the electors at the election of June 6, 1978. Subsequent amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Any additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 1.01. - Purpose. 
    We, the people of the City of Temple Terrace, desiring to avail ourselves of the right to establish a home rule charter form of government, do ordain and establish, in accordance with the Constitution and Laws of Florida, a Council-City manager structure of government for the City of Temple Terrace. 
Sec. 1.02. - Body corporate. 
    The residents of the City of Temple Terrace, as its limits now or as the same may be established hereafter, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Temple Terrace, and, as such, shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers. 
    The City shall have all governmental, corporate and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal services; and it may exercise any power for municipal purposes, except when expressly prohibited by law. All extraterritorial powers and jurisdiction, powers of taxation, and powers to impose and enforce liens, which the City now has, are preserved and shall remain in full force and effect. The powers of the City shall be liberally construed in favor of the City. 
Sec. 1.04. - Separation of powers. 
    There shall be a distinct separation of legislative and administrative powers. Except as otherwise herein expressly provided, all legislative powers shall be vested in and exercised by the City Council and all administrative powers shall be vested in and exercised by the City Manager. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE 

Sec. 2.01. - Qualifications. 
    The City Council shall be composed of five members elected from the City at large. For two (2) years immediately prior to the date of the election, members of Council shall have been residents of, and domiciled in, the City or the areas annexed to the City, or a combination thereof, and shall remain residents of the City during their tenure of office. The compensation of members of Council shall be fixed by ordinance. 
    The Council Members shall adopt such by-laws, regulations and rules of procedure, for their own guidance and government, as they may deem expedient. 
(Ord. No. 702, ratified 11-7-1989) 
Sec. 2.02. - Elections. 
    The regular election of the City Council shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every even-numbered year. The candidates for City Council receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected to fill the existing vacancies for four-year terms. 
    Council Members shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms and shall not seek reelection for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 576, ratified 6-3-1986; Ord. No. 700, ratified 11-7-1989; Ord. No. 960, ratified 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 2.03. - Run-off election. 
    A run-off election shall be held, if necessary, twenty-eight (28) days following the regular election date. 
(Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 2.04. - Interim vacancies. 
    The office of City Council shall become vacant upon the death, resignation, or removal from office of any member of City Council in any manner authorized by law. Within thirty (30) days after any vacancy in City Council, the Mayor shall appoint a five-member citizen committee. The citizen committee shall be comprised of registered electors, each of whom must be qualified to hold the office of City Council. Within thirty (30) days of such appointment, the citizen committee shall present a slate of two (2) candidates to City Council. At the next scheduled regular meeting of the City Council, the members of the City Council shall consider and select, by secret ballot, one of the two candidates presented to it. The candidate shall be selected by majority vote of the City Council, and shall fill the vacancy for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, or until the next scheduled election for City Council, whichever occurs first, to complete the unexpired term. If no election for City Council is scheduled to be held within one hundred eighty (180) days, then a special election will be held to fill the vacancy and complete the unexpired term. 
    Time spent serving in an interim capacity shall not be considered with respect to the term limitation set forth in Section 2.02 of this Charter if the Council Member selected by the procedure set forth in this Section decides to run for the office; that Council Member will be eligible to serve two consecutive four-year terms, if elected. 
    If a member of City Council resigns from his/her office to run for another office, the resignation shall be effective in accordance with the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1116, ratified 8-31-2004; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 2.05. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
    Each ordinance or resolution, except those making appropriations, shall be introduced in writing and shall embrace but one subject, and the matters properly connected therewith. The subject shall be clearly stated in the title. Ordinances or resolutions making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriations. 
Sec. 2.06. - Publication. 
    For every proposed ordinance, except an emergency ordinance or one which rezones private real property, a notice of proposed enactment shall be published, at least ten (10) days prior to adoption, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice of proposed enactment shall state the date, time and place of the meeting, the title or titles of the proposed ordinance, and the place or places where the proposed ordinance may be inspected by the public. Said notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance. The procedure for rezoning private real property shall be as provided by law. 
Sec. 2.07. - Reading. 
    A proposed ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall be read by title only on two (2) separate days; provided, that upon demand made by two (2) Council Members, the final reading shall be in full. An emergency ordinance may be passed after reading by title only at one Council meeting. 
Sec. 2.08. - Action. 
    The Council shall act by ordinance, resolution or motion. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum, except during an emergency session, then three (3) Council Members shall constitute a quorum. An ordinance, resolution or motion shall be enacted upon the affirmative vote of three (3) Council Members; provided, however, upon a finding and declaration of emergency by Council, an emergency ordinance shall be enacted upon the affirmative vote of four (4) Council Members. Upon passage of any ordinance, the vote of each Council Member shall be entered upon the minutes. Except in an emergency session, the Mayor may be counted to establish a quorum, but the Mayor shall have no vote unless otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 701, ratified 11-7-1989) 
Sec. 2.09. - Veto. 
    Before going into effect, all ordinances passed by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor or, in his absence, to the Vice-Mayor. If approved, the Mayor shall sign the ordinance, whereupon it shall become law. If disapproved, the Mayor shall return it to the City Council with written objections. At the next regular Council meeting, the objections shall be entered in full upon the record and the Council shall consider the Mayor's objections. If, upon consideration, the City Council shall pass the ordinance by affirmative vote of four (4) Council Members, the ordinance or ordinances shall then become law, the Mayor's objections to the contrary notwithstanding. Any ordinance which shall not be returned to the Council at the next regular meeting of the Council after its passage shall become a law as if signed by the Mayor. 
Sec. 2.10. - Effective. 
    All ordinances shall become effective immediately upon becoming law, unless otherwise provided therein, and all resolutions shall become effective immediately after passage or as provided therein. 
Sec. 2.11. - Adoption by reference. 
    The City Council, by ordinance, may provide procedures for the adoption by reference of any codification of ordinances, technical codes and similar publications; provided, that such procedures afford reasonable notice and opportunity to the public to inspect and to be heard thereon prior to the final adoption thereof. 
Sec. 2.12. - Recording and authentication. 
    Every ordinance, upon becoming a law, shall be recorded in a book kept by the City Clerk for that purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the City Clerk. 
Sec. 2.13. - Investigations. 
    In the exercise of its legislative powers, the Council, or any special committee thereof, shall have the power to conduct such investigations and hold such hearings as the Council may deem necessary, expedient and proper, and shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and production of evidence, by the issuance of all forms of subpoena; and shall have the power to punish for contempt, by fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); and each day any such contempt shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 2.14. - Appointive and fiscal powers. 
    All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the City Manager, City Clerk and City Attorney; 
(2)  Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, to establish by ordinance all administrative departments necessary or expedient for promoting or maintaining the general welfare of the municipality or its residents; 
(3)  Adopt the annual operating and capital improvements budgets; 
(4)  Authorize the issuance of bonds and certificates of indebtedness in accordance with the Constitution and the Laws of the State of Florida; 
(5)  Inquire into the conduct of any office or department of the City and make investigation as to municipal affairs; 
(6)  Appoint and define duties of boards or committees other than those enumerated in this charter, when deemed necessary or expedient; 
(7)  Grant franchises for public utilities by ordinance, including public transportation, taxis and buses; 
(8)  Provide for an annual independent certified audit, as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR 

Sec. 3.01. - Qualifications. 
    Only electors who are qualified to be candidates for City Council shall be qualified to hold office as Mayor. The Mayor shall hold no other public office during his or her tenure. 
(Ord. No. 506, ratified 6-5-1984; Ord. No. 576, ratified 6-3-1986; Ord. No. 959, ratified 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 3.02. - Election. 
    The regular election for Mayor shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every other even-numbered year. The candidate for Mayor receiving the highest number of votes cast for Mayor shall be elected and shall hold office for a four (4) year term or until a successor is duly elected and the election is certified. The Mayor shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms. 
    A run-off election, if necessary, shall be held twenty-eight (28) days following the original election date. 
(Ord. No. 506, ratified 6-5-1984; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 3.03. - Duties and Powers. 
    The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council; he shall be recognized as head of City government for ceremonial purposes, and by the Governor for purposes of martial law; however, he shall have no regularly assigned duties. Except to break any tie vote by the City Council, the Mayor shall have no vote. A Vice-Mayor, who shall act as Mayor and assume those duties during the Mayor's absence or disability, shall be elected by the City Council in a manner determined in the City Council Rules of Order and Procedure. The Vice-Mayor shall be counted in the determination of a quorum of Council Members and shall discharge the duties of a Council Member, including voting. 
(Ord. No. 506, ratified 6-5-1984; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation. 
    The annual compensation and expense account of the Mayor shall be prescribed by ordinance. Such compensation shall not be increased nor approved during the term of office for which the Mayor shall have been elected. 
(Ord. No. 506, ratified 6-5-1984; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 3.05. - Interim Vacancy. 
    The office of Mayor shall become vacant upon the Mayor's death, resignation or removal of office in any manner authorized by law. A vacancy in the office of Mayor shall require a special election, unless an election for Mayor is to occur within one hundred eighty (180) days. If an election for Mayor is to occur within one-hundred eighty (180) days after the vacancy, the Mayor shall be elected at said election. 
    If the Mayor resigns his or her office to run for another office, the resignation shall be effective in accordance with the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 506, ratified 6-5-1984; Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 4.01. - Office created. 
    The administrative director of the City shall be the City Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City and shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the City government. The City Manager shall be responsible to the City, and to that end, shall have the rights, powers and duties provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.02. - Appointment. 
    The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council, solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience or knowledge of the duties of the office of City Manager. At the time of appointment, the City Manager need not be a resident of the City or state, but within six (6) months after becoming City Manager, he shall become a resident of the City, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTRACTS AND BIDDING 

Sec. 5.01. - Contracts-Form and execution. 
    Every contract made by the City involving the non-budgeted expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be in writing, approved by the Council, signed by the Mayor or City Manager, and attested by the City Clerk with the official City seal affixed thereto; otherwise, any such instrument shall be void. 
Sec. 5.02. - [Same-]Verbal. 
    No promise or representation of any kind or character whatsoever, by any officer or employee of the City, shall be binding upon, or enforceable against nor create an estoppel, an implied contract, or any liability against or upon, the part of the City unless ratified by or embodied in: 
(1)  A contract made, approved, and executed as above provided; or 
(2)  In a permit, license, approval, consent, or other instrument issued pursuant to, and in accordance with, an ordinance of a general and permanent nature. 
Sec. 5.03. - [Same-]Void. 
    Any contract in violation of, or conflict with, this charter or any ordinance of the City shall be void. 
Sec. 5.04. - Central purchasing and competitive bidding. 
    The City Manager, or his designee, shall serve as central purchasing agent for the City. A central purchasing program for the acquisition of City supplies, materials, equipment, and the establishment of a competitive bidding process shall be provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 699, ratified 11-7-1989) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 6.01. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September. 
Sec. 6.02. - Submission of budget. 
    No less than forty-five (45) days before the expiration of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall present to the City Council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The form and content of said budget shall be as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.03. - Council action on budget. 
    On receipt of the budget, a public hearing shall be called and held by the Council after having been advertised as required by State Law. If the budget is not adopted by the City Council before the first day of any fiscal year, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year, on a month-to-month basis, until such time as the City Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be adopted in the form of an ordinance and shall constitute an appropriation of the amount specified therein as expenditures of the funds indicated. No money shall be disbursed from the City treasury, except pursuant to appropriations made by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 6.04. - Amendments after adoption. 
    The City Council is authorized to make such changes in said budget as it deems necessary for the proper and economical operation of the municipal government. If, at any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager recommends the reappropriation of funds not needed for the purpose for which they were appropriated, or the appropriation of any unappropriated cash surplus, the City Council may appropriate such funds to any municipal purpose. 
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 7.01. - Elections. 
    All elections shall be conducted as provided by law and in accordance with Chapter 7, Temple Terrace Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 7.02. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    Neither the City, nor any of its officers or employees, shall, by legislation, engage in any practice or enter into any contract which will result in discrimination against any person or group of persons because of race, religion or national origin. 
Sec. 7.03. - Standards of conduct. 
    The public officials and employees of the City of Temple Terrace are governed by the Florida Code of Ethics (Section 112.311, Florida Statutes, as amended [F.S. § 112.311]) and by those additional standards of conduct that are or may be adopted by the City Council. 
Sec. 7.04. - Facsimile signatures. 
    Except with regard to the passage of ordinances, the City Council may authorize the use of facsimile signatures by such persons and under such conditions as may be prescribed by ordinances. 
Sec. 7.05. - Reemployment. 
    No elected official of the City shall hold compensated, appointed City office or employment until one year after the expiration of his term of office. 
Sec. 7.06. - Initiative and referendum. 
    With the exception of emergency ordinances, or ordinances relating to the budget, capital improvements, appropriations of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees, the registered electors of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council or to require reconsideration of any adopted ordinances, by petition signed by registered electors equal in number to not less than ten (10) percent of the registered electors registered to vote at the last election for Mayor or City Council. The form of such petition shall be as provided for under the provisions relating to recall of elected officers. If the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed or to repeal the ordinance so reconsidered, the ordinance shall be approved or rejected at the next election for Mayor or City Council, if time permits, or at a special election scheduled for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 7.07. - Recall. 
    The recall of elected officers shall be governed by Section 100.361, Florida Statutes, as amended [F.S. § 100.361]. 
Sec. 7.08. - Oath. 
    Each elected or appointed officer of the City, before entering upon the discharge of the officer's duties, shall swear and subscribe to, before a person authorized to administer oaths, an oath that the officer is entitled to hold, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office and will support, uphold, and defend the Charter and ordinances of the City of Temple Terrace, the Constitution and laws of Florida, and the Constitution and laws of the United States of America. 
Sec. 7.09. - Boards. 
    The City Council shall appoint boards and members thereto, as it deems desirable. The terms, duties and responsibilities of the members of all boards shall be determined by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1169, ratified 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 7.10. - Severability and retention clause. 
    If any part of this Charter is for any reason held or declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, invalid or void, such holding or declaration shall not be construed to affect the portions of this Charter not so held or declared, or to affect the application of this Charter to other circumstances not so held or declared. 
Sec. 7.11. - Officers, employees and agents. 
    The adoption of this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall not affect or impair the rights, privileges or immunities of persons who are City officers, employees or agents at the time of the adoption of this Charter. 
Sec. 7.12. - Ordinances preserved. 
    All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
    All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings involving the City shall continue and remain in full force and effect, except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. All rights, title and interest in property, real or personal, uncollected taxes due, claims, judgments, decrees, liens, suits, actions and choses in action, held or owned by the existing municipality, shall pass to, and the same are hereby vested in, the municipality continued under this Revised Charter. 
Sec. 7.14. - Obligations of contracts preserved. 
    No debt or obligation of contract of the City shall be impaired as a result of the adoption of this Charter, but all such debts and obligations shall pass to, and be binding upon, the municipality which is hereby organized and continued. 
Sec. 7.15. - Existing rights, obligations, duties and relationships. 
    All rights, obligations, duties and relationships now existing by law or agreement between the City and other governmental units shall be unaffected and shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 7.16. - Transitional provisions; former Charter. 
    All provisions of Special Laws of Florida of which the former Charter, hereby supplanted, is comprised, and which are not embodied herein specifically or by reference, and which are not inconsistent with this Charter, shall become ordinances of the City subject to amendment or repeal in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from Ordinance No. 363, adopted May 5, 1978, and ratified and approved by the electors at the election of June 6, 1978. 
Ordinance 
Number Ratification 
Date Section Section 
this Charter 363  6- 6-1978 Char. (note) 506  6- 5-1984 3.01 3.02 3.03 3.04 3.05 576  6- 3-1986 2.02 3.01 699 11- 7-1989 5.04 700 11- 7-1989 2.02 701 11- 7-1989 2.08 702 11- 7-1989 2.01 959 11- 3-1998 3.01 960 11- 3-1998 2.02 1116  8-31-2004 2.04 1169 11- 7-2006 2.02 2.03 2.04 2.14 3.01 3.02 3.03 3.04 3.05 6.03 7.01 7.06 7.09  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Temple Terrace, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 2001, § 1.100) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context of state law clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general and the more specific provision shall always prevail. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council can be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. Scrivener's errors shall be ignored. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. The term "city" includes its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City council, council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    City officers, employees, boards, committees, and commissions. References to officers, employees, boards, committees, and commissions are to city officers, city employees, city boards, city committees, and city commissions. 
    Code. The term "Code," "the Code," or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Temple Terrace, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the term "or" may be read as the term "and," and the term "and" may be read as the term "or" if the sense requires it: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Hillsborough County, Florida. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    F.A.C. The abbreviation "F.A.C." means the official Florida Administrative Code Annotated, as amended, containing the rules and regulations of the state regulatory agencies. 
    Following. The term "following" means next after. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." means the Florida Statutes (i.e., the official statutes of the State of Florida), as adopted and amended by the state legislature. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include words of all other genders. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural. The plural includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease on, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2001, § 1.105) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(c)  References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
(Code 2001, § 1.110) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2001, § 1.115) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Temple Terrace, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Temple Terrace, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2001, § 1.135) 
State Law reference- Ordinance adoption procedures, F.S. § 166.041. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. But in no case shall such person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 2001, § 1.120) 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below not codified in this Code. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(1)  Any ordinance proposing an amendment to the city Charter. 
(2)  Any ordinance annexing territory into the city, excluding territory from the city, or extending or describing the boundaries of the city. 
(3)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Any ordinance making any appropriation or providing for a budget or budget amendment or budget transfer. 
(5)  Any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries or benefits of city officers or city employees not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Any ordinance granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Any ordinance accepting or naming any public park or public recreation area. 
(9)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan not codified in this Code. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street or public way. 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(13)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not codified in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code. 
(16)  Any ordinance rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map. 
(17)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Secs. 1-11-1-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Code enforcement generally, F.S. ch. 162; penalty for ordinance violations, F.S. § 162.22; enforcement of ordinances by code inspectors, F.S. § 166.0415. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1-39. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a civil infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a civil infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(f)  The city shall be entitled to be reimbursed for its attorneys' fees and costs incurred in any legal action, litigation, administrative proceedings, or similar activity, to enforce any city ordinance or to abate a public nuisance. All of the city's costs, including demolition costs, and fees, including attorneys' fees, shall be charged to the ordinance violator or the perpetrator of the nuisance and, if not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of invoice, shall become a lien upon any property within the city limits owned by the person committing the nuisance or the ordinance violation and shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date when same became due and payable. 
(g)  In enjoining violations, the city may pursuant to F.S. ch. 162: 
(1)  Order the work to be done by the owner, occupant, or person in possession; or 
(2)  Do the work and assess the costs against the lot, parcel or tract. 
(Code 2001, §§ 1.145, 1.150; Ord. No. 392, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 474, 5-17-1983) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, F.S. § 162.22. 
Sec. 1-40. - Assessment of additional court costs to fund criminal justice education and training. 
(a)  Pursuant to F.S. § 938.15, the city hereby assesses $2.00, as court costs, in addition to all other applicable court costs, against every person convicted of violation of a state penal or criminal statute or convicted of violation of a municipal or county ordinance where such offense occurred within the city limits. 
(b)  In addition, $2.00 shall be deducted from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to any such penal statute or ordinance violation; however, no such assessment shall be made against any person convicted for violation of any state statute or municipal or county ordinance relating to the parking of vehicles. 
(c)  All such assessments shall be collected by the appropriate courts and shall be remitted to the finance director, and earmarked for criminal justice education and training, including basic training of the members of the city police department, part-time law enforcement officers, auxiliary officers and support personnel. Use and expenditure of such funds shall be in accordance with the educational and training programs for law enforcement personnel as determined by the chief of police and in accordance with F.S. § 938.15. 
(Code 2001, § 20.220; Ord. No. 688, 4-4-1989) 
Sec. 1-41. - Appellate hearing officer and appellate special magistrate; appointment; removal; qualifications; compensation; powers; administrative and clerical support. 
(a)  Appointment and Term. The city may appoint hearing officers and special magistrates as needed to serve as an intermediate appellate officer to hear and decide appeals from certain actions of the city, including, but not limited to condemnation actions, and shall have, among other authority provided by this Code, the authority to render decisions upholding or overturning the actions of the city, whether in whole or in part. Each appellate hearing officer and appellate special magistrate shall be appointed by the city manager based on qualifications and experience, and shall be subject to the approval of the city council. Each appointment shall be for a term of three (3) years. 
(b)  Removal. The appellate hearing officers and appellate special magistrates may be removed by the city manager with or without cause subject to the approval of the city council. 
(c)  Qualifications and oath. Each appellate hearing officer and appellate special magistrate shall be a member in good standing of the Florida Bar, shall have a sound reputation for integrity, responsibility, and business or professional ability, and shall take an oath of office as required by the City Charter before commencing their duties. 
(d)  Compensation. Appellate hearing officers and appellate special magistrates shall not be city employees, but may be compensated as independent contractors for services rendered at an hourly rate not exceeding an amount that is reasonable for the services rendered commensurate with the person's education, training, and experience as the city manager or designee deems appropriate. 
(e)  Powers. The appellate hearing officers and appellate special magistrates shall have the power to: 
(1)  Conduct quasi-judicial hearings pursuant to this Code, in which formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but the fundamental due process rights of the parties shall be observed. 
(2)  Consider testimony under oath and other evidence presented at hearings. 
(3)  Adopt rules deemed appropriate for the conduct of fair and impartial hearings. 
(4)  Issue orders following a hearing, which orders shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law, and which shall have the force of law. 
(5)  Take any and all such other and further actions as are provided by this Code, including, but not limited to section 8-168. 
(f)  Record of proceedings. A record shall be maintained of the proceedings and all evidence considered by the appellate hearing officers and appellate special magistrates. All hearings shall be open to the public. 
(g)  Administrative and clerical support. The city shall provide administrative and clerical support to the appellate hearing officers and appellate special magistrates as may be reasonably required for the proper performance of duties. 
(Code 2001, § 2.240; Ord. No. 1243, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 1362, § 2(Exh. A), 9-16-2014) 
Secs. 1-42-1-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD 

Sec. 1-61. - Short title and legislative intent. 
    This division may be known and cited as the "code enforcement ordinance." It is the intent of this division to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by appointing a municipal code enforcement board and one or more special magistrates with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes and ordinances of the city and otherwise exercise authority as provided by Florida law. The city hereby adopts a code enforcement system which gives the municipal code enforcement board and the special magistrates appointed by the city council the authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violators of the city's ordinances and codes. In addition, special magistrates shall serve as the city's local hearing officer as defined in F.S. § 316.003, and the special magistrates shall conduct hearings and adjudicate matters pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 316.0083. Nothing in this division shall be deemed or interpreted to create exclusive jurisdiction in the municipal code enforcement board or the special magistrates for the enforcement of any or all municipal codes or ordinances. The city may also enforce violations of its codes and ordinances in any court or forum of competent jurisdiction as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.1), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-62. - Municipal code enforcement board and special magistrates created; authority of municipal code enforcement board and special magistrates. 
(a)  The operation of a municipal code enforcement board (MCEB) and one or more special magistrates is hereby authorized pursuant to and in the manner set forth in F.S. Ch. 162. 
(b)  The MCEB and the special magistrates shall have the duties, responsibilities and powers, and shall carry out the functions and procedures as set forth in F.S. Ch. 162. These duties, responsibilities and powers may include, but are not limited to, adopting reasonable rules and procedures for the conduct of hearings; subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings; subpoena evidence to its hearings; hold hearings and take testimony under oath and receive evidence; assess fines and costs against violators; issue orders having the force of law commanding whatever relief or steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance; grant, deny or modify extensions of time for compliance; to hear requests for abatement or reduction of fines and make recommendations to city council; and authorize liens to be recorded against property owned by violators. In addition special magistrates shall serve as the city's local hearing officer as defined in F.S. § 316.003, and shall conduct hearings, impose fines, assess costs, issue orders and adjudicate matters pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. § 316.0083. 
(c)  The MCEB and special magistrates shall have the authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties when pending violations exist or continue to exist. 
(d)  The MCEB and special magistrates shall have the authority to impose fines and other noncriminal penalties, regardless of whether the violation is pending, when it has been established that the violation is: 
(1)  A repeat violation; 
(2)  A serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare; or 
(3)  An irreparable or irreversible violation. 
(e)  The MCEB and special magistrates shall have the authority to make a determination whether a property condition presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare so as to warrant an immediate abatement of the condition by directing the appropriate city department to make all reasonable repairs or take all reasonable action necessary to bring said condition into compliance with this code and to charge the violator the reasonable cost of the repairs or action in addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.2), 2-12-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggrieved party means a person who is the nonprevailing party in an action by the MCEB. 
    City means the City of Temple Terrace, as well as any of its departments or divisions, offices or officials acting in the course and scope of their employment. 
    Code means any of the several chapters of this Code, city ordinances, or any other codes or technical codes of the city. 
    Code inspector or code enforcement officer means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty is to assure Code compliance. 
    Decision or final order means a written order of the MCEB constituting final agency action consistent with the powers of the MCEB as described in this division. 
    Division means the code enforcement ordinance established in this division, including sections 1-61 through 1-77. 
    Irreparable or irreversible violation means a violation that causes harm, damage, injury or change that is incapable of correction, repair or return to an original condition. 
    Municipal code enforcement board (MCEB) means a code enforcement board established by the city pursuant to F.S. § 162.05. 
    Notice of violation or notice means a written notice issued by the inspector to an alleged violator pursuant to section 1-76. 
    Person means any natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association or other legal entity or person recognized or allowed to do business under state law. 
    Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of the Code or ordinance by a respondent who has been previously found through an MCEB quasi-judicial process to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five (5) years prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occurring at different locations within the city. 
    Respondent or alleged violator means those persons, including property or business owners and/or tenants, who have been issued a notice of violation. 
    Special magistrate means a magistrate appointed by the city manager and approved by the city council established by the city pursuant to F.S. § 162.03 & § 162.05. The authority of the special magistrate shall be coextensive with the grant of authority to municipal code enforcement boards in F.S. Ch. 162, Part 1 as it may be amended from time to time. The Special Magistrate shall also serve as the city's local hearing officer as defined in F.S. § 316.003. 
    Violator means a person who has been ordered to correct a violation consistent with this division. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.3), 2-12-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-64. - Municipal code enforcement board and special magistrate appointment. 
(a)  Membership of MCEB. The MCEB shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the city council. The city council may appoint up to two (2) alternate members to serve on the MCEB in the absence of board members. 
(b)  Appointment and term of office of MCEB. 
(1)  Appointment to the MCEB shall be made in accordance with applicable law and ordinances on the basis of experience or interest in the subject matter jurisdiction of the MCEB, in the sole discretion of the city council. The membership of the MCEB shall, whenever possible, include a businessperson, an architect, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor, and a realtor. 
(2)  Appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years. Upon the concurrence of the city council, members may be reappointed for up to two (2) successive terms, and may serve no more than three (3) consecutive terms. Members will serve until their successors are duly appointed. An appointment to fill any vacancy on the MCEB shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office and shall count as a full term if the vacancy filled is for more than one and one-half (11/2) years. 
(3)  Members of the MCEB shall be residents of the city at the time of appointment and throughout their terms of office. Any member who is no longer a resident of the city shall be automatically removed and that vacancy filled as provided in this section. 
(4)  If any member of the MCEB fails to attend two (2) of three (3) successive meetings, without cause and without prior approval of the chairman of the MCEB, the MCEB shall declare that member's office vacant, and the city council shall promptly fill such vacancy. Members of the MCEB may be removed from office for cause, after notice, by the city council. 
(c)  Organization, quorum and compensation of MCEB. 
(1)  Annually, the members of the MCEB shall elect one of its members to serve as chairman; said chairman shall be a voting member. 
(2)  The presence of four (4) or more members at any meeting shall constitute a quorum in order for the MCEB to conduct its business. 
(3)  Members of the MCEB shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Appointment, term of office, qualifications, compensation of special magistrate. 
(1)  Each special magistrate is to be appointed by the city manager subject to the approval of city council. Special magistrates shall serve a term of three (3) years unless sooner removed, either with or without cause, by the city manager with the consent of city council. 
(2)  Appointments shall be made on the basis of demonstrated experience and interest in the fields of zoning, building control, or other relevant disciplines. 
(3)  Special magistrates shall be residents of the city at the time of appointment and throughout their terms in office. Any special magistrate who is no longer a resident of the city shall be automatically removed and that vacancy filled as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Special magistrates may be re-appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. 
(5)  Appointments to fill a vacant special magistrate position shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(6)  Compensation for special magistrates, if any, shall be no more than is reasonable for the services provided in such amounts determined appropriate by the city manager; in addition, they shall receive reimbursement for parking if paid parking is required, and for mileage for any code enforcement related business, except travel to and from regularly scheduled and specially called hearings. Such reimbursement shall be consistent with city policy. 
(7)  The city attorney may represent the City of Temple Terrace in prosecuting cases before the special magistrates. The special magistrates may have their own attorney who shall be responsible for providing the special magistrates with legal counsel. 
(8)  A violator whose case has been heard by a special magistrate and is found guilty shall be precluded from arguing the same case to the MCEB. 
(Ord. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.4), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-65. - Oath of office 
    Each member of the MCEB and each special magistrate, upon appointment, shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties of office, take an oath of office as required by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.4), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-66. - Procedural powers of the MCEB and special magistrates. 
(a)  The MCEB and the special magistrates shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings which are consistent with this Code and F.S. Ch. 162 as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by law enforcement or duly qualified private process servers at the expense of the requestor. Issuance and returns of service for MCEB subpoena shall be governed by the rules enacted by the MCEB to conduct its hearings; 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings; 
(4)  Hold hearings and take testimony under oath and accept evidence into the record of the hearing; 
(5)  Issue an order having the force of law commanding whatever steps are necessary to bring the violation into compliance. However, no order can direct action be taken that violates any provision of the Code; 
(6)  Grant, deny or modify extensions of time for compliance; 
(7)  Hear requests for abatement or reduction of fines and make recommendations to city council; 
(8)  Authorize liens to be recorded against property owned by violators. 
(b)  Neither the MCEB nor the Special Magistrate shall have the power to impose costs. 
(c)  Special magistrate serving as local hearing officer. 
(1)  Special magistrates who serve as the city's local hearing officer shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures set forth in F.S. § 316.0083. 
(2)  A the conclusion of the hearing, the special magistrate shall determine whether a violation under F.S. § 316.0083 has occurred, in which case the special magistrate shall uphold or dismiss the violation, issue a final administrative order including the determination and, if the violation is upheld, require the petitioner to pay the penalty previously assessed under F.S. § 316.0083 and may also require the petitioner to pay municipal costs, not to exceed the sum of $100. 
(3)  The final administrative order shall be mailed to the petitioner by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, §25.315.6), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-67. - Code enforcement procedures. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the responsible city departments to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes and ordinances. No member of the MCEB shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, if a violation of this Code is found, the inspector shall notify the alleged violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the inspector shall notify the MCEB or a special magistrate, as appropriate, and request a hearing. The MCEB or a special magistrate, through clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be delivered to the alleged violator as provided by section 1-76. Notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in section 1-76. If the violation is corrected and then recurs within forty-five (45) days of service of the notice or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction, the case may be presented to the MCEB or special magistrate even if the violation was corrected prior to the hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a repeat violation of this Code is found, the inspector shall notify the alleged violator of the finding but is not required to give the alleged violator a reasonable time to correct the repeated violation before scheduling a hearing before the MCEB or special magistrate. The inspector, upon notifying he alleged violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the MCEB or special magistrate, as appropriate, and request a hearing. The MCEB or special magistrate, through clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice to the alleged violator as provided in section 1-76. The case may be presented to the MCEB or special magistrate to determine and impose fines even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(d)  If the inspector has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the alleged violator and may immediately notify the MCEB or special magistrate, as appropriate, and request a hearing. The MCEB or special magistrate, through clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice to the alleged violator as provided in section 1-76. The case may be presented to the MCEB or special magistrate to determine and impose fines and the payment of any costs expended by the city to abate the violation even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(e)  If the inspector has reason to believe a violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the alleged violator and may immediately notify the MCEB or special magistrate, as appropriate, and request a hearing. The MCEB or special magistrate through clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice to the alleged violator as provided in section 1-76. The case may be presented to the MCEB or Special Magistrate to determine and impose fines and the payment of any costs expended by the city to abate the violation even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.7), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-68. - Conduct of MCEB and special magistrate hearings. 
(a)  The MCEB will meet no less than twelve (12) times in each calendar year, on a monthly basis, unless there are no pending cases, or at other times as may be necessary. The chair of the MCEB may call hearings of the MCEB at times other than the regularly scheduled meetings, upon the request of a department director or the city attorney's office. Hearings may also be called by written notice signed by at least three (3) members of the MCEB. The notice of a special meeting shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior thereto. The MCEB may, at any hearing, set a future hearing date. 
Special magistrates shall hold hearings no less than twelve (12) times in each calendar year, on a monthly basis, unless there are no pending cases, or at other times as may be necessary. 
(b)  Minutes of all MCEB and special magistrate hearings shall be kept by the city clerk's office, including (i) for MCEB meetings, the vote of each member upon each question and the outcome of the case, and (ii) for special magistrate hearings, the determinations made by the special magistrate. 
(c)  All hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  All testimony shall be under oath and mechanically recorded. An alleged violator or the city may cause the proceedings to be recorded by a certified court reporter at the requesting party's expense. 
(e)  The city shall provide a hearing room and clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the MCEB or special magistrates to conduct hearings and perform their respective duties. 
(f)  Each case before the MCEB or special magistrates shall be presented by the administrative staff, including inspectors, of the city department that is charged with the responsibility for enforcement of those specific code sections alleged to have been violated. 
(g)  The city attorney shall represent the city and its departments in bringing cases before the MCEB or special magistrates. The MCEB and special magistrates shall have their own attorney who shall be responsible for providing the MCEB and special magistrates with legal counsel. The attorney for the MCEB or special magistrates shall not be required to attend meetings held by the MCEB unless requested to do so by the MCEB. 
(h)  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to the MCEB or special magistrate proceedings, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Relevant evidence shall be admissible if it is the type of evidence upon which a reasonable and responsible person would normally rely in the conduct of business affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make such evidence inadmissible over objections in a civil action. The chair of the MCEB or special magistrates may exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence. 
(i)  Each party to an MCEB or special magistrate hearing shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses, impeach witnesses and rebut evidence. It shall be the responsibility of the alleged violator to create, at the alleged violator's own expense, a certifiable record of the proceedings in case of appeal or administrative review. 
(j)  The alleged violator has the right at his own expense to be represented by an attorney at any MCEB or special magistrate hearing. 
(k)  The burden of proof shall be with the city to show by the greater weight of the evidence that a Code violation exists and that the alleged violator committed or was responsible for allowing or maintaining the violation. If the alleged violator raises one (1) or more defenses, the alleged violator has the burden to prove those defenses by the greater weight of the evidence. 
(l)  If notice to an alleged violator of the public hearing has been provided pursuant to this section, the hearing may be conducted and an order rendered in the absence of the alleged violator. 
(m)  At the conclusion of the MCEB or special magistrate hearing, the MCEB or special magistrate shall issue an order containing findings of fact, based on the evidence of record, and conclusions of law. The order shall be binding on the violator and afford the proper relief or penalty consistent with the powers granted under this division. With regard to actions of the MCEB, the findings shall be by a motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that, at least four (4) members must vote in order for the action to be official. A tie vote constitutes no action and the matter remains pending before the MCEB. If a tie occurs, the MCEB shall continue to vote until there is a majority approving the motion or the MCEB may continue the matter to the next regular meeting of the MCEB at which time those board members who were absent at the time of the original vote shall vote on the motion pending before the MCEB. The board members absent at he original vote must review the evidence presented in the evidentiary hearing prior to casting their vote. The order of the MCEB or a special magistrate may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed if the order is not complied with by that date. The MCEB or special magistrate may also determine and include in its order the rate of the fine to be imposed if the violator fails to comply with the order in a timely fashion. 
(n)  Under the conditions specified in section 1-70(h), the MCEB or special magistrate may include any expenses incurred by the city in performing repairs or taking curative steps in addition to the fine if the order is not complied with in a timely fashion. 
(o)  If the violation concerns real property, a copy of the MCEB or special magistrate order certified by the city clerk may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute binding notice of the violations found therein to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns. 
(p)  If an order of the MCEB or special magistrate is recorded in the public records pursuant to this section and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the MCEB shall issue an order acknowledging compliance or a release that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required for issuance of an order acknowledging compliance or release. The chair of the MCEB the city clerk, or other designees shall execute orders of the MCEB. 
(q)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all hearings and actions of special magistrates serving as the city's local hearing officer pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083 shall be held in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.8), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-69. - Mandatory disclosures upon the transfer of property. 
(a)  If the owner of property that is the subject of an enforcement proceeding before the MCEB or special magistrate transfers ownership of that property between the time that the notice of violation is served and the time that a hearing has been scheduled, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose the existence and nature of the proceedings in writing to the prospective transferee; 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee copies of any and all pleadings, including all notices of violation, affidavits of violation, and notices of any kind, including hearing notices issued by the city and received by the owner prior to the transfer; 
(3)  Disclose in writing to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable Code provisions and any orders issued in the MCEB hearing; and 
(4)  File a notice with the city clerk of the transfer of the property, identifying the new owner by full name and address and attaching copies of the disclosures made to the new owner no later than five (5) days from the date of transfer or closing. 
(b)  Failure to make the disclosures required by this section before the transfer of property shall create a rebuttable presumption of fraud. 
(c)  If the property is transferred to a bona fide purchaser for value in an arm's length transaction before the hearing, the proceedings will not be dismissed but the new owner will be provided a reasonable time period to correct the alleged violations previously cited before the hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.9), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-70. - Administrative fines and costs of repair. 
(a)  The MCEB or special magistrate may order a violator that has failed to comply with an order of the MCEB to pay a fine in an amount within the limits specified in this division for each day the violation continues past the date set by the MCEB for compliance. 
(b)  When the MCEB or special magistrate has found a violation to be a repeat violation, the MCEB or special magistrate may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount within the limits specified in this division for each day the repeat violation continues past the date notice of the repeat violation was provided to the violator. 
(c)  If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this division, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. 
(d)  Whenever the MCEB or special magistrate orders a violator to effect repairs or otherwise correct a Code violation by a certain date, the inspector shall inspect the premises or otherwise investigate whether the order of the MCEB or special magistrate has been complied with in a timely manner on the day following the deadline or as soon thereafter as reasonable. Upon a finding of noncompliance, the inspector shall file with the city clerk an inspection report or affidavit setting forth the facts of such noncompliance. A copy of the inspection report or affidavit shall be served on the violator by hand delivery or U.S. mail. 
(e)  A fine imposed pursuant to this division shall not exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day for a first violation and shall not exceed five hundred dollars($500.00) per violation per day for a repeat violation. 
(f)  If the MCEB or special magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed five thousand ($5,000.00) per violation. 
(g)  In determining the amount of any fine, the MCEB or special magistrate should consider the gravity of the violation, any actions by the violator to correct the violation, any previous violations committed by the violator, the willfulness of the violation, and the violator's ability to correct the violation within a reasonable time. 
(h)  If the MCEB or special magistrate makes a finding that a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the MCEB or special magistrate may direct the appropriate city department to make all reasonable repairs or take all reasonable action necessary to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable costs of the repairs or action in addition to the fine imposed pursuant to this division. Making such repairs or taking such action does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs, take further action, or maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. 
(i)  In addition to the imposition of fines, the MCEB or special magistrate may assess the amount of all costs incurred by the city in enforcing its codes and all costs of repairs. 
(j)  The city council, upon receipt of a recommendation from the MCEB or special magistrate, may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this division in such amounts and upon such conditions as deemed appropriate by city council. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.10), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-71. - Challenges to inspection report. 
    A violator who disputes an inspection report or affidavit finding the violations are not in compliance by the deadline given by the MCEB or special magistrate may seek a hearing before the MCEB or special magistrate to challenge the report or affidavit by filing a written motion with the city clerk and serving a copy on the city attorney's office no later than ten (10) days from the date of service of the inspection report or affidavit. The motion shall set forth with specificity the grounds for challenging the findings. The city clerk will schedule a hearing and notify the violator by U.S. mail. If the MCEB or special magistrate, after hearing the motion, upholds the findings of the inspector, all costs arising from the hearing may be assessed against the violator and included in the lien authorized by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.10), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-72. - Liens. 
(a)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine or a fine plus costs may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall thereafter constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of the state including execution and levy against personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this division shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit filed pursuant to this division, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this division runs in favor of the city and the city may execute a satisfaction or release of such lien. 
(d)  The MCEB or special magistrate may authorize the city attorney's office to foreclose any unpaid lien or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien plus accrued interest after three (3) months from the filing date of the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this division may be foreclosed on real property that is homestead under section 4, article X of the state constitution. Actions for money judgments under this division may be pursued only on fines levied after October 1, 2000, and the money judgment provisions of this division shall not apply to personal or real property covered by section 4(a), article X of the state constitution. 
(e)  No lien provided under this division shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action is commenced pursuant to section 1-73 in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  In an action to foreclose on a lien or for money damages, the prevailing parties are entitled to recover all costs, including reasonable attorney's fee, incurred in the action. The city shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. 
(g)  The continuation of the lien affected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2)exh. A, § 25.315.12), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-73. - Appeal. 
    A party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of the MCEB or special magistrate issued pursuant to sections 1-70 or 1-71 in the Circuit Court of the Thirteenth Judicial Circuit of Florida. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date of entry of the order to be reviewed. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the city clerk and served upon the city attorney's office but an action must be filed with the circuit court following procedural rules applicable to such proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.13), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-74. - Rehearing. 
    An aggrieved party may move for a new hearing on the matter upon the grounds enumerated in this section. A motion for rehearing must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the date of entry of the MCEB or special magistrate order. The time cannot be extended. On its own initiative, the MCEB or special magistrate may order rehearing within ten (10) days after the entry of the order. After timely service of a motion, the time to file a notice of appeal runs from the date of rendition of the order on the motion, and not from any order that has been entered. If a notice of appeal is filed by the aggrieved party before the motion for rehearing is heard, the motion for rehearing is automatically waived and withdrawn. The grounds upon which a motion for rehearing may be filed shall include one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Factual errors on the record; 
(2)  Procedural errors committed during the public hearing; 
(3)  Perjury committed by a person testifying at the hearing; 
(4)  Newly discovered evidence; and/or 
(5)  Dispute amount of fine imposed by MCEB or special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.14), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-75. - Setting aside orders. 
    If, within ninety (90) days after the expiration of a deadline to correct violations set by the MCEB or special magistrate, the city has received notice that enforcement action could not be commenced or continued due to the application of statutory law, including but not limited to federal bankruptcy stays or protections available under the Soldier and Sailors Relief Act, then the city may move to have the MCEB or special magistrate set aside the order and remand the case back to the applicable department for further action, as may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.15), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-76. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices to an alleged violator required by this division shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that if such notice is sent under this subsection to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the records maintained by the county property appraiser and at any other address provided to the city by such owner, and is returned unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the city with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff's office, code inspector or any other person duly designated and authorized by the city; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above fifteen (15) years of age and informing that person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person authorized to accept such notice on behalf of the commercial establishment. 
(5)  In the case of hearings held pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083, notices shall be provided to petitioners by first class U.S. mail. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, at the option of the inspector as to notices of violation or notices of hearing, a notice may be served by publication or posting as follows: 
(1)  By publishing the notice once during each week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four (4) publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed in F.S. Ch. 50 for legal and official advertisements. Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(2)  In lieu of publication, a notice may be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing or to the expiration of any deadline contained in a notice, in at least two (2) locations, one of which shall be on the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be in the lobby of City Hall, 11250 North 56th Street, Temple Terrace, Florida. Proof of posting shall be made by affidavit of the person posting the notice and shall include a copy (which may be in the form of a photograph) of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(c)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this section have been met, without regard whether or not the alleged violator received actual notice. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.16), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 1-77. - Conflict of interest. 
    Conflict of interest provisions shall apply to shall apply to members of the MCEB and special magistrates pursuant to F.S. §§ 112.3143 and 286.012. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2(exh. A, § 25.315.17), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1346, § 2, 7-2-2013) 
Secs. 1-78-1-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 1-101. - Short title and legislative intent. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Supplemental Enforcement Procedures Ordinance." This division has been enacted pursuant to the authority of F.S. ch. 162, part II. It is the intent of this division to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by adopting an alternate code enforcement system which gives code enforcement officers the authority to issue citations imposing a civil penalty against violators of the city's ordinances and codes. The enforcement authority created in this division shall be limited to those sections of the code expressly enumerated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 2(exh. A, § 25.335.1), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 1-102. - Applicability; nonapplicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all violations of city codes or ordinances which are expressly declared by the city council to be governed by the provisions of this division. This division shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80 of building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. For the purposes of this section, "building codes" means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 (Florida Building Code). 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 2(exh. A, § 25.335.2), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 1-103. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Citation means the notice issued by a code enforcement officer in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against that person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
    Code enforcement officer means any designated employee or agent of the city whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city and may include, but may not be limited to, code inspectors, law enforcement officers, or fire safety inspectors. Such employees or agents shall be trained and qualified to issue citations. 
    Division means the supplemental enforcement procedures ordinance established in this division, including sections 1-101 through 1-106. 
    Irreparable or irreversible violation shall mean a violation that causes harm, damage, injury or change that is incapable of correction, repair or return to an original condition. 
    Person means any natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association or other legal entity or person recognized or allowed to do business under state law. 
    Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has received a citation and: 
(1)  Paid the fine for; 
(2)  Contested the citation and been found guilty of; or 
(3)  Been found guilty by reason of default for; 
violating the same provision of the code within five (5) years prior to the violation, notwithstanding that the violations occurred at different locations. 
    Violator means a person who has been issued a citation consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 2(exh. A, § 25.335.3), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 1-104. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The county court shall have jurisdiction over all violations governed by this division. 
(b)  A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an act in violation of a duly enacted city code or ordinance. 
(c)  Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a city code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than thirty (30) days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the code violation within the given time period, a code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. 
(d)  If, however, a code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation is a repeat violation or presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, a code enforcement officer does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue that citation. 
(e)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county court. 
(f)  A violation of a city code or ordinance enforced by the provisions of this division is a civil infraction punishable by a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 or such amount as may hereafter by prescribed by law. The fines to be assessed by code enforcement officers shall be established by ordinance. 
(g)  Subject to subsection (j) of this section, the alleged violator has the option of paying the penalty or contesting the citation in county court. The procedures for contesting the citation shall be set forth in the citation. 
(h)  Subject to subsection (j) of this section, if a person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation for the first two (2) violations, he or she shall pay to the clerk of the circuit court the corresponding penalty within the time frame set forth on the citation. Payment of said penalty shall be made either by mail or in person to the clerk of the circuit court within the time frame specified on the citation. 
(i)  If a person fails to pay the penalty within the specified period or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation. A judgment may be entered against that person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(j)  Mandatory court appearances are required for the third and subsequent violations of a code or ordinance. The citation shall clearly inform the person of the mandatory court appearance. A person required to appear in court does not have the option of paying the penalty instead of appearing in court. 
(k)  Any civil penalties collected by virtue of the operation of this division shall be paid, and deposited by the clerk of the circuit court, into such funds as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 1-105. - Schedule of violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations of the following sections of the city Code of Ordinances are considered Class I violations and will carry a fine of: 
    For a first offense, $25.00. 
    For a second offense, $75.00. 
    For a third offense, $150.00. 
    For a fourth or subsequent offense, $300.00. 
City Code Section 8-56(a) Florida Fire Protection Code/National Fire Protection Association provisions: 1:13.6.8.1.3-Obstructed/improperly mounted fire extinguisher 101:7.1.10.1-Obstructed/inaccessible egress 101:7.2.1.5-Locked egress when occupied 1:10.19.3.2-Obstructed sprinkler heads 1:13.1.4-Inaccessible fire protection system 1:50.5.6-Unclean hood system 1:50.6.1.2.2-Hood system nozzles not aligned 1:10.19-Improper storage of combustibles 101:7.9.1.1-Inadequate emergency lighting 101:7.10.5.1-Exit sign not illuminated 1:11.1.7-Improper use of extension cords 8-57(b)(1) Fire extinguisher inspection 8-166(2)b Dumpster lids 10-31(4) Unauthorized removal of recyclables 12-983(2)b Prohibited signs 20-62 Operation of golf carts 20-63 Registration 20-64 Required equipment 22-304 Grease traps and interceptors 22-340 Collection practices for solid waste 22-344(4) Shopping carts  
(b)  Violations of the following sections of the city Code of Ordinances are considered Class II violations and will carry a fine of: 
For a first offense, $75.00. 
For a second offense, $150.00. 
For a third or subsequent offense, $300.00. 
City Code Section 14-224 Hawking, peddling, soliciting and canvassing prohibited without license 14-225 Solicitation in public rights-of-way prohibited 16-3 Public buildings; injury, deface, etc.  
(c)  Violations of the following sections of the city Code of Ordinances are considered Class III violations and will carry a fine of: 
For a first offense, $150.00. 
For a second or subsequent offense, $300.00. 
City Code Section 12-621(a) Stormwater Discharges From Industrial and Construction Activities 12-623 Prohibition of Illicit Discharges and Illicit Connections  
(Ord. No. 1307, § 2(exh. A, § 25.335.5), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1353, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 1-106. - Supplemental enforcement tool. 
    The provisions of this division are additional and supplemental means of enforcing city codes or ordinances and may be used for the enforcement of any code or ordinance, or for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 2(exh. A, § 25.335.6), 2-21-2012) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; elections, F.S. chs. 97-107; lost or abandoned property, F.S. ch. 705. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Custodian of public records of city. 
(a)  The city clerk is hereby designated as the custodian of the public records of the city. 
(b)  The term "public records" means all documents referred to in F.S. § 119.011(12) insofar as said provision is applicable to the city. 
(c)  As custodian of the public records, the city clerk shall have the duties and responsibilities set forth in F.S. ch. 119. 
(Code 2001, § 2.200; Ord. No. 242, 1-19-1971; Ord. No. 1451 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 2-2. - Notices; publication; posting. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, wherever publication is required herein such publication shall be made by posting at a conspicuous place in the city hall for the requisite period and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 2001, § 2.205; Ord. No. 433, 4-6-1982) 
Sec. 2-3. - Administrative departments established; appointment of department heads; bond; additional duties. 
(a)  The following city administrative departments are hereby established, all of which shall serve directly under the jurisdiction and authority of the city manager or designee: 
(1)  Code compliance; 
(2)  Community development; 
(3)  Finance; 
(4)  Fire; 
(5)  Human resources; 
(6)  Information technology; 
(7)  Leisure services; 
(8)  Police; 
(9)  Public works; 
(10)  Redevelopment. 
(b)  All department heads shall be appointed by the city manager or designee and shall be exempt from the city's merit system; they shall be deemed to be unclassified city employees. A department head may be responsible for one or more departments. 
(c)  The community development director shall be responsible for the administrative support of the board of adjustment. 
(d)  The finance director shall serve without remuneration as treasurer to the police and fire pension funds. 
(e)  The fire chief shall also serve as fire marshal. 
(f)  The fire chief shall also serve as the emergency preparedness coordinator. 
(g)  As provided in section 8-96, the fire chief is the housing official. 
(Code 2001, § 2.235(a), (b), (d)-(g); Ord. No. 447, 6-15-1982; Ord. No. 646, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 961, 11-18-1997; Ord. No. 1110, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009) 
Secs. 2-4-2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, F.S. chs. 97-107. 

Sec. 2-25. - State election laws adopted. 
    Except as provided in this section, the election laws of the state applicable to a municipality, where not in conflict with the corporate Charter of the city are hereby adopted. 
(Code 2001, § 7.700; Ord. No. 176, 2-7-1967; Ord. No. 647, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 1149, 6-21-2005) 
State Law reference- State election laws, F.S. chs. 97-107. 
Sec. 2-26. - Designation of elections official. 
    For any election, referendum or other ballot question not conducted in conjunction with a countywide election, the city clerk, or (in the event that the city contracts with the supervisor of elections to canvass the returns and certify the election) the supervisor of elections of the county shall canvass and certify the returns, and the results as shown by such returns shall be declared as the result of the election, and shall thereupon within ten (10) days after the canvass, furnish a certificate of elections pursuant to law. 
(Code 2001, § 7.710; Ord. No. 1149, 6-21-2005) 
Sec. 2-27. - Qualifying period for the regular election of city council and/or mayor. 
(a)  For any regular election of the city council and/or mayor, the qualifying period shall be defined as from noon the seventy-first day prior to the regular election for the office of city council and/or mayor, to noon the sixty-seventh day prior to the regular election for the office of city council and/or mayor. 
(b)  All other provisions relative to qualifying procedures and requirements for candidates seeking election to the office of city council or mayor shall be in accordance with state law. 
(Code 2001, § 7.720; Ord. No. 1170, 5-2-2006) 
Secs. 2-28-2-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public officers and employees generally, F.S. chs. 111, 112. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-58. - Merit system of employment. 
    The city is hereby empowered to establish a merit system covering and embracing the employees of the city to the end that appointments and promotions in the administrative service of the city shall be made according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained, so far as practicable, by competitive examination. 
(Code 2001, § 2.220; Ord. No. 433, 4-6-1982) 
Sec. 2-59. - Bonds of city officers and employees. 
    Such officers or employees as the council may, by ordinance, require so to do, shall give bond or similar insurance equivalent in such amount and with such surety as may be required by the council. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 2.215; Ord. No. 433, 4-6-1982) 
Sec. 2-60. - City officers not to have interest in concerns contracting with city; penalty for violations. 
    No members of the council or any officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract, or in the sale to the city, or to a contractor supplying the city, of any land or rights or interests in any land, material, supplies or service. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the council. 
(Code 2001, § 2.210; Ord. No. 433, 4-6-1982) 
Sec. 2-61. - Travel expenses for city officers, employees and authorized persons. 
(a)  Scope. Except as otherwise provided by contract or by resolution, in which event same shall prevail, the regulations established herein shall govern payment for authorized travel expenses incurred by city officers, employees and authorized persons. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized persons means: 
(1)  Persons, other than public officers or employees as defined herein, who are authorized by city council to incur travel expenses in the performance of their official duties; 
(2)  Persons who are called upon by city council to contribute time and services as consultants or advisors; or 
(3)  Persons who are candidates for an executive or professional position. 
    City employees means persons, other than city officers who fill or hold a regular or full-time, authorized position and who are responsible to the city manager or designee. 
    City officers means the mayor and members of the city council, the city manager, city department heads, the city clerk and other persons appointed by city council to travel or to incur expenses while on city business. 
    Class "A" travel means continuous travel of twenty-four (24) hours or more away from the city. 
    Class "B" travel means continuous travel of less than twenty-four (24) hours which involves overnight absence from the city. 
    Class "C" travel means travel for short or day trips where the travel is not away from the city overnight. 
    Common carrier means a train, bus, commercial airline operating scheduled flights, or rental car of an established rental car firm. 
    Travel day means a period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Travel expense, traveling expenses, necessary expenses while traveling, actual expenses while traveling, or words of similar nature means the usual, ordinary and incidental expenditures necessarily incurred by a traveler. 
    Travel period means the period of time between the time of departure and time of return. 
    Traveler means a city officer, city employee, or an authorized person, performing authorized travel. 
(c)  Authority to incur traveling expenses. 
(1)  To be paid from city funds, all travel must have the prior authorization and approval of the city manager or, in the absence of the city manager, the director of finance. 
(2)  Traveling expenses shall be those expenses necessarily incurred by the traveler in the performance of a public purpose. 
(3)  All travel expense vouchers shall be substantiated by complete explanation and justification. 
(4)  All air travel shall be tourist class, unless prior authorization is granted by the city manager or designee. 
(5)  Upon prior written approval of the city manager or designee, or by direction of the city council, candidates for executive or professional positions may be allowed traveling expenses pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Computation of travel time for reimbursement. 
(1)  The travel day for class "A" travel shall be a calendar day (midnight to midnight). The travel day for class "B" shall begin at the same time as the travel period. For class "A" and class "B" travel, the traveler shall be reimbursed at the authorized rate for each day or fraction thereof, included within the travel period. 
(2)  A traveler shall not be reimbursed on a per diem basis for class "C" travel but shall receive subsistence as provided in this section. Allowance for meals for class "C" travel shall be based upon the following schedule: 
Breakfast When travel begins before 7:00 a.m. and extends beyond 9:00 a.m. Lunch When travel begins before 11:00 a.m. and extends beyond 2:00 p.m. Dinner When travel begins before 4:00 p.m. and extends beyond 7:00 p.m., or when authorized travel occurs during nighttime hours. No allowance shall be made for meals when travel is confined to the city.  
(e)  Rates of per diem and subsistence allowance. 
(1)  All travelers may be allowed subsistence up to the amounts permitted in subsection (e)(2) of this section for meals, plus actual expenses for lodging at single occupancy rate, plus incidental traveling expenses to be substantiated by paid receipts. 
(2)  Travelers on official business shall be eligible for subsistence up to the following amounts: 
Breakfast $8.00 Lunch 12.00 Dinner 20.00  
(3)  All travelers must substantiate their full actual expenses by paid receipts approved by the city manager or designee before they can be reimbursed. 
(4)  Subsistence allowance will not be allowed for meals provided which are included in the cost of registration fees. 
(f)  Transportation. 
(1)  Route to be traveled. All travel must be by a usually traveled route. In case a person travels by an indirect route for the traveler's own convenience, any extra costs shall be borne by the traveler and reimbursement for expenses shall be based only on such charges as would have been incurred by a usually traveled route. 
(2)  Method of travel. The city manager or designee shall designate the most economical method of travel for each trip, keeping in mind the following conditions: 
a.  The nature of the business. 
b.  The most efficient and economical means of travel (considering time of the traveler, cost of transportation and subsistence required). 
c.  The number of persons making the trip, and the amount of equipment or material to be transported. 
(3)  Common carrier; receipt. Transportation by common carrier when traveling on official business and paid for personally by the traveler shall be substantiated by receipt. 
(4)  Privately-owned vehicle; reimbursement; mileage. The use of a privately-owned vehicle for official travel in lieu of publicly-owned vehicles or common carrier may be authorized by the city manager or designee if a publicly-owned vehicle is not available. Mileage for the use of a privately-owned vehicle will be reimbursed in accordance with the standard mileage rate for transportation expenses for all miles of use for business purposes, as established by the Internal Revenue Services. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section, the standard mileage rate established by the Internal Revenue Service and in effect as of January 1 of each year shall be used to calculate mileage reimbursements. 
a.  Reimbursement for expenditures related to the operation, maintenance and ownership of a vehicle shall not be allowed when privately-owned vehicles are used on public business and reimbursement is made pursuant to this subsection. 
b.  All mileage shall be shown from point of origin to point of destination and when possible shall be computed on the basis of the current map of the department of transportation. Vicinity mileage necessary for the conduct of official business is allowable, but must be shown as a separate item on the expense voucher. 
(5)  Chartered vehicles. Transportation by chartered vehicles when traveling on official business may be authorized by the city manager or designee when necessary or when it is to the advantage of the city. 
(6)  Allowance for privately-owned automobile. 
a.  The city manager or designee may grant monthly allowances in fixed amounts for use of privately owned automobiles on official business in lieu of the mileage rate provided in subsection (f)(4) of this section. Allowances granted pursuant to this subsection shall be reasonable, taking into account the customary use of the automobile, the roads customarily traveled, and whether any of the expenses incident to the operation, maintenance, and ownership of the automobile are paid from funds of the city. Such allowance may be changed at any time and shall be made on the basis of a signed statement of the traveler, filed before the allowance is granted or changed, and at least annually thereafter. 
b.  The statement shall show the places and distances for an average typical month's travel on official business, and the amount that would be allowed under the approved rate per mile for the travel shown in the statement, if payment has been made pursuant to subsection (f)(4) of this section. 
(7)  Monthly allowance; travel beyond county limits. Payment of a monthly allowance in fixed amounts for use of privately-owned vehicles shall not exempt a traveler from payment under subsection (f)(4) of this section when travel extends beyond the county limits. 
(8)  Depreciation allowance. No contracts may be entered into between a city officer or employee, or any other person, and the city in which a depreciation allowance is used in computing the amount due by the city to the individual for the use of a privately-owned vehicle on official business. 
(9)  Transportation by another person. No traveler shall be allowed either mileage or transportation expense when the traveler is gratuitously transported by another person, or when the traveler is transported by another traveler who is entitled to mileage or transportation expenses. 
(g)  Other expenses. The following incidental traveling expenses of the traveler shall be reimbursed when travel is authorized under subsection (c) of this section. 
(1)  Taxi fare. 
(2)  Ferry fares, and bridge, road and tunnel tolls. 
(3)  Storage or parking fees. 
(4)  Communication expense. 
(5)  Convention registration fee. 
(h)  Fraudulent claims. Claims submitted pursuant to this section shall not be required to be sworn to before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths, but all claims shall be submitted on the prescribed travel expense report form. This form shall contain a statement that the expenses were actually incurred by the traveler as necessary travel expenses in the performance of the traveler's official duties and shall be signed by the person submitting the claim. Any person who willfully makes and subscribes any claims which the person does not believe to be true and correct as to every material matter, or who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels, or advises the preparation or presentation of a claim which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished accordingly. Whoever shall receive an allowance or reimbursement by means of a false claim shall be civilly liable in the amount of the overpayment for the reimbursement of the public fund from which the claim was paid. 
(Code 2001, § 2.245; Ord. No. 374, 11-3-1978; Ord. No. 516, 7-10-1984; Ord. No. 891, 1-3-1995; Ord. No. 1122, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 1192, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 1243, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009) 
State Law reference- Reimburse of municipal officers for authorized travel, F.S. § 166.021(9). 
Sec. 2-62. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the city is required or authorized by any state statute, the provisions of this Code, or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained or for the purpose of carrying out duties, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties; provided, that such entry and inspection shall be made in a lawful manner. 
(Code 2001, § 1.155) 
Secs. 2-63-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC OFFICES 

Sec. 2-81. - City manager. 
(a)  Responsibilities. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city, and shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. 
(b)  Separation of executive powers from powers of council and mayor. Neither the mayor, nor the council, nor any of its members, shall direct or request that the city manager or designee appoint or remove any person from office, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the mayor and city council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager or designee. Neither the mayor, the city council, nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. If the mayor or any member of the city council violates the provisions of this section, or votes for a resolution or ordinance in violation of this section, such person shall be guilty of misfeasance of office and upon conviction shall cease to hold office; provided, however, that passage of, or action on, an ordinance or resolution establishing a merit system providing for employee regulations or benefits or authorizing execution of a collective bargaining agreement shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Appointment and removal of administrative department heads; and serve as the final administrative authority in formal grievance procedures pursuant to any collective bargaining agreement or under the merit system established by the city council; 
(2)  Serve as chief fiscal officer for the city; provided, however, that the city manager may delegate any or all of said duties to the finance director, who shall perform said duties under the city manager or designee's supervision and control. The duties of the chief fiscal officer shall include: 
a.  Compilation of the current expenses and capital estimates for the city's budget; 
b.  Preparation of the annual city budget; submittal of same to city council, and responsibility for administration of the city budget after adoption; 
c.  Supervision and responsibility for the disbursement of all monies, including, but not limited to, purchase of all materials, supplies or equipment for which funds are provided in the city's budget; provided, however, that the city manager or designee shall purchase no item which exceeds any budget appropriation, or let any contract (construction or otherwise) which cannot be consummated with budgeted funds, unless the city manager or designee receives prior authorization therefor from the city council; 
d.  Maintenance of a general accounting system for the city, including, but not limited to, maintaining all books for the exercise of financial budgetary control, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures for municipal government; 
e.  Advise and recommend to the city council as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and propose measures which are necessary or expedient; 
f.  Submit to the city council a periodic statement of all receipts and disbursements, in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city, and preparation and submittal to the council of the annual audit; 
g.  Supervision and responsibility for the making of all special assessments for the city council; and do all other things required by the laws of the state for the assessment of such taxes; 
h.  Custody of all public funds belonging to, or under control of, the city or any office or department thereof and deposit of all funds coming into the city in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the city council; 
i.  Custody of all investments and invested funds of the city; safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city; and receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(3)  Enforcement and administration of all city laws, resolutions and ordinances; 
(4)  Performance of such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(5)  The city manager, or any other office holder of the city, who is appointed by the city council to serve as a trustee of the firefighters retirement system pension board and/or police officers retirement system pension board, that such service shall be as part of their ex officio duties. 
(d)  Designation of substitute if city manager is temporarily absent or disabled. If the city manager is temporarily absent or disabled, the city manager shall designate a qualified officer of the city to perform the duties of city manager until the city manager shall return or the disability ceases. If the person so designated by the city manager is unsatisfactory to the city council, the city council may, by resolution, appoint an alternate officer to perform the duties of the city manager. 
(Code 2001, § 2.230(a), (c)-(e); Ord. No. 447, 6-15-1982; Ord. No. 1131, 12-7-2004) 
Sec. 2-82. - City clerk. 
(a)  Established; powers and duties. The office of city clerk is hereby established. The city clerk shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all legislative affairs of the city and to that end shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Appointment of a deputy city clerk, who shall be exempt from the city employee merit system; 
(2)  Preparation and submittal to the city manager or designee of the annual legislative budget; 
(3)  Maintenance of the journal of all city council meetings and work sessions and of such other board and committee meetings as shall be required by the city council; 
(4)  Authentication of all ordinances, resolutions and transcripts of legislative functions; 
(5)  Service as deputy registrar for voter registration, and responsibility for the conduct of all municipal elections; 
(6)  Publication of all public notices required by the city council or by law; 
(7)  Service as legal custodian of all city records including, but not limited to, all contracts, deeds, abstracts, title insurance policies and other official documents; 
(8)  Preparation of all awards, proclamations, certificates and other formal documentation by the mayor and/or city council; 
(9)  Notification to the city council of all vacancies on boards or committees established by the city council; 
(10)  Filing of all liens, satisfactions and releases, as authorized by the city manager or designee; 
(11)  Service as a notary public on behalf of the city; 
(12)  Performance of such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  Designation of alternate officer to perform duties if clerk is temporarily absent or disabled. If the city clerk is temporarily absent or disabled, the city clerk shall designate a qualified officer of the city to perform the duties of city clerk until the city clerk shall return or the disability ceases. If the person so designated by the city clerk is unsatisfactory to the city council, the city council may, by resolution, appoint an alternate officer to perform the duties of city clerk. 
(Code 2001, § 2.225(a), (b); Ord. No. 446, 6-8-1982) 
Sec. 2-83. - City attorney. 
(a)  Established. The office of the city attorney is hereby established. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council unless a term of office is otherwise provided for by written agreement of the city. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The city attorney shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all legal affairs of the city and to that end shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Service as general legal counsel for the city, including the rendering of legal advice and assistance to the city council, city manager, and all city departments. 
(2)  Research of legal questions, preparation of resolutions and ordinances, issuance of briefs and legal documents, representation of the city in various civil lawsuits and rendering of legal opinions. 
(3)  Attendance at all city council meetings and work sessions and at such other board and committee meetings as required by the city council. 
(4)  Preparation and submittal of the annual legal department budget to the city manager or designee. 
(5)  Appointment of an assistant city attorney and/or para-legal subject to confirmation by the mayor and city council and subject to budgetary funding. 
(6)  Performance of other related duties as may be required by the city council. 
(c)  Designation of alternate officer to perform duties if attorney is temporarily absent or disabled. If the attorney is temporarily absent or disabled, the attorney shall designate a qualified officer of the city to perform the duties of city attorney until the city attorney shall return or disability ceases. If the person so designated by the city attorney is unsatisfactory to the city council, the city council may, by resolution, appoint an alternate officer to perform the duties of city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1460 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-2018) 
Secs. 2-84-2-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 2-108-2-127. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Social Security[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Social security for public officers and employees, F.S. ch. 650. 

Sec. 2-128. - Participation by city. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of July 1, 1951, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by F.S. ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of said city by employees thereof. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 2001, § 18.180.1; Ord. No. 14, 9-18-1951) 
Sec. 2-129. - Employee contributions; withholding. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages, or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-128 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by said laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 2001, § 18.180.2; Ord. No. 14, 9-18-1951) 
Sec. 2-130. - City contributions; appropriations. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general fund and provided for in the budget of the city, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 2001, § 18.180.3; Ord. No. 14, 9-18-1951) 
Sec. 2-131. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the rules and regulations of the state agency for the enforcement of said laws and regulations. 
(Code 2001, § 18.180.4; Ord. No. 14, 9-18-1951) 
Sec. 2-132. - Custodian of funds. 
    The treasurer of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the treasurer is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purpose of this subdivision. 
(Code 2001, § 18.180.5; Ord. No. 14, 9-18-1951) 
Sec. 2-133. - Adoption of social security act. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public Law, No. 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its departments and agencies except any of such officers and employees who occupy any position, office or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 2001, § 18.180.6; Ord. No. 14, 9-18-1951) 
Secs. 2-134-2-164. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Florida Retirement System[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Florida retirement system, F.S. ch. 121. 

Sec. 2-165. - Adoption of Florida Retirement System. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of the Florida Retirement System, for and on behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be covered under the agreement. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.1; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-166. - Benefits extended to employees and officials. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective October 1, 1972, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or excepted herein, the benefits of the Florida Retirement System as authorized by F.S. ch. 121 to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. ch. 121, performed in the employ of the city by employees and officials thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.2; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-167. - Exclusions; referendum for electing coverage; compulsory coverage. 
    There is hereby excluded from this subdivision any authority to include in any agreement entered into under section 2-168 any service, position, employee, or official now covered by or eligible to be covered by an existing retirement system sponsored by the city except social security only after holding a referendum, in which all employees and officials in the affected units have the right to participate. Only those employees and officials electing coverage under the Florida Retirement System by affirmative vote in said referendum shall be eligible for coverage, and those not participating or electing not to be covered by the Florida Retirement System shall remain in their present system and shall not be eligible for coverage. After said referendum is held, all future employees shall be compulsory members of the Florida Retirement System. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.3; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-168. - Mayor authorized to execute agreements and amendments for administration of plan. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the department of administration for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the Florida Retirement System to the employees and officials of the city as provided in sections 2-166 and 2-167, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the administrator of the Florida Retirement System to be necessary and proper, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after October 1, 1972. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.4; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-169. - Withholding from salaries, wages, etc. 
    Withholding from salaries wages, or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-166 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the administrator designated by said laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.5; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-170. - Contributions by city. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general fund and gross revenue funds, such amounts and at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments required of the city as employer, by applicable state laws or regulations, which shall be paid over the lawfully designated administrator of the Florida Retirement System at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.6; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-171. - Records and reports to be kept. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, and shall adhere to all laws and regulations relating to the Florida Retirement System. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.7; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-172. - Fiscal director as custodian of funds; withholding and reporting agent. 
    The fiscal director of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees as authorized herein and of the appropriated funds for the employer's contributions as provided in section 2-170. Also, the fiscal director is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining records for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 18.200.8; Ord. No. 272, 9-5-1972) 
Secs. 2-173-2-197. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Firefighters[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Firefighter pensions, F.S. ch. 175; actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.60 et seq.; minimum requirements for local firefighter pension plans, F.S. § 175.351. 

Sec. 2-198. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, only that portion of any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, shall be included in accumulated contributions. Accumulated contributions also includes the amount the member contributes to the trust fund which represents the actuarial equivalent of the value of benefits attributable to the purchase of military service prior to employment pursuant to section 2-217 and attributable to the purchase of fire service prior to employment pursuant to section 2-223. 
    Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon actuarial assumptions and an interest rate as determined by the board of trustees after advice by the fund's actuary. 
    Average final compensation means the average of the four (4) highest calendar years of compensation or salary for credited service of the last ten (10) calendar years prior to retirement, termination or death. The amount of vacation payoff shall not be included in one of the four (4) highest calendar years of compensation but shall be added to such before dividing by forty-eight (48) to obtain the average final monthly compensation, provided however after October 8, 2011, the maximum amount of vacation payoff that may be included shall be the amount of accrued unused vacation leave as of October 8, 2011. For in-line-of-duty disability benefits, if less than four (4) years of credited service have been completed, the term "average final compensation" means the average annual compensation of the total number of years of credited service. Each year used in the calculation of average final compensation shall commence on January 1. When the last calendar year prior to retirement, termination, or death does not constitute a full calendar year, such partial calendar year may be used in connection with part of another calendar year, pursuant to written rules adopted by the board of trustees. Notwithstanding the maximum amount set forth in section 2-207(a) and (b), for firefighters who separate from employment or who enter DROP, whichever comes first, on or after September 1, 2011, the maximum amount shall be ninety (90) percent of his average final compensation; provided, however, a firefighter who has completed forty-five (45) years of credited service shall receive an additional two (2) percent per year of credited service for each year in excess of forty-five (45) years. 
    Beneficiary means the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
    Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided and serve as trustees of the fund. 
    Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
    Credited service means and includes: 
(1)  The aggregate number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a firefighter with member contributions to the system, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such firefighter may not be employed by the city. No firefighter will receive credit for years or fractional parts of years of service if the firefighter withdrawn the firefighter's contributions to the fund for those years or fractional parts of years of service, unless the firefighter repays into the fund the amount the firefighter has withdrawn, plus interest determined by the board. The member shall have one hundred twenty (120) days after reemployment to make repayment. A firefighter may voluntarily leave accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five (5) years after leaving the employ of the fire department pending the possibility of being rehired, without losing credit for the time of active participation as a firefighter. If the firefighter is not reemployed within five (5) years, then the accumulated contributions will be returned upon request of the member. The years or fractional parts of years that a firefighter serves in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States or the United States Merchant Marine, voluntarily or involuntarily, after initial employment with the city shall be added to years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, pursuant to applicable provisions of federal and state law. 
(2)  Military service prior to employment purchased pursuant to section 2-217. 
(3)  Prior service as a firefighter for some other employer, as long as the firefighter is not entitled to receive a benefit for such other prior service as a firefighter, purchased pursuant to section 2-223. 
    Effective date means August 1, 1972. 
    Firefighter means an actively employed full-time person employed by the city, including initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.35 and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and to protect property. The term shall also mean any person whose name is carried on the active membership roll of the city fire department as a volunteer firefighter, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and to protect property. 
    Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
    Member means an actively employed firefighter who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire or enter the deferred retirement option program prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
    Plan year means the twelve-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
    Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
    Retirement means a member's separation from employment as a firefighter with the city with eligibility for receipt of benefits under the system, or entry into the deferred retirement option program. 
    Salary or compensation means: 
(1)  For salary or compensation prior to the pay period beginning October 9, 2011, the total salary paid a firefighter including overtime payments and education incentive, but excluding flexible benefits, uniform allowances, and any third-party sick pay. 
(2)  For a firefighter initially hired as a firefighter prior to October 9, 2011, for salary or compensation commencing with the pay period beginning October 9, 2011, the total salary paid a firefighter including education incentive and overtime payments up to three hundred (300) hours per year, but excluding flexible benefits, uniform allowances, any third-party sick pay, overtime payments over three hundred (300) hours per year, payments for accrued unused vacation leave and payments for accrued unused sick leave. Provided however, vacation payoff (the amount of the accrued unused vacation leave paid at the time of retirement, termination or death) shall be included up to the amount of the accrued unused vacation leave as of October 8, 2011. Provided further however, a firefighter who has reached normal retirement date on or before October 1, 2011, salary or compensation shall be determined as provided in subsection (1) of this definition. 
(3)  For firefighters initially hired as a firefighter on or after October 9, 2011, for salary or compensation commencing with the pay period beginning October 9, 2011, the total salary paid a firefighter including education incentive and overtime payments up to three hundred (300) hours per year, but excluding flexible benefits, uniform allowances, any third party sick pay, overtime payments over three hundred (300) hours per year, payments for accrued unused vacation leave and payments for accrued unused sick leave. 
(4)  The "compensation" used for the calculation of benefits and employee/employer contributions will be prior to any adjustments before taxes that are a portion of the city's flexible benefit program. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the code shall be disregarded. 
    Spouse means the lawful wife or husband of a member at the time of preretirement death or retirement. 
    System means the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System as contained herein and all amendments thereto, and rules adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.1; Ord. No. 1231, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 1265, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 1293, § 2, 8-16-2011) 
Sec. 2-199. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. 
(1)  All firefighters as of the effective date, and all future new firefighters, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(2)  All firefighters shall be required to complete a complete medical examination as prescribed by the city. 
(b)  Membership. Each firefighter shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.2) 
Sec. 2-200. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective the provisions of this article are hereby vested in a board of trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five (5) trustees, two (2) of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the municipality, who shall be appointed by the city council; and two (2) of whom shall be full-time firefighter members of the system, who shall be elected by a majority of the firefighters who are members of the system. The fifth trustee shall be chosen for a two-year term by a majority of the previous four (4) trustees as provided for herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its trustee. The fifth trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four (4) trustees appointed or elected as herein provided and shall serve a two-year term unless the office is sooner vacated and reappointed or reelected a trustee. Each resident shall serve as trustee for a period of two (2) years, unless sooner replaced by the city council at whose pleasure the trustee shall serve, and be reappointed or reelected a trustee. Each firefighter trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of two (2) years, unless the trustee sooner retires, leaves employment as a firefighter with the city, enters DROP, or otherwise vacates office as trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing trustee. Each firefighter may reappointed or reelected a trustee. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(b)  The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chair, vice chair, and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(c)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest provided that trustee complies with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d)  The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. 
(e)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4)  To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  To receive and process all applications for membership and benefits. 
(7)  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  Make the final determination of a member's eligibility for the disability benefits provided herein. 
(10)  To perform such other duties as are specified in this article. 
(11)  To perform such other duties as are specified in F.S. § 175.071. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.3) 
Sec. 2-201. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  As part of the system, there exists the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c)  All funds of the firefighters' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the finance director, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as the finance director is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the finance director shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the firefighters' retirement system. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the firefighters' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds and securities shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefits payments; 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  An independent audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f)  The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  The investment of the assets of the fund shall be subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in F.S. § 215.47(1)-(6), (8), (9), (11), and (17), except as prohibited in subsection (f)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Pursuant to F.S. § 112.661, the board shall adopt a written investment policy. 
(4)  Investment activity in the following is prohibited: 
a.  Short sales, margin purchases and borrowing. 
b.  Private placements and other restricted securities. 
c.  Commodities. 
d.  Puts, calls, straddles and hedging. 
e.  Warrants and other options, except as part of the purchase of another security. 
f.  Municipal and county bonds. 
g.  More than twenty-five (25) percent of the fund's assets in foreign securities on a market-value basis. 
(5)  At least once every three (3) years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 175.071, to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(6)  The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(7)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to the trustee's or board's own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(8)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(9)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney, with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(10)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(11)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this section, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(12)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board. Overpayment shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund. 
(13)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(14)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(15)  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to said fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.4; Ord. No. 1265, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-202. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. 
(1)  Amount. Effective January 8, 2006, members of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of ten and fifty-one hundredths (10.51) percent of salary. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for federal income tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  State contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the state, for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for firefighters of the city shall be deposited in the fund comprising part of this system immediately and under no circumstances more than five (5) days after receipt by the city. Effective October 1, 2016, the state contribution will be used as provided for in F.S. § 175.351(1). As determined by the actuary, the city will be able to use up to $156,212.42 of the annual state contributions to offset its City contribution to the fund. Any annual state contribution, including any supplemental state contribution, in excess of $156,212.42 will be divided equally between the city and the members; the city' fifty (50) percent of the increase will be used to offset the city's contribution and the member's fifty (50) percent will be deposited to the share plan. For the fiscal 2016/2017 year only, the accumulated unallocated state contributions of $18,213.24 will be divided equally between the city and the members in accordance with F.S. § 175.351(1)(d): the city's fifty (50) percent will be used to offset the unfunded liability in the fund and the member's fifty (50) percent will be used to fund the share accounts. 
(c)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year, between the total aggregate member contributions for the year, plus state contributions for such year, and the total cost for the year, as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided in F.S. ch. 112, pt. VII (F.S. § 112.60 et seq.). 
(d)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.5; Ord. No. 1157, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 1417, § 1, 4-4-2017 ) 
Sec. 2-203. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a)  Normal retirement date. 
(1)  For firefighters who separate from employment or who enter DROP, whichever comes first, prior to September 1, 2011, a member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of the completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service or attainment of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. 
(2)  For firefighters who separate from employment or who enter DROP, whichever comes first, on or after September 1, 2011, a member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of the completion of twenty (20) years of credited service, or attainment of age fifty-four (54) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. 
(3)  A member may retire on his normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and each member shall become one hundred (100) percent vested in this accrued benefit on the member's normal retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is retirement from employment as a firefighter with the city on or after the normal retirement date. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on or after the normal retirement date shall receive monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the retirement date and be continued thereafter during member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed in any event. In the event the member dies after retirement but before the member has received retirement benefits for a period of ten (10) years, the same monthly benefit shall be paid to the beneficiary as designated by the firefighter for the balance of such ten-year period. 
(1)  The amount of monthly retirement income payable to a firefighter who retires on or after the normal retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of years of credited service prior to October 1, 1981, multiplied by two and one-half (21/2) percent plus the number of years of credited service after October 1, 1981, multiplied by three (3) percent of the average of the highest five years of the last ten years of compensation as a firefighter. 
(2)  For firefighters who separate from employment as a firefighter or who enter DROP, whichever comes first, on or after October 1, 2003, but prior to January 1, 2006, the monthly retirement benefit shall equal three (3) percent for each year of credited service, multiplied by the average compensation of the best four (4) years of the last ten (10) years of credited service as a firefighter prior to retirement, termination, or death, or entry into DROP, whichever comes first. 
(3)  For firefighters who separate from employment as a firefighter or who enter DROP, whichever comes first, on or after January 1, 2006, the monthly retirement benefit shall equal three (3) percent for each year of credited service prior to June 1, 2001, and three and five-tenths (3.5) percent for each year of credited service after June 1, 2001, multiplied by the average compensation of the best four (4) years of the last ten (10) years of credited service as a firefighter prior to retirement, termination, or death, or entry into DROP, whichever comes first. The actuarial cost of increasing the benefit accrual rate from three (3) percent to three and five-tenths (3.5) percent for credited service after June 1, 2001, shall first be borne by increasing members' contributions from six and eight-tenths (6.8) percent to ten and fifty-one hundredths (10.51) percent of the members' salary, then by the use of the annual premium tax revenues in excess of $93,191.00 per calendar year up to a maximum additional annual amount of $85,182.00, and then, if necessary, by city contributions. 
(c)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on the early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the later of the attainment of age fifty (50) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment as a firefighter with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(d)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on the early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal retirement as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been the normal retirement date had the member remained a firefighter and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on the normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of the early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, which is actuarially reduced from the amount to which the member would have been entitled had the member retired on the date which would have been the member's normal retirement date had the member continued employment, with the same number of years of credited service as at the time benefits commence and based on average final compensation at that date. In no event shall the early retirement reduction exceed three (3) percent for each year by which the member's age at retirement precedes the member's normal retirement age. 
(e)  Lump-sum payment of small retirement income. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, if the monthly retirement income payable to any person entitled to benefits hereunder is less than $100.00, or if the single-sum value of the accrued retirement income is less than $5,000.00, as of the date of retirement or termination of service, whichever is applicable, the board, in the exercise of its discretion, may specify that the actuarial equivalent of such retirement income be paid in a lump sum. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.6; Ord. No. 1157, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 1293, § 3, 8-16-2011) 
Sec. 2-204. - Cost-of-living adjustment. 
(a)  The retirement benefit for a firefighter retiring after October 1, 2000, but before April 1, 2004, under the early or normal retirement provisions of the fund shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the firefighter's fifty-sixth birthday and ending on the October 1 immediately following the firefighter's seventieth birthday. For purposes of this subsection, the term "retiring" means a firefighter who separates from city employment as a firefighter other than because of disability or death who upon separation is immediately eligible for receipt of retirement benefits under the retirement plan, or who in lieu of terminating employment as a firefighter enters the deferred retirement option program (DROP); provided, however, for a firefighter retiring after October 1, 2000, but before April 1, 2004, the board of trustees is authorized after advice by the fund's actuary to make an adjustment as a result of changing the month in which cost-of-living adjustments begin or are adjusted. 
(b)  For a firefighter who separates from employment as a firefighter or enters DROP, whichever comes first, on or after April 1, 2004, but before September 1, 2011, who has twenty-five (25) years or more of creditable service as a firefighter, or who was granted line-of-duty disability retirement benefits by the board of trustees, or who was granted line-of-duty death benefits by the board of trustees, or who at the time of separation from employment as a firefighter or entry into DROP had completed ten (10) or more years of creditable service as a firefighter and had attained age fifty-five (55), the monthly retirement benefit payable shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the firefighter's fifty-sixth birthday and ending on October 1 immediately following the firefighter's seventieth birthday. 
(c)  For a firefighter who separates for employment as a firefighter or enters DROP, whichever comes first, on or after September 1, 2011, who at the time of separation from employment as a firefighter or entry into DROP had attained normal retirement date as defined in section 2-203, or who was granted line-of-duty disability retirement benefits by the board of trustees, or who was granted line-of-duty death benefits by the board of trustees, the monthly retirement benefit payable shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the firefighter's fifty-sixth birthday and ending on October 1 immediately following the firefighter's seventieth birthday. 
(d)  Those persons who are eligible to receive monthly retirement benefits after the death of the firefighter who was eligible for cost-of-living adjustments under subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall receive the cost-of-living adjustments at the same time the firefighter would have received the cost-of-living adjustments but for the death of the firefighter. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.7; Ord. No. 1305, § 1, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-205. - Deferred retirement option program (DROP). 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    DROP means the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Deferred Retirement Option Program as set forth in this subsection. 
    DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating employment as a firefighter, any firefighter actively employed by the city and who is eligible to receive a normal retirement pension under the firefighters' pension trust fund may elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
(2)  Election to participate. A firefighter's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the firefighters' pension trust fund board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least thirty (30) business days after it is received by the board. Member contributions to the fund shall cease beginning with the first pay period after entry into DROP. 
(3)  Period of participation. A firefighter who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2) of this section shall participate in the DROP for a period not more than sixty (60) months. An election to participate in DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from service as a firefighter with the city not later than sixty (60) months from the beginning of participation in DROP. A firefighter may participate only once. 
(4)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A firefighter participating in the DROP shall cease participating in the DROP by terminating employment as a firefighter. 
b.  Upon a firefighter's termination of participation in the DROP, amounts shall cease to be credited to the DROP account under subsection (c)(2) of this section and the DROP account shall cease being credited with interest and investment earnings or losses under subsection (c)(2)b of this section. Upon termination of employment as a firefighter any amounts remaining in the DROP account shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. 
c.  A firefighter who elects to terminate participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(4) of this section shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5)  Effect of DROP participation on the firefighters' pension trust fund. 
a.  A firefighter's credited service and accrued benefit under the firefighters' pension trust fund shall be determined on the date participation in the DROP first becomes effective. The firefighter shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the firefighters' pension trust fund (except for cost-of-living adjustments provided by the system) while a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, the member shall not be permitted to again contribute to the firefighters' pension trust fund nor shall the member be eligible for disability or other preretirement benefits. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a firefighter from the firefighters' pension trust fund while the firefighter is a participant in the DROP. No amounts shall be paid from the firefighters' pension trust fund until the firefighter terminates employment as a firefighter. Unless otherwise specified in the firefighters' pension trust fund, amounts credited to the firefighter's DROP account shall be paid directly to the firefighter only after the first day of the month coincident with or next following the termination of employment as a firefighter. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each firefighter participating in the DROP. A firefighter's DROP account shall consist of amounts credited to the DROP under subsection (c)(2) of this section and interest earnings on those amounts. With respect to the earnings to be credited, prior to entering the DROP, a firefighter shall make an election to have the account credited with either: 
a.  A flat six and five-tenths (6.5) percent per annum, compounded quarterly; or 
b.  The actual investment return of the trust fund, net of all investment costs. 
The firefighter may prospectively change the method of crediting earnings once during the period of participation in the DROP effective at the beginning of the next fiscal year quarter. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a firefighter's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit which would have been received under the firefighters' pension trust fund had the firefighter terminated employment as a firefighter and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be credited to a DROP account. A firefighter's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b) (3) and (4) of this section, but in no event shall it continue past the date of termination as a firefighter. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b of this section, amounts credited to a firefighter's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) of this section shall be credited or debited with interest as follows: 
1.  After each fiscal year quarter, the average daily balance in a firefighter's deferred retirement option account shall be credited with the flat interest rate or credited or debited at a rate equal to the actual net rate of investment return realized by the firefighters' pension trust fund for that quarter, as previously elected by the firefighter. Net investment return for the purpose of this subsection is the total return of the assets in which the firefighter's DROP account is invested by the board of trustees net of brokerage commissions, management fees and transaction costs. 
2.  A firefighter's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings while the firefighter is a participant in the DROP. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. 
a.  As soon as administratively practicable following termination of employment, a firefighter shall receive the balance in the DROP account by direct rollover or in a cash lump sum, or a combination of both. No amounts shall be paid to a firefighter from the DROP prior to termination of employment as a firefighter. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a firefighter dies before benefits commence, the balance in the DROP account shall be paid to the stated beneficiary(s). 
c.  The distribution of a firefighter's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following the firefighter's termination of employment. 
(2)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased firefighter's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP assets shall be placed in the firefighters' pension trust fund board. 
(2)  Individual balances, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each firefighter's DROP account, and the board shall keep or cause to be kept in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to firefighters participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate government agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, the applicable portions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP's assets. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(5)  Expenses. To compensate the firefighters' pension trust fund for the expenses of administering and operating the DROP, the board may elect to charge each firefighter's DROP account an annual administrative fee which shall be reviewed and subject to increase or decrease annually. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended at any time and from time to time, and retroactively, if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise prohibited by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any firefighter. 
(2)  Information. Each firefighter, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that the board shall require to establish benefits under the DROP. 
(3)  Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three (3) months from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made written claim therefor within three (3) months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such person or the person's beneficiary later notifies the board of such person's whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to such person in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(4)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a firefighter pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules, uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by firefighters under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, the new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each firefighter who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with a current address and any subsequent changes in address. Any notice required to be given to a firefighter hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. 
(5)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable under the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the DROP and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.8) 
Sec. 2-205.1. - Share account. 
(a)  Once the insurance premium tax proceeds received by the system is in excess of $156,212.42, then one-half (1/2) of the insurance premium tax proceeds in excess of $156,212.42 shall be reserved to pay share account benefits to members of the System at the time of retirement. For the fiscal 2016/2017 year, one-half (1/2) of the accumulated unallocated state contributions of $18,213.24 will be deposited to the share account. This is a one (1) time deposit reserved to pay share account benefits to members of the system. 
(1)  The insurance premium tax reserve will be invested with the retirement system assets. 
(2)  The reserve balance will be credited with the net investment earnings/losses on a quarterly basis. 
(b)  In the year that the insurance premium tax proceeds exceed $156,212.42, then members will earn credit for each year, or fractional part of a year, of service worked. 
(1)  One (1) full credit is earned for each year and fractional parts are based on number of months and days worked during the year. 
(2)  Purchased years of service are not counted for purposes of credited service for the share account benefit. 
(c)  Upon attainment of ten (10) years of credited service, a member vests in entitlement to payment of the benefits when the member is eligible to collect retirement benefits. 
(1)  A member who does not attain ten (10) years of service is not entitled to a benefit. 
(2)  Members who are entitled to duty disability benefits are entitled to a benefit even though they do not have ten (10) years of service. The share of benefits is determined based upon the actual number of years of service. 
(3)  Beneficiaries/surviving spouses of members who are entitled to duty death benefit are entitled to a benefit even though the member did not have ten (10) years of service. The share of benefits is determined based upon the actual number of years of service. 
(4)  On the date of enactment, all current members of the plan are deemed vested in the share account if they have ten (10) years of service with the Temple Terrace Fire Department. 
(d)  Upon reaching retirement, a member's share of the insurance premium tax reserve will be determined by multiplying the insurance premium tax reserve balance by a fraction, the numerator of which is the member's total number of credits and the denominator is the total number of credits of all of the members of the plan. 
(1)  Benefits for vested terminated members are determined at the time of termination of employment and are accounted for separately until the member is eligible to begin receiving benefits. These assets are credited with the net investment earnings/losses on a quarterly basis, but the member is not entitled to share in any insurance premium tax receipts after termination of employment and no further service credits are earned. 
(2)  Interest is credited as of the end of each calendar quarter with the net rate of return on the retirement system assets as a whole. 
(3)  Members entitled to a share account benefit who retire intra-quarter will receive the earnings credited/losses as of the end of the prior quarter. 
(4)  The investment earnings/losses for the share accounts is net of management fees. 
(e)  The member's share is payable at retirement in a lump sum of the entire balance, which can be rolled over. 
(f)  If an actively employed member dies not in the line of duty and has more than ten (10) years of credited service, the deceased member's share is payable in a lump sum to the member's designated beneficiary. If a deceased actively employed member fails to designate a beneficiary, or if the beneficiary predeceases the actively employed member, the entire balance shall be paid to in the following priority: 
(1)  The deceased member's surviving child(ren), divided equally, if necessary; 
(2)  If no children are alive, the deceased member's surviving spouse; 
(3)  If no spouse is alive, the member's surviving parent(s), divided equally, if necessary; or 
(4)  If none are alive, the estate of the member. 
(g)  Rule-making authority. The board of trustees of the retirement system shall be authorized to adopt the rules necessary for the administration of the share plan. 
( Ord. No. 1417, § 2, 4-4-2017 ) 
Sec. 2-206. - Pre-separation death. 
    In the event a member (an actively employed and contributing firefighter who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements of the firefighters' retirement trust fund) dies prior to separation from employment as a firefighter or prior to entry into DROP, whichever comes first: 
(1)  Prior to vesting. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not yet vested shall receive a refund of one hundred (100) percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(2)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement. The beneficiary of any member who dies while actively employed as firefighter with the city and who, at the date of death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
a.  If the member was vested, but not yet eligible for normal or early retirement benefits, the beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would have been eligible for early or normal retirement benefits, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of the member's death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
b.  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement benefits, the beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal retirement date, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of the member's death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
c.  A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions, without interest. 
d.  A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, elect to receive a monthly amount payable for the life of the beneficiary which monthly amount shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section. The beneficiary may elect the date on which said monthly amount will commence. 
(3)  Member who dies in the line of duty. Upon determination by the board of trustees that a member died in the line of duty on or after October 1, 2003, regardless of length of service, the following benefits shall be paid: 
a.  As soon as is administratively possible, a total sum of $10,000.00 to the member's beneficiary. 
b.  Beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death a monthly benefit payable for fifteen (15) years (one hundred eighty (180) monthly payments) equal to fifty (50) percent of the member's annualized salary based on salary earned during the last full pay period immediately prior to death shall be paid to the member's beneficiary. 
c.  Beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death a monthly benefit equal to seven and one-half (71/2) percent of the member's annualized salary based on salary earned during the last full pay period prior to death shall be paid to each minor child of the member with the last monthly payment being on the first of the month immediately following the child's eighteenth birthday; provided, however, the combined monthly benefits paid to minor children shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the member's salary. 
d.  In lieu of the benefits provided in subsection (3)b of this section, the beneficiary may elect any of the benefits provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
e.  Once a firefighter enters DROP, or separates from employment as a firefighter, whichever comes first, the firefighter shall not be eligible for the in-line-of-duty death benefits provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(4)  As used in this section, the term "beneficiary" means one or more persons, named sequentially or jointly, who has or have been designated by the member, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board of trustees to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable. If no beneficiary is named in the manner provided herein, or if no beneficiary designated survives the member, the death benefit, if any, shall be paid by the board of trustees to the estate of such deceased member, provided that the board of trustees, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of any remaining monthly benefits payments be paid in a lump sum. Each designation may be revoked by the member by signing and filing with the board of trustees a new designation of beneficiary form. 
(5)  The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective administration of this section, including a designation of beneficiary form. 
(6)  For purposes of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, a member who leaves employment to perform qualified military service (as defined in section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code) and who dies while performing qualified military service, the beneficiary of the deceased member shall be entitled to those benefits as set forth in subsection (1) or (2) of this section as if the deceased member had resumed and then terminated employment on account of death, provided: 
a.  If the member has withdrawn accumulated contributions, such withdrawn contributions are repaid, plus interest determined by the board. 
b.  The member shall be entitled to credited service from the date the member leaves employment to perform qualified military service until the date of death while performing qualified military service, but not to exceed two (2) years. 
c.  This subsection (6) shall apply to deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.9; Ord. No. 1265, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-207. - Disability. 
(a)  Disability benefits on-duty. Any member who shall have become totally and permanently disabled while an active member of the city fire department to the extent that the member is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, which disability was directly caused by the performance of duty as a firefighter, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to the appropriate accrual rate set forth under normal retirement benefit multiplied by the total years of credited service multiplied by average final compensation, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be forty-two (42) percent of the average final compensation of the member, and the maximum amount shall be one hundred (100) percent of average final compensation. 
(b)  Disability benefits not in line of duty. Any member with ten (10) years or more credited service who shall have become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that the member is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of duties as a firefighter shall be entitled to a monthly pension equal to the appropriate accrued rate(s) set forth under normal retirement benefit multiplied by the total years of credited service multiplied by average final compensation, but in any event, the minimum amount paid to the member shall be twenty-five (25) percent of average final compensation, and the maximum amount shall be one hundred (100) percent of average final compensation. 
(c)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each firefighter who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the Armed Forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained after employment as a firefighter with the city shall have terminated. 
(d)  Physical examination requirement. 
(1)  A firefighter shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless the firefighter undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. 
(2)  Any firefighter receiving disability benefits under provisions of this article may be periodically reexamined by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that the retiree is unable to render useful and efficient service as a firefighter, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a firefighter, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that member had at the time the member was placed upon pension. In the event the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within thirty (30) days from the issuance thereof, member shall forfeit the right to the pension. 
(3)  The cost of the physical examination and/or reexamination of the firefighter claiming and/or receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. 
(4)  If the firefighter recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a firefighter, service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which the firefighter received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date the firefighter reentered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the system. 
(5)  The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(e)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the firefighter recovers from the disability prior to the normal retirement date, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery, or 
(2)  If the firefighter dies without recovering from disability or attains the normal retirement date while still disabled, the payment due next preceding death or the one hundred twentieth monthly payment, whichever is later; provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in section 2-209, which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(f)  Application for disability payments. A member who separates from employment as a firefighter with the city fire department shall not be eligible for disability benefits unless the member files a complete application for disability benefits on the required form within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of separation. A member who has filed a complete application for disability benefits on the required form who thereafter separates from employment (either voluntarily or involuntarily) may continue to seek disability benefits, and, if eligible, may start receipt of normal or early retirement benefits. If, at a later date, the member is determined by the board of trustees to be eligible for disability benefits, such disability benefits shall be paid retroactive to the first day of the month following the last day the member works prior to retiring or separating from employment. A member, who files an application for disability benefits who is determined by the board of trustees not to be totally and permanently disabled who does not separate from employment as a firefighter, may reapply for disability benefits only if there has been a change of circumstances. Change of circumstances may include, but is not limited to, additional injury or injuries, additional diagnostic test or tests, or application of disability benefits based on another medical condition. Any final order of the board of trustees in connection with an application for disability benefits shall be subject to review by way of filing a timely petition for writ of certiorari in the Thirteenth Judicial Circuit in and for the county. The board of trustees does not grant a rehearing in connection with any final order entered by the board of trustees, unless ordered by the court. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.10; Ord. No. 1198, 1-16-2007) 
Sec. 2-208. - Vesting. 
    If a member terminates employment as a firefighter with the city, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  If the member has less than ten (10) years credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a refund of accumulated contributions or member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  If the member has ten (10) or more years of credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal or early retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rates as of the date of termination, payable to the member commencing at member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, provided the member does not elect to withdraw accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw accumulated contributions and does not survive to the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, the member's designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under preretirement death. 
(3)  Any vested member of the system whose position is terminated, for whatever reason, but who remains employed by the city in some other capacity, shall have all retirement benefits accrued up to the date of such termination under this system preserved, provided the member does not elect to withdraw accumulated contributions from this system. Such accrued retirement benefits shall be payable at the member's otherwise early (reduced as for early retirement) or normal retirement date hereunder, or later, in accordance with the provisions of this system. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.11) 
Sec. 2-209. - Optional forms of retirement income. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified herein, a firefighter, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of actuarial equivalent value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of larger monthly amount payable to the retiree for the retiree's lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the joint lifetime of the retiree and a joint pensioner designated by the retiree, and following the death of the retiree, one hundred (100) percent, seventy-five (75) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent, or fifty (50) percent of such monthly amount payable to the joint pensioner for the lifetime of the joint pensioner. 
(b)  The firefighter upon electing any option of this section will designate the joint pensioner to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner. A member may change the joint pensioner at any time. If a firefighter has elected an option with a joint pensioner and retirement income benefits have commenced, the firefighter may thereafter change the designated joint pensioner at any time, but may only change the joint pensioner and not the option previously selected. The consent of a firefighter's joint pensioner to any such change shall not be required. Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then-current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculations expenses after the second change. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. 
(c)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a firefighter dies prior to normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 2-206. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary or joint pensioner dies before the firefighter's retirement under the plan, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the firefighter upon retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the firefighter prior to retirement. 
(3)  If a firefighter continues beyond the normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 2-203 and dies prior to actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary designated by the firefighter in the amount computed as if the firefighter had retired under the option on the date on which death occurred. 
(d)  No firefighter may make any change in retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing the first retirement check. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.12; Ord. No. 1265, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-210. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each firefighter may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a choice of one or more persons, named sequentially or jointly, as beneficiary to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such firefighter by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive only benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased firefighter fails to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, or if the beneficiary named by a deceased firefighter predeceases the firefighter, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased firefighter, shall be paid to the estate of the firefighter and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.13) 
Sec. 2-211. - Reports to division of retirement. 
    Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file a report with the division of retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 175.261. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.14) 
Sec. 2-212. - Roster of retirees. 
    The secretary of the board or designee shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this retirement system in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary or designee shall keep a record of all members of the retirement system in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.15) 
Sec. 2-213. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. Plan repeal or termination of system shall be consistent with F.S. § 175.361 and federal law. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting one hundred (100) percent of benefits accrued to date of repeal and the assets of the system shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the persons so entitled in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(c)  The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the system as of the date of repeal of this article, or if contributions to the system are discontinued with the date of such discontinuation being determined by the board: 
(1)  Apportionment shall first be made in respect of each retired firefighter receiving a retirement or disability benefit hereunder on such date, each person receiving a benefit on such date on account of a retired or disabled (but since deceased) firefighter, and each firefighter who has, by such date, become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, an amount which is the actuarial equivalent of such benefit, based upon the actuarial assumptions in use for purposes of the most recent actuarial valuation, provided that, if such asset value be less than the aggregate of such amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such asset value. 
(2)  If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, apportionment shall next be made in respect of each firefighter in the service of the city on such date who has completed at least ten (10) years of credited service and who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent, as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, of the accrued normal retirement benefit, based on the credited service and average monthly earnings as of such date, and each vested former member then entitled to a deferred benefit who has not, by such date, begun receiving benefit payments, in the amount required to provide said actuarial equivalent of the accrued normal retirement benefit, provided that, if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(3)  If there is any asset value after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, apportionment shall be made in respect of each firefighter in the service of the city on such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section in the amount equal to member's accumulated contributions, provided that, if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder such latter amount be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(4)  If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each firefighter included in subsection (c)(3) of this section to the extent of the actuarial equivalent, as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, of the accrued normal retirement benefit, less the amount apportioned in subsection (c)(3) of this section, based on the credited service and average monthly earnings as of such date, provided that, if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such amounts shall be reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5)  If there is any asset value remaining after the full apportionment specified in subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return of the state's contributions to the state, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to the date of termination such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
The allocation of the fund provided for in this subsection may, as decided by the board, be carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one sum to the persons entitled to said benefits or the distribution may be carried out in such other equitable manner as the board may direct. The fund may be continued in existence for the purposes of subsequent distributions. If, at any time during the first ten (10) years after the effective date of the ordinance originally establishing this system, the system shall be terminated or the full current costs of the system shall not have been met, anything in the system to the contrary notwithstanding, city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the twenty-five (25) highest paid firefighters on the effective date, whose anticipated annual retirement allowance provided by the city's contributions at member's normal retirement date would exceed $1,500.00, shall not exceed the greater of either $20,000.00, or an amount computed by multiplying the smaller of $10,000.00 or twenty (20) percent of such firefighter's average annual earnings during the last five (5) years of service by the number of years of service since the effective date. In the event that it shall hereafter be determined by statute, court decision, ruling by the commissioner of Internal Revenue, or otherwise, that the provisions of this subsection are not then necessary to qualify the system under the Internal Revenue Code, this subsection shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment of this section. 
(d)  After all the vested and accrued benefits provided hereunder have been paid and after all other liabilities have been satisfied, then and only then shall any remaining funds revert to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.16) 
Sec. 2-214. - Exemption from execution, nonassignability. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable, provided however, the following deductions may be made: 
(1)  Federal income tax shall be withheld in accordance with federal law, unless the payee elects otherwise on Form W-4P. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written authorization from the retiree or eligible dependents, premiums for life, health, accident, hospitalization, or annuity insurance, or all of any kinds of insurance that the city is required to offer retirees and their eligible dependents pursuant to F.S. § 112.0801. 
(3)  Repayment of overpayments from the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System upon notification to the payee. 
(4)  Payments to an alternate payee for alimony or child support pursuant to an income deduction order under F.S. § 61.1301. 
(5)  Payments to the Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax levies upon notification to the board of trustees by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(6)  Upon receipt of written authorization from the retiree or eligible dependents, premiums for life, health, accident, hospitalization, or annuity insurance, or all of any kinds of such insurance offered by or through a certified bargaining unit of the city. 
(7)  Pursuant to F.S. § 175.061(7), the board of trustees may by rule also authorize its custodian to withhold from the retirement payment those funds necessary to pay for premiums for accident, health, and long-term care insurance for the retiree and the retiree's spouse and dependents upon receipt of written authorization from the retiree, or retiree's surviving spouse, or retiree's beneficiary. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.17; Ord. No. 1265, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-215. - Pension validity. 
    The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or to correct the pension amount of any person heretofore or hereafter granted a pension under prior or existing law or heretofore granted a pension under this pension plan if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.18) 
Sec. 2-216. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein referred to as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c)  This section shall not apply nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.18) 
Sec. 2-217. - Military service prior to employment. 
    The years and fractional parts of years that a member has served on active military service of the Armed Forces of the United States or the United States Merchant Marine, voluntarily or involuntarily, and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city fire department shall be added to years of creditable service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the trust fund an amount which represents the actuarial equivalent of the value of the benefits attributable to such service credits on the date of deposit, along with the costs of all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the calculation. 
(2)  The maximum number of years of prior military service credits which may be purchased is four (4) years. 
(3)  The amounts to be deposited shall be calculated using the mortality table and interest rate determined by the board of trustees after advice by the fund's actuary. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.20) 
Sec. 2-218. - Excise tax on fire and tornado loss insurance. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the department of insurance of the state, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which said tax shall be in the amount of one and eighty-five hundredths (1.85) percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The license or excise tax herein levied shall be payable and collected in the manner provided for by F.S. ch. 175. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.21) 
State Law reference- Authority for tax, F.S. § 175.101. 
Sec. 2-219. - Applicable federal and state law. 
    The applicable provisions of federal and state law now existing or as they may exist in the future are incorporated herein by reference, except for provisions of applicable law which are permissive or not preemptive and not authorized herein. The board of trustees is hereby authorized to adopt written rules setting forth the specifics of applicable mandatory provisions of federal and state law as they now exist or may exist in the future. Applicable mandatory provisions of federal and state law include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, including, but not limited to, sections 401(a)(17) and 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), relating to military service. 
(3)  F.S. ch. 61, including, but not limited to, income deduction orders. 
(4)  F.S. § 112.18, concerning presumptions for certain conditions relative to disability. 
(5)  F.S. § 112.181, relating to special provisions relative to certain communicable diseases. 
(6)  F.S. § 112.3173, relating to forfeiture of retirement benefits. 
(7)  F.S. ch. 112, pt. III (F.S. § 112.311 et seq.), relating to the Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees. 
(8)  F.S. ch. 112, pt. VII (F.S. § 112.60 et seq.), cited as the "Florida Protection of Public Employee Retirement Benefits Act." 
(9)  F.S. § 112.661, relating to investment policies. 
(10)  F.S. ch. 119, relating to public records. 
(11)  F.S. § 175.071, relating to the general powers and duties of the board of trustees. 
(12)  F.S. § 175.195, relating to false, misleading or fraudulent statements made to obtain public retirement benefits. 
(13)  F.S. § 175.221, relating to lump-sum payment of small retirement income. 
(14)  F.S. § 175.231, relating to the presumption that certain diseases of firefighters were suffered in the line of duty. 
(15)  F.S. § 175.241, relating to exemption from tax and execution. 
(16)  F.S. § 175.351, relating to municipalities having their own pension plan for firefighters. 
(17)  F.S. § 215.47(1)-(8), (10) and (16), concerning authorized investments. 
(18)  F.S. § 286.0105, relating to notices of meeting and hearings. 
(19)  F.S. § 286.011, relating to public meetings. 
(20)  F.S. § 286.012, relating to voting requirements. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.22) 
Editor's note- The city's pension attorney advises that as a result of F.S. § 112.661(5)(a), as amended by Laws of Fla. ch. 2009-21, § 6, that the applicable mandatory state law provision is now F.S. § 215.47(1)-(6), (8), (9), (11), and (17). 
Sec. 2-220. - Administration of retirement system. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective administration of the retirement system, including but not limited to claims procedures, provided that such rules are not inconsistent with any applicable federal law, state law, or ordinance of the city or with the terms of any collective bargaining agreement entered into by the city and the certified bargaining agents of the firefighters. Notwithstanding any other provision of the retirement system to the contrary, any provision of the retirement system shall be construed and administered in such a manner that the fund will qualify as a qualified governmental pension plan under existing or hereafter enacted provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States; and the board of trustees may adopt any rules to accomplish this purpose as is necessary to attain tax qualification. Any rules adopted by the board of trustees shall have the force of law and shall be considered part of the retirement system. 
(b)  All questions, disputes, claims appeals or controversies of whatever character, arising in any manner between any persons in connection with the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System, the plan of benefits or the operation thereof, whether related to: 
(1)  Any claim for any benefit by any member or any other person; or 
(2)  The construction of the language or meaning of ordinances concerning the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System or rules and regulations, or policies adopted by the trustees; or 
(3)  Construction of the language or meaning of any writings, decision, instrument or accounts in connection with the operation of the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System; or 
any other matter, shall be submitted to the trustees, and the decision of the trustees shall be final and binding upon all persons dealing with the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System or claiming benefits thereunder. In reaching its decisions, the trustees shall have full and complete discretionary authority to make eligibility determination or to construe the terms of the retirement system. 
(c)  The board of trustees has the power to construe all items, rules, conditions and limitations of the retirement system, and its construction made in good faith shall be final and conclusive upon all parties' interests. 
(d)  The powers and duties of the board of trustees or of any other persons as set out herein are not intended to be complete or exclusive but each such body or persons shall have such powers and duties as are reasonably implied under the terms of the ordinances concerning the City of Temple Terrace Firefighters' Retirement System. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.23) 
Sec. 2-221. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in the state statutes. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.24) 
Sec. 2-222. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Adoption of state law by reference. Since it is the intent of the city to qualify for premium tax monies collected pursuant to F.S. ch. 175, all applicable mandatory provisions under F.S. ch. 175, now existing or as they may exist in the future which establish minimum benefits and minimum standards for the operation and funding of the firefighters retirement plan are incorporated herein by reference; provided however, to the extent that the provisions herein exceed the minimum benefits and minimum standards, the provisions herein shall prevail. 
(b)  Interest of members in system. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(c)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city commission of the city which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(d)  Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the code, as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(e)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.25) 
Sec. 2-223. - Fire service prior to employment. 
    The years and fractional parts of years that a member has served as a firefighter for some other employer, excluding the Armed Forces of the United States, prior to first and initial employment with the city fire department shall be added to years of creditable service provided that: 
(1)  The member, prior to separation from employment or entry into DROP, whichever comes firsts, contributes to the trust fund an amount which represents the actuarial equivalent of the value of the benefits attributable to such service credits on the date of deposit, along with the costs of all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the calculation. 
(2)  The member is not entitled to receive a benefit for such other prior service as a firefighter. 
(3)  The maximum number of years of prior firefighter service credits which may be purchased is four (4) years. 
(4)  The amounts to be deposited shall be calculated using the mortality table and interest rate determined by the board of trustees after advice by the fund's actuary. 
(5)  For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a firefighter, in addition to service as a firefighter in this state, credit shall be given for federal, other state, or county service if the prior service is recognized by the division of state fire marshal as provided under F.S. ch. 633, or the firefighter provides proof to the board of trustees that the service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a firefighter under F.S. § 175.032(8). 
(Code 2001, § 18.195.26; Ord. No. 269, 8-1-1972; Ord. No. 270, 8-1-1972; Ord. No. 641, 12-15-1987; Ord. No. 675, 11-1-1988; Ord. No. 822, 11-3-1992; Ord. No. 864, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 916, 4-16-1996; Ord. No. 970, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 1026, 9-7-2000; Ord. No. 1047, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 1109, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1119, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 1157, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 1198, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 1231, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 1265, 2-16-2010) 
Secs. 2-224-2-254. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Police Officers[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal police pensions, F.S. ch. 185; actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.60 et seq.; minimum requirements for local police officer pension plans, F.S. § 185.35. 

Sec. 2-255. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, only that portion of any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, shall be included in accumulated contributions. Accumulated contributions also includes the amount the member contributes to the trust fund which represents the actuarial equivalent of the value of benefits attributable to the purchase of military service prior to employment pursuant to section 2-274 and attributable to the purchase of police service prior to employment pursuant to section 2-280. 
    Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon actuarial assumptions and an interest rate as determined by the board of trustees after advice by the fund's actuary. 
    Average final compensation means the average of the three (3) highest calendar years of compensation or salary for credited service of the last five (5) calendar years prior to retirement, termination or death. The amount of vacation payoff shall not be included in one of the three (3) highest calendar years of compensation but shall be added to such before dividing by thirty-six (36) to obtain the average final monthly compensation. Provided however, effective October 1, 2013, no amount of vacation payoff shall be included. For in-line-of-duty disability benefits, if less than three (3) years of credited service have been completed, the term "Average Final Compensation" means the average annual compensation of the total number of years of credited service. Each year used in the calculation of average final compensation shall commence on January 1. When the last calendar year prior to retirement, termination, or death does not constitute a full calendar year, such partial calendar year may be used in connection with part of another calendar year, pursuant to written rules adopted by the board of trustees. Notwithstanding the maximum amount set forth in section 2-264(a) and (b), for police officers who separate from employment or who enter DROP, whichever comes first, on or after July 1, 2012, the maximum amount shall be ninety (90) percent of his average final compensation. Provided however, a Police Officer who has completed forty-five (45) years of credited service shall receive an additional two (2) percent per year of credited service for each year in excess of forty-five (45) years. 
    Beneficiary means the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
    Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided and serve as trustees of the fund. 
    Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
    Credited service means and includes: 
(1)  The aggregate number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a police officer with member contributions to the system, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such police officer may not be employed by the city. No police officer will receive credit for years or fractional parts of years of service if the officer has withdrawn contributions to the fund for those years or fractional parts of years of service, unless the police officer repays into the fund the amount the police officer has withdrawn, plus interest determined by the board. The member shall have one hundred twenty (120) days after reemployment to make repayment. A police officer may voluntarily leave accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five (5) years after leaving the employ of the police department pending the possibility of being rehired, without losing credit for the time of active participation as a police officer. If the police officer is not reemployed within five (5) years, then the accumulated contributions will be returned upon request of the member. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a police officer serves in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States or the United States Merchant Marine, voluntarily or involuntarily, after initial employment with the city shall be added to years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, pursuant to applicable provisions of federal and state law. 
(2)  Military service prior to employment purchased pursuant to section 2-274. 
(3)  Prior service as a police officer for some other employer, as long as the police officer is not entitled to receive a benefit for such other prior service as a police officer, purchased pursuant to section 2-280. 
    Effective date means May 3, 1977. 
    Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
    Member means an actively employed police officer who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire or enter the deferred retirement option program prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
    Plan year means the twelve-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
    Police officer means an actively employed full-time person, employed by the city, including the initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a police officer as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 943.14 who is vested with the authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, traffic, or highway laws of the state. 
    Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
    Retirement means a member's separation from employment as a police officer with the city with eligibility for receipt of benefits under the system, or entry into the deferred retirement option program. 
    Salary or compensation means: 
(a)  For service earned prior to October 1, 2013, the total cash remuneration paid a police officer including overtime payments and education incentive, but excluding payments for extra duty or a special detail work performed on behalf of a second party employer. 
(b)  For service earned on or after October 1, 2013, the total cash remuneration including overtime payments and education incentive, with such overtime being limited to not more than three hundred (300) hours of overtime per police officer per calendar year, but excluding (i) payments for extra duty or a special detail work performed on behalf of a second party employer, and (ii) payments for accrued unused sick leave and accrued unused annual or vacation leave and excluding vacation payoff. 
(c)  The "compensation" used for the calculation of benefits and employee/employer contributions will be prior to any adjustments before taxes that are a portion of the city's flexible benefit program. Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in section 401(a)(17) of the code shall be disregarded. 
    Spouse means the lawful wife or husband of a member at the time of preretirement death or retirement. 
    System means the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System as contained herein and all amendments thereto, and rules adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.1; Ord. No. 1232, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 1266, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 1313, § 1(18.185.1), 6-19-2012; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-256. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. 
(1)  All police officers as of the effective date, and all future new police officers, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(2)  All police officers shall be required to complete a complete medical examination as prescribed by the city. 
(b)  Designation of beneficiary. Each police officer shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.2) 
Sec. 2-257. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective the provisions of this article are hereby vested in a board of trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five (5) trustees, two (2) of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the municipality, who shall be appointed by the city council; and two (2) of whom shall be full-time police officer members of the system, who shall be elected by a majority of the police officers who are members of the system. The fifth trustee shall be chosen for a two-year term by a majority of the previous four (4) trustees as provided for herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the city council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board of trustees as its fifth trustee. The fifth trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four (4) trustees appointed or elected as herein provided and shall serve a two-year term unless the office is sooner vacated and may be reappointed or reelected a trustee. Each resident shall serve as trustee for a period of two (2) years, unless sooner replaced by the city council at whose pleasure the trustee shall serve, and reappointed or reelected a trustee. Each police officer trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of two (2) years, unless the trustee sooner retires, leaves employment as a police officer with the city, enters DROP, or otherwise vacates the office as trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing trustee. Each police officer may be reappointed or reelected a trustee. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(b)  The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chair, vice-chair, and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(c)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall have the right to abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest provided that trustee complies with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d)  The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. 
(e)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4)  To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  To receive and process all applications for membership and benefits. 
(7)  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  Make the final determination of a member's eligibility for the disability benefits provided herein. 
(10)  To perform such other duties as are specified in this article. 
(11)  To perform such other duties as are specified in F.S. § 185.06. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.3) 
Sec. 2-258. - Finances and fund management; establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  As part of the system, there exists the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c)  All funds of the police officers' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the finance director, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as the finance director is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the finance director shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the police officers' retirement system. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the police officers' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds and securities shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(4)  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever; and 
(5)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  An independent audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f)  The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city council to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  The investment of the assets of the fund shall be subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in F.S. § 215.47(1)-(6), (8), (9), (11), and (17), except as prohibited in subsection (f)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Pursuant to F.S. § 112.661, the board shall adopt a written investment policy. 
(4)  Investment activity in the following is prohibited: 
a.  Short sales, margin purchases and borrowing. 
b.  Private placements and other restricted securities. 
c.  Commodities. 
d.  Puts, calls, straddles and hedging. 
e.  Warrants and other options, except as part of the purchase of another security. 
f.  Municipal and county bonds. 
g.  More than twenty-five (25) percent of the fund's assets in foreign securities on a market-value basis. 
(5)  At least once every three (3) years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 185.06, to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(6)  The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(7)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to the board's or trustee's negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(8)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(9)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(10)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(11)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this section, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(12)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board. Overpayment shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund. 
(13)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(14)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(15)  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to said fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.4; Ord. No. 1266, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-259. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. 
(1)  Amount. members of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of eleven and two-tenths (11.2) percent of salary, effective October 2, 2005. Member contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for Federal Income Tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the difference in each year, between the total aggregate member contributions for the year, plus state contributions for such year, and the total cost for the year, as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation of the system. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded past service liability as provided in F.S. ch. 112, pt. VII (F.S. § 112.60 et seq.). 
(c)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.5; Ord. No. 1153, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 2-260. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a)  Normal retirement date. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of the completion of twenty (20) years of credited service or attainment of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. A member may retire on the normal retirement date or on the first day of any month thereafter, and each member shall become one hundred (100) percent vested in the accrued benefit on the member's normal retirement date. Normal retirement under the system is separation from employment as a police officer with the city on or after the normal retirement date, or entry into the deferred retirement option program. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. 
(1)  For a person hired as a police officer before October 1, 2011, a member retiring hereunder on or after his normal retirement date shall receive monthly benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his retirement date and be continued thereafter during member's lifetime, ceasing upon death, but with one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed in any event. In the event the member dies after retirement but before he has received retirement benefits for a period of ten (10) years, the same monthly benefit shall be paid to the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) as designed by the police officer for the balance of such ten-year period. For members separating from employment as a police officer or entering DROP on or after October 1, 2005, the monthly retirement benefit shall equal three and five-tenths (3.5) percent for each year of credited service, multiplied by average final compensation. The actuarial cost of increasing the benefit accrual rate from three (3) percent to three and five-tenths (3.5) percent shall first be borne by increasing member's contributions from seven (7) percent to eleven and two-tenths (11.2) percent of the member's salary, then by use of the annual premium tax revenues in excess of $57,958.16 per calendar year up to a maximum additional annual amount of $150,108.00, and then, if necessary, by city contributions. 
(2)  For a person hired as a police officer on or after October 1, 2011, the monthly retirement benefit shall equal three and one-quarter (31/4) percent for each year of credited service, multiplied by average final compensation. 
(c)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on the early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the later of the attainment of age fifty (50) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment as a police officer with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(d)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on the early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal retirement as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been the normal retirement date had the member remained a police officer and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on the normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of the early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in subsection (d)(1) of this section, which is actuarially reduced from the amount to which the member would have been entitled had the member retired on the date which would have been the member's normal retirement date had the member continued employment, with the same number of years of credited service as at the time the benefits commence and based on the member's average final compensation at that date. In no event shall the early retirement reduction exceed three (3) percent for each year by which the member's age at retirement precedes the member's normal retirement age. 
(e)  Lump-sum payment of small retirement income. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, if the monthly retirement income payable to any person entitled to benefits hereunder is less than $100.00, or if the single-sum value of the accrued retirement income is less than $2,500.00, as of the date of retirement or termination of service, whichever is applicable, the board, in the exercise of its discretion, may specify that the actuarial equivalent of such retirement income be paid in a lump sum. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.6; Ord. No. 1153, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1313, § 2(18.185.6), 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-261. - Cost-of-living adjustment. 
(a)  The retirement benefit for a police officer retiring after January 1, 1998, but on or before June 1, 2000, shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday and ending on October 1 immediately following the police officer's sixty-fifth birthday. The retirement benefit for a police officer retiring after June 1, 2000, but before April 1, 2004, shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday and continuing for life. For purposes of this subsection (a), the term "retiring" means a police officer who separates from city employment as a police officer other than because of disability or death who upon separation is immediately eligible for receipt of retirement benefits under the retirement plan, or who in lieu of terminating employment as a police officer enters the deferred retirement option program (DROP). Provided however, for a police officer retiring after January 1, 1998, but before April 1, 2004, the board of trustees is authorized after advice by the fund's actuary to make an adjustment as a result of changing the month in which cost-of-living adjustments begin or are adjusted. 
(b)  For a police officer who separates from employment as a police officer or enters DROP, whichever comes first, on or after April 1, 2004, but before July 1, 2012, who has twenty (20) years or more of creditable service as a police officer, or who was granted line-of-duty disability retirement benefits by the board of trustees, or who was granted line-of-duty death benefits by the board of trustees, or who at the time of separation from employment as a police officer or entry into DROP had completed ten (10) or more years of creditable service as a police officer and had attained age fifty-five (55), the monthly retirement benefit payable shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday and continuing for the life of the police officer. 
(c)  For a person hired as a police officer before October 1, 2011, who separates from employment as a police officer or enters DROP, whichever comes first, on or after July 1, 2012, who has twenty (20) years or more of creditable service as a police officer, or who at the time of separation from employment as a police officer or entry into DROP had completed ten (10) or more years of creditable service as a police officer and had attained age fifty-five (55), the monthly retirement benefit payable shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the annual actuarial valuation which indicates that the funded ratio (actuarial value of assets divided by actuarial accrued liability), is eighty (80) percent or more, but no earlier than the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday, and continuing for the life of the police officer. Thereafter, cost-of-living adjustments will continue annually to eligible police officer regardless of the funded ratio. Provided however, a police officer who has reached normal retirement date before July 1, 2012, or a police officer who is granted line-of-duty disability benefits by the board of trustees effective on or after July 1, 2012, or the beneficiaries of a police officer who are entitled to monthly line-of-duty death benefits as a result of the death of a police officer on or after July 1, 2012, shall be paid cost-of-living adjustments pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, regardless of the funded ratio. 
(d)  For a person hired as a police officer on or after October 1, 2011 who separates from employment as a police officer or enters DROP, whichever comes first, on or after July 1, 2012, who has twenty (20) years or more of creditable service as a police officer, or who at time of separation from employment as a police officer or entry into DROP had completed ten (10) or more years of creditable service as a police officer and had attained age fifty-five (55), the monthly retirement benefit payable shall be automatically increased by three (3) percent each year beginning on October 1 immediately following the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday and ending on October 1 immediately following the police officer's sixty-fifth birthday. Provided however, a police officer hired on or after October 1, 2011 who is granted line-of-duty disability benefits by the board of trustees, or the beneficiaries of a police officer who are entitled to monthly line-of-duty death benefits, shall be paid cost-of-living adjustments as long as monthly pension benefits are owed. 
(e)  Those persons who are eligible to receive monthly retirement benefits after the death of the police officer who was eligible for cost-of-living adjustments under subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section shall receive the cost-of-living adjustments at the same time the police officer would have received the cost-of-living adjustments but for the death of the police officer. 
(f)  For all police officers eligible for cost-of-living adjustments who separate from employment as a police officer or enters DROP, whichever comes first, on or after January 1, 1998, and for those persons who are eligible to receive cost-of-living adjustments after the death of a police officer who was eligible for cost-of-living adjustments, the board of trustees is authorized after advice by the fund's actuary to make an adjustment as a result of starting cost-of-living adjustments beginning on October 1 immediately following the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday instead of on the first of the month immediately following the police officer's fifty-sixth birthday. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.7; Ord. No. 1313, § 3(18.185.7), 6-19-2012; Ord. No. 1316, § 1(18.185.7), 7-3-2012; Ord. No. 1365, § 2, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-262. - Deferred retirement option program (DROP). 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    DROP means the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Deferred Retirement Option Program as set forth in this subsection. 
    DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating employment as a police officer, any police officer actively employed by the city and who is eligible to receive a normal retirement pension under the police officers' pension trust fund may elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
(2)  Election to participate. A police officer's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the police officers' pension trust fund board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least thirty (30) business days after it is received by the board. Member contributions to the fund shall cease beginning with the first pay period after entry into DROP. 
(3)  Period of participation. A police officer who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall participate in the DROP for a period not more than 60 months. An election to participate in DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from service as a police officer with the city not later than sixty (60) months from the beginning of participation in DROP. A police officer may participate only once. 
(4)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A police officer participating in the DROP shall cease participating in the DROP by terminating employment as a police officer. 
b.  Upon a police officer's termination of participation in the DROP, amounts shall cease to be credited to the DROP account under subsection (c)(2) of this section and the DROP account shall cease being credited with interest and investment earnings or losses under subsection (c)(2)b of this section. Upon termination of employment as a police officer any amounts remaining in the DROP account shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. 
c.  A police officer who elects to terminate participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(4) of this section shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5)  Effect of DROP participation on the police officers' pension trust fund. 
a.  A police officer's credited service and accrued benefit under the police officers' pension trust fund shall be determined on the date participation in the DROP first becomes effective. The police officer shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the police officers' pension trust fund (except for cost-of-living adjustments provided by the system) while a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, the member shall not be permitted to again contribute to the police officers' pension trust fund nor shall the member be eligible for disability or other preretirement benefits. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a police officer from the police officers' pension trust fund while the police officer is a participant in the DROP. No amounts shall be paid from the police officers' pension trust fund until the police officer terminates employment as a police officer. Unless otherwise specified in the police officers' pension trust fund, amounts credited to the police officer's DROP account shall be paid directly to the police officer only after the first day of the month coincident with or next following the termination of employment as a police officer. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. 
a.  A DROP account shall be established for each police officer participating in the DROP. A police officer's DROP account shall consist of amounts credited to the DROP under subsection (c)(2) of this section and interest earnings on those amounts. 
b.  For a police officer who enters DROP before July 1, 2012, and for a police officer who has reached normal retirement date before July 1, 2012, with respect to the earnings to be credited, prior to entering the DROP, a police officer shall make an election to have his or her account credited with either: i) a flat six and five-tenths (6.5) percent per annum, compounded quarterly, or ii) the actual investment return of the trust fund, net of all investment costs. The police officer may prospectively change the method of crediting earnings once during his period of participation in the DROP effective at the beginning of the next fiscal year quarter. 
c.  For a police officer who enters DROP on or after July 1, 2012, who did not reach normal retirement date before July 1, 2012, with respect to the earnings to be credited, prior to entering the DROP, a police officer shall make an election to have his or her account credited with either i) a flat three (3) percent per annum, compounded quarterly, or ii) the actual investment return of the trust fund, net of all investment costs. The police officer may prospectively change the method of crediting earnings once during his period of participation in the DROP effective at the beginning of the next fiscal year quarter. Provided however, when the annual actuarial valuation indicates that the funded ratio (actuarial value of assets divided by actuarial accrued liability) is eighty (80) percent or more, the flat rate option shall return to six and five-tenths (6.5) percent per annum beginning the following October 1, and remain at six and five-tenths (6.5) percent regardless of the funded ratio thereafter. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a police officer's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit which would have been received under the police officers' pension trust fund had the police officer terminated employment as a police officer and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be credited to a DROP account. A police officer's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b) (3) and (4) of this section, but in no event shall it continue past the date of termination as a police officer. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b of this section, amounts credited to a police officer's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) of this section shall be credited or debited with interest as follows: 
1.  After each fiscal year quarter, the average daily balance in a police officer's deferred retirement option account shall be credited with the flat interest rate or credited or debited at a rate equal to the actual net rate of investment return realized by the police officers' pension trust fund for that quarter, as previously elected by the police officer. The term "net investment return" for the purpose of this subsection is the total return of the assets in which the police officer's DROP account is invested by the board of trustees net of brokerage commissions, management fees and transaction costs. 
2.  A police officer's DROP account shall only be credited or debited with earnings while the police officer is a participant in the DROP. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. 
a.  As soon as administratively practicable following termination of employment, a police officer shall receive the balance in the DROP account by direct rollover or in a cash lump sum, or a combination of both. No amounts shall be paid to a police officer from the DROP prior to termination of employment as a police officer. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a police officer dies before benefits commence, the balance in the DROP account shall be paid to the stated beneficiary. 
c.  The distribution of a police officer's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following the police officer's termination of employment. 
(2)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased police officer's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board to administer the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP assets shall be placed in the police officers' pension trust fund board. 
(2)  Individual balances, records and reports. The board shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each police officer's DROP account, and the board shall keep or cause to be kept in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare or cause to be prepared and distributed to police officers participating in the DROP and other individuals or filed with the appropriate government agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, the applicable portions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. The board shall also oversee the investment of the DROP's assets. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(5)  Expenses. To compensate the police officers' pension trust fund for the expenses of administering and operating the DROP, the board may elect to charge each police officer's DROP account an annual administrative fee which shall be reviewed and subject to increase or decrease annually. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended at any time and from time to time, and retroactively, if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise prohibited by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any police officer. 
(2)  Information. Each police officer, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish benefits under the DROP. 
(3)  Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three (3) months from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made written claim therefor within three (3) months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the DROP, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the DROP. Upon such cancellation, the DROP shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such person or the beneficiary thereof later notifies the board of such person's whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due such person under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to such person in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(4)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a police officer pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules, uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by police officers under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, the new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each police officer who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with a current address and any subsequent changes in address. Any notice required to be given to a police officer hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. 
(5)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable under the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the DROP and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.8; Ord. No. 1313, § 4(18.185.8), 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 2-263. - Pre-separation death. 
    In the event a member (an actively employed and contributing police officer who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements) dies prior to separation from employment as a police officer or entry into the deferred retirement option program, whichever comes first: 
(1)  Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not yet vested shall receive a refund of one hundred (100) percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(2)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement. The beneficiary of any member who dies while actively employed as a police officer with the city and who, at the date of the member's death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
a.  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
b.  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten (10) years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise normal retirement date, at the option of the beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of the member's death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
c.  A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions, without interest. 
d.  A beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, elect to receive a monthly amount payable for the life of the beneficiary which monthly amount shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section. The beneficiary may elect the date on which said monthly amount will commence. 
(3)  Member who dies in the line of duty. Upon determination by the board of trustees that a member died in the line of duty on or after April 1, 2004, regardless of length of service, the following benefits shall be paid: 
a.  As soon as is administratively possible, a total sum of $10,000.00 to the member's beneficiary. 
b.  Beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death a monthly benefit payable for fifteen (15) years (one hundred eighty (180) monthly payments) equal to fifty (50) percent of the member's annualized salary based on salary earned during the last full pay period immediately prior to death shall be paid to the member's beneficiary. 
c.  Beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death a monthly benefit equal to seven and one-half (71/2) percent of the member's annualized salary based on salary earned during the last full pay period prior to death shall be paid to each minor child of the member with the last monthly payment being on the first of the month immediately following the child's eighteenth birthday; provided, however, the combined monthly benefits paid to minor children shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the member's salary. 
d.  In lieu of the benefits provided in subsection (3)(b) of this section, the beneficiary may elect any of the benefits provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
e.  Once a police officer enters DROP, or separates from employment as a police officer, whichever comes first, the police officer shall not be eligible for the in-line-of-duty death benefits provided in this subsection. 
(4)  As used in this section, the term "beneficiary" means one or more persons, named sequentially or jointly, who has or have been designated by the member, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board of trustees to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable. If no beneficiary is named in the manner provided herein, or if no beneficiary designated survives the member, the death benefit, if any, shall be paid by the board of trustees to the estate of such deceased member, provided that the board of trustees, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of any remaining monthly benefits payments be paid in a lump sum. Each designation may be revoked by the member by signing and filing with the board of trustees a new designation of beneficiary form. 
(5)  The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective administration of this section, including a designation of beneficiary form. 
(6)  For purposes of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, a member who leaves employment to perform qualified military service (as defined in section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code) and who dies while performing qualified military service, the beneficiary of the deceased member shall be entitled to those benefits as set forth in subsection (a) or (b) of this section as if the deceased member had resumed and then terminated employment on account of death, provided: 
a.  If the member has withdrawn accumulated contributions, such withdrawn contributions are repaid, plus interest determined by the board. 
b.  The member shall be entitled to credited service from the date the member leaves employment to perform qualified military service until the date of death while performing qualified military service, but not to exceed two (2) years. 
c.  This subsection (6) shall apply to deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.9; Ord. No. 1266, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-264. - Disability. 
(a)  Disability benefits on-duty. Any member who has become totally and permanently disabled while an active member of the city police department to the extent that the member is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability was directly caused by the performance of duty as a police officer, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to the appropriate accrual rate set forth under normal retirement benefit multiplied by the total years of credited service multiplied by average final compensation, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be forty-two (42) percent of the average final compensation of the member, or fifty (50) percent of pay at the date of disablement, whichever is greater, and the maximum amount shall be one hundred (100) percent of average final compensation, exclusive of cost-of-living adjustments. 
(b)  Disability benefits not in line of duty. Any member with ten (10) years or more credited service who shall have become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that the member is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of duties as a police officer shall be entitled to a monthly pension equal to the appropriate accrued rate set forth under normal retirement benefit multiplied by the total years of credited service multiplied by average final compensation, but in any event, the minimum amount paid to the member shall be twenty-five (25) percent of average final compensation, and the maximum amount shall be one hundred (100) percent of average final compensation. 
(c)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each police officer who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the Armed Forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained after employment as a police officer with the city shall have terminated. 
(d)  Physical examination requirement. 
(1)  A police officer shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless the member undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician and/or surgeon, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. 
(2)  Any police officer receiving disability benefits under provisions of this article may be periodically reexamined by a qualified physician and/or surgeon who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that the member is unable to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a police officer, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that member had at the time the member was placed upon pension. If the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within thirty (30) days from the issuance thereof, member shall forfeit the right to a pension. 
(3)  The cost of the physical examination and/or reexamination of the police officer claiming and/or receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. 
(4)  If the police officer recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a police officer, service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which the member received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date the member reentered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the system. 
(5)  The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(e)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the police officer recovers from the disability prior to normal retirement date, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery; or 
(2)  If the police officer dies without recovering from disability or attains normal retirement date while still disabled, the payment due next preceding death or the one hundred twentieth monthly payment, whichever is later; provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in section 2-266, which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(f)  Separation of member from employment. A member who separates from employment as a police officer with the city police department shall not be eligible for disability benefits unless the member files a complete application for disability benefits on the required form within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of separation. A member who has filed a complete application for disability benefits on the required form who thereafter separates from employment (either voluntarily or involuntarily) may continue to seek disability benefits, and, if eligible, may start receipt of normal or early retirement benefits. If, at a later date, the member is determined by the board of trustees to be eligible for disability benefits, such disability benefits shall be paid retroactive to the first day of the month following the last day the member works prior to retiring or separating from employment. A member, who files an application for disability benefits who is determined by the board of trustees not to be totally and permanently disabled who does not separate from employment as a police officer, may reapply for disability benefits only if there has been a change of circumstances. Change of circumstances may include, but is not limited to, additional injury or injuries, additional diagnostic test or tests, or application of disability benefits based on another medical condition. Any final order of the board of trustees in connection with an application for disability benefits shall be subject to review by way of filing a timely petition for writ of certiorari in the Thirteenth Judicial Circuit in and for the county. The board of trustees does not grant a rehearing in connection with any final order entered by the board of trustees, unless ordered by the court. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.10; Ord. No. 1199, 1-16-2007) 
Sec. 2-265. - Vesting. 
    If a member terminates employment as a police officer with the city, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(1)  If the member has less than ten (10) years credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a refund of accumulated contributions or member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(2)  If the member has ten (10) or more years of credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal or early retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rates as of the date of termination, payable to the member commencing at member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, provided the member does not elect to withdraw accumulated contributions and provided member survives to the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw accumulated contributions and does not survive to the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, the member's designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under preretirement death. 
(3)  Any vested member of the system whose position is terminated, for whatever reason, but who remains employed by the city in some other capacity, shall have all retirement benefits accrued up to the date of such termination under this system preserved, provided the member does not elect to withdraw accumulated contributions from this system. Such accrued retirement benefits shall be payable at the member's otherwise early (reduced as for early retirement) or normal retirement date hereunder, or later, in accordance with the provisions of this system. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.11) 
Sec. 2-266. - Optional forms of retirement income. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified herein, a police officer, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of actuarial equivalent value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of larger monthly amount payable to the retiree for the retiree's lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the joint lifetime of the retiree and a joint pensioner designated by the retiree, and following the death of the retiree, one hundred (100) percent, seventy-five (75) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent, or fifty (50) percent of such monthly amount payable to the joint pensioner for the lifetime of the joint pensioner. 
(b)  The police officer upon electing any option of this section will designate the joint pensioner to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the plan in the event of the officer's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner. A member may change the joint pensioner at any time. If a police officer has elected an option with a joint pensioner and the retirement income benefits have commenced, the police officer may thereafter change the designated joint pensioner at any time, but may only change the joint pensioner and not the option previously selected. The consent of a police officer's joint pensioner to any such change shall not be required. Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then-current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculations expenses after the second change. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. 
(c)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a police officer dies prior to normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 2-263. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary or joint pensioner dies before the police officer's retirement under the plan, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the police officer upon retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the police officer prior to retirement. 
(3)  If a police officer continues beyond normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 2-260 and dies prior to actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary designated by the police officer in the amount or amounts computed as if the police officer had retired under the option on the date on which death occurred. 
(d)  No police officer may make any change in retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing the first retirement check. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.12; Ord. No. 1266, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-267. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each police officer may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a choice of one or more persons named sequentially or jointly, as beneficiary to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such police officer by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive only benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased police officer fails to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, or if the beneficiary named by a deceased police officer predeceases the police officer, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased police officer, shall be paid to the estate of the police officer and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.13) 
Sec. 2-268. - Reports to division of retirement. 
    Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file a report with the division of retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 185.221. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.14) 
Sec. 2-269. - Roster of retirees. 
    The secretary of the board or designee shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this retirement system in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary or designee shall keep a record of all members of the retirement system in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date such employment is terminated. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.15) 
Sec. 2-270. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. Plan repeal or termination of system shall be consistent with F.S. § 185.37 and federal law. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued, or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting one hundred (100) percent of benefits accrued to date of repeal and the assets of the system shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the persons so entitled in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(c)  The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the system as of the date of repeal of this article, or if contributions to the system are discontinued with the date of such discontinuation being determined by the board: 
(1)  Apportionment shall first be made in respect of each retired police officer receiving a retirement or disability benefit hereunder on such date, each person receiving a benefit on such date on account of a retired or disabled (but since deceased) police officer, and each police officer who has, by such date, become eligible for normal retirement but has not yet retired, an amount which is the actuarial equivalent of such benefit, based upon the actuarial assumptions in use for purposes of the most recent actuarial valuation, provided that, if such asset value be less than the aggregate of such amounts, such amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such asset value. 
(2)  If there be any asset value remaining after the apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, apportionment shall next be made in respect of each police officer in the service of the city on such date who has completed at least ten (10) years of credited service and who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, in the amount required to provide the actuarial equivalent, as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, of the accrued normal retirement benefit, based on the credited service and average monthly earnings as of such date, and each vested former member then entitled to a deferred benefit who has not, by such date, begun receiving benefit payments, in the amount required to provide said actuarial equivalent of the accrued normal retirement benefit, provided that, if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such latter amounts shall be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(3)  If there be any asset value after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, apportionment shall be made in respect of each police officer in the service of the city on such date who is not entitled to an apportionment under subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section in the amount equal to member's accumulated contributions, provided that, if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder such latter amount be proportionately reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(4)  If there be any asset value remaining after the apportionments under subsections (c)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each police officer included in subsection (c)(3) of this section to the extent of the actuarial equivalent, as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, of the accrued normal retirement benefit, less the amount apportioned in subsection (c)(3) of this section, based on the credited service and average monthly earnings as of such date, provided that, if such remaining asset value be less than the aggregate of the amounts apportioned hereunder, such amounts shall be reduced so that the aggregate of such reduced amounts will be equal to such remaining asset value. 
(5)  In the event that there be asset value remaining after the full apportionment specified in subsections (c)(1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return of the state's contributions to the state, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to the date of termination such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
The allocation of the fund provided for in this subsection may, as decided by the board, be carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one sum to the persons entitled to said benefits or the distribution may be carried out in such other equitable manner as the board may direct. The fund may be continued in existence for the purposes of subsequent distributions. If, at any time during the first ten (10) years after the effective date of the ordinance originally establishing this system, the system shall be terminated or the full current costs of the system shall not have been met, anything in the system to the contrary notwithstanding, city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the twenty-five (25) highest paid police officers on the effective date, whose anticipated annual retirement allowance provided by the city's contributions at member's normal retirement date would exceed $1,500.00, shall not exceed the greater of either $20,000.00, or an amount computed by multiplying the smaller of $10,000.00 or twenty (20) percent of such police officer's average annual earnings during the last five (5) years of service by the number of years of service since the effective date. In the event that it shall hereafter be determined by statute, court decision, ruling by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or otherwise, that the provisions of this paragraph are not then necessary to qualify the system under the Internal Revenue Code, this subsection shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment of this section. 
(d)  After all the vested and accrued benefits provided hereunder have been paid and after all other liabilities have been satisfied, then and only then shall any remaining funds revert to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.16) 
Sec. 2-271. - Exemption from execution, nonassignability. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable, provided however, the following deductions may be made: 
(1)  Federal income tax shall be withheld in accordance with federal law, unless the payee elects otherwise on Form W-4P. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written authorization from the retiree or eligible dependents, premiums for life, health, accident, hospitalization, or annuity insurance, or all of any kinds of insurance that the city is required to offer retirees and their eligible dependents pursuant to F.S. § 112.0801. 
(3)  Repayment of overpayments from the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System upon notification to the payee. 
(4)  Payments to an alternate payee for alimony or child support pursuant to an income deduction order under F.S. § 61.1301. 
(5)  Payments to the Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax levies upon notification to the board of trustees by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(6)  Upon receipt of written authorization from the retiree or eligible dependents, premiums for life, health, accident, hospitalization, or annuity insurance, or all of any kinds of such insurance offered by or through a certified bargaining unit of the city. 
(7)  Pursuant to F.S. § 185.05(6), the board of trustees may by rule also authorize its custodian to withhold from the retirement payment those funds necessary to pay for premiums for accident, health, and long-term care insurance for the retiree and the retiree's spouse and dependents upon receipt of written authorization from the retiree, or retiree's surviving spouse, or retiree's beneficiary. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.17; Ord. No. 1266, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-272. - Pension validity. 
    The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or to correct the pension amount of any person heretofore or hereafter granted a pension under prior or existing law or heretofore granted a pension under this pension plan if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.18) 
Sec. 2-273. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein referred to as "claims," against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c)  This section shall not apply nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.19) 
Sec. 2-274. - Military service prior to employment. 
    The years and fractional parts of years that a member has served on active military service of the Armed Forces of the United States or the United States Merchant Marine, voluntarily or involuntarily, and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city police department shall be added to years of creditable service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the trust fund an amount which represents the actuarial equivalent of the value of the benefits attributable to such service credits on the date of deposit, along with the costs of all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the calculation. 
(2)  The maximum number of years of prior military service credits which may be purchased is four (4) years. 
(3)  The amounts to be deposited shall be calculated using the mortality table and interest rate determined by the board of trustees after advice by the fund's actuary. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.20) 
Sec. 2-275. - Excise tax on casualty insurance. 
(a)  In addition to any other lawful license or excise tax now levied by the city, an excise or license tax is assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of casualty insurance, as shown by the records of the department of insurance, in the amount of eighty-five hundredths (0.85) percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The license or excise tax herein levied shall be payable and collected in the manner provided for by F.S. ch. 185. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.21) 
State Law reference- Authority for tax, F.S. § 185.08. 
Sec. 2-276. - Applicable federal and state law. 
    The applicable provisions of federal and state law now existing or as they may exist in the future are incorporated herein by reference, except for provisions of applicable law which are permissive or not preemptive and not authorized herein. The board of trustees is hereby authorized to adopt written rules setting forth the specifics of applicable mandatory provisions of federal and state law as they now exist or may exist in the future. Applicable mandatory provisions of federal and state law include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, including, but not limited to, sections 401(a)(17) and 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), relating to military service. 
(3)  F.S. ch. 61, including, but not limited to, income deduction orders. 
(4)  F.S. § 112.181, relating to special provisions relative to certain communicable diseases. 
(5)  F.S. § 112.3173, relating to forfeiture of retirement benefits. 
(6)  F.S. ch. 112, pt. III (F.S. § 112.311 et seq.), relating to the Code of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees. 
(7)  F.S. ch. 112, pt. VII (F.S. § 112.60 et seq.), cited as the "Florida Protection of Public Employee Retirement Benefits Act." 
(8)  F.S. § 112.661, relating to investment policies. 
(9)  F.S. ch. 119, relating to public records. 
(10)  F.S. § 185.06, relating to the general powers and duties of the board of trustees. 
(11)  F.S. § 185.185, relating to false, misleading or fraudulent statements made to obtain public retirement benefits. 
(12)  F.S. § 185.191, relating to lump-sum payment of small retirement income. 
(13)  F.S. § 185.34, relating to the presumption that certain diseases of police officers were suffered in the line of duty. 
(14)  F.S. § 185.25, relating to exemption from tax and execution. 
(15)  F.S. § 185.35, relating to municipalities having their own pension plan for police officers. 
(16)  F.S. § 215.47(1)-(8), (10) and (16), concerning authorized investments. 
(17)  F.S. § 286.0105, relating to notices of meeting and hearings. 
(18)  F.S. § 286.011, relating to public meetings. 
(19)  F.S. § 286.012, relating to voting requirements. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.22) 
Editor's note- The city's pension attorney advises that as a result of F.S. § 112.661(5)(a), as amended by Laws of Fla. ch. 2009-21, § 6, that the applicable mandatory state law provision is now F.S. § 215.47(1)-(6), (8), (9), (11), and (17). 
Sec. 2-277. - Administration of retirement system. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective administration of the retirement system, including but not limited to claims procedures, provided that such rules are not inconsistent with any applicable federal law, state law, or ordinance of the city or with the terms of any collective bargaining agreement entered into by the city and the certified bargaining agents of the police officers. Notwithstanding any other provision of the retirement system to the contrary, any provision of the retirement system shall be construed and administered in such a manner that the fund will qualify as a qualified governmental pension plan under existing or hereafter enacted provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States; and the board of trustees may adopt any rules to accomplish this purpose as is necessary to attain tax qualification. Any rules adopted by the board of trustees shall have the force of law and shall be considered part of the retirement system. 
(b)  All questions, disputes, claims appeals or controversies of whatever character, arising in any manner between any persons in connection with the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System, the plan of benefits or the operation thereof, whether related to: 
(1)  Any claim for any benefit by any member or any other person; or 
(2)  The construction of the language or meaning of ordinances concerning the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System or rules and regulations, or policies adopted by the trustees; or 
(3)  Construction of the language or meaning of any writings, decision, instrument or accounts in connection with the operation of the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System; or 
any other matter, shall be submitted to the trustees, and the decision of the trustees shall be final and binding upon all persons dealing with the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System or claiming benefits thereunder. In reaching its decisions, the trustees shall have full and complete discretionary authority to make eligibility determination or to construe the terms of the retirement system. 
(c)  The board of trustees has the power to construe all items, rules, conditions and limitations of the retirement system, and its construction made in good faith shall be final and conclusive upon all parties' interests. 
(d)  The powers and duties of the board of trustees or of any other persons as set out herein are not intended to be complete or exclusive but each such body or persons shall have such powers and duties as are reasonably implied under the terms of the ordinances concerning the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.23) 
Sec. 2-278. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in the state statutes. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.24) 
Sec. 2-279. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Adoption of state law by reference. Since it is the intent of the city to qualify for premium tax monies collected pursuant to F.S. ch. 185, all applicable mandatory provisions under F.S. ch. 185, now existing or as they may exist in the future which establish minimum benefits and minimum standards for the operation and funding of the police officers retirement plan are incorporated herein by reference; provided however, to the extent that the provisions herein exceed the minimum benefits and minimum standards, the provisions herein shall prevail. 
(b)  Interest of members in system. At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system, with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(c)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the city council which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(d)  Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of this Code, as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of this Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(e)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.25) 
Sec. 2-280. - Police service prior to employment. 
    The years and fractional parts of years that a member has served as a police officer for some other employer, excluding the Armed Forces of the United States, prior to first and initial employment with the city police department shall be added to the years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member, prior to separation from employment or entry into DROP, whichever comes first, contributes to the trust fund an amount which represents the actuarial equivalent of the value of the benefits attributable to such service credits on the date of deposit, along with the costs of all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the calculation. 
(2)  The member is not entitled to receive a benefit for such other prior service as a police officer. 
(3)  The maximum number of years of prior police officer service credits which may be purchased is four (4) years. 
(4)  The amounts to be deposited shall be calculated using the mortality table and interest rate determined by the board of trustees after advice by the fund's actuary. 
(5)  For purposes of determining credit for prior service, in addition to service as a police officer in this state, credit shall be given for federal, other state, or county service as long as such service is recognized by the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission within the Department of Law Enforcement as provided under F.S. ch. 943, or the police officer provides proof to the board of trustees that such service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a police officer under F.S. § 185.02(11). 
(Code 2001, § 18.185.26; Ord. No. 342, 5-3-1977; Ord. No. 625, 8-25-1987; Ord. No. 675, 11-1-1988; Ord. No. 744, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 745, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 865, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 971, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 990, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 1013, 5-16-2000; Ord. No. 1066, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 1118, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 1153, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1199, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 1232, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 1266, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 2-281. - Share program. 
(a)  Creation and purpose. 
(1)  Pursuant to F.S. § 185.35(6), a share program within the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System to be entitled "The Temple Terrace Police Officers' Share Program" is hereby created effective October 1, 2016. The purpose of this share program is to comply with the provisions of F.S. § 185.35, as amended by Chapter 2015-039, Laws of Florida, concerning the use of state premium tax monies. The share program hereby created shall be in addition to any other benefits under the City of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System, and nothing herein shall in any way affect any other benefits that now or hereafter exist. 
(2)  Funding of this share program shall not begin until the city (plan sponsor), and the collective bargaining representative, or, if none, a majority of the police pension plan members, mutually consent to revoke the mutual consent agreement(s) for use of state premium tax monies approved by city resolution no. 26-16 on February 2, 2016. 
(3)  The city shall not be required to levy any additional taxes on its residents or to make any contributions to the share program. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, for the purpose of the share program, have the meanings indicated below. 
    Account means the participant's share program account credited with (i) state premium tax monies pursuant to F.S. Chapter 185 or pursuant to a mutual consent agreement, (ii) allocations of forfeitures, and (iii) allocations of the annual net investment return of the share program. 
    Beneficiary means any person, persons or entity designated by a participant to receive any share program benefits payable in the event of the participant's death. If no beneficiary designation is in effect at the participant's death, or if no person, persons or entity so designated survives the participant, the participant's beneficiary shall be the participant's estate. 
    Board or board of trustees means the board of trustees of the city of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System, who shall likewise serve as the board of trustees for this share program. The board shall be the administrative board, which shall hold title to, supervise, administer and manage the assets of this share program. 
    Effective date means October 1, 2016, the date on which this share program shall take effect. 
    Forfeiture means the termination of a participant's account under "forfeiture for cause", and "non vesting forfeiture" of this share program. 
    Net investment return for the retirement system means the retirement system's rate of investment return on the retirement system's assets as a whole as reported by the retirement system's investment consultant, net of investment expenses and any administrative expenses incurred by the retirement system. 
    Net investment return for the share program means the net investment return for the retirement system, net of any investment expenses and any administrative expenses incurred by the share program. 
    Share participant means a city of Temple Terrace Police Officer who is a active member of the city of Temple Terrace Police Officers' Retirement System who was employed as a police officer during all weeks of the share program year in which state premium taxes were collected and allocated to the share program, excluding deferred retirement option program (DROP) participants. It does not include persons who have separated from employment as a police officer with the city of Temple Terrace. 
    Share program means the Temple Terrace Police Officers' Share Program as provided herein. 
    Share program year means January 1 through December 31. 
    Valuation date, annual means the last business day of on or before September 30. The annual valuation date shall be the date upon which the fair market value of the assets of the share program shall be determined. 
(c)  Allocation of state premium tax revenues pursuant to F.S. § 185.35 or a mutual consent agreement. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided by a mutual consent agreement, applicable state premium tax revenues shall be allocated equally among all police officers employed on October 1st of the applicable year who were employed during all weeks during the previous January 1st-December 31st, excluding deferred retirement option program (DROP) participants. 
(2)  If a police officer separates from service as a police officer with less than ten (10) years of credited service at the time of separation and has received a refund of contributions without qualifying for disability benefits or death benefits, said police officer's share account plus any earnings thereon shall be equally allocated among the remaining active share participants who are employed on October 1st immediately following the calendar year in which the police officer separated and who were employed as a police officer during all weeks of the previous calendar year. 
(3)  The board shall make the allocation of the state premium tax revenues it receives to the share program as soon as possible after its receipt of such premium tax revenues. Thereafter, the board shall forthwith allocate to each share participant's account the participant's allocable share thereof based on the participant's employment during the corresponding calendar year in which the premium tax revenues were paid to and collected by the state. 
(4)  Allocations of forfeitures. As of each October 1st, all amounts forfeited since the preceding October 1st shall be prorated and credited to the accounts of the eligible individual share participants who are employed on October 1st and who were employed during all weeks of the previous calendar year. 
(5)  Allocation of net investment return. The board shall invest the share program assets together with the assets of the retirement system. The board shall value the share program's assets as of each September 30th valuation date and shall allocate to the share participant's account his or her allocable share of the change in the fair market value of the share program's assets. For the purpose of allocation of net investment return, the net investment return for the retirement system shall be the retirement system's rate of investment return of the retirement system's assets as a whole as reported by the retirement system's investment consultant, net of investment expenses. The share program's net investment return shall be the same as the retirement system's net investment return, net of investment expenses and any administrative expenses incurred by the share program. 
(d)  Maximum allocation limitation. Notwithstanding any provision of this share program to the contrary, the maximum amount allocated to the share participant's account for any calendar year shall not exceed the limitations set forth in I.R.C. Section 415 and any regulations issued thereunder. 
(e)  Allocation of costs and expenses. Any allocation to a share participant's account shall be net of the participant's allocable portion of the share program's costs, expenses and fees of administering the share program during the relevant period. 
(f)  Benefits, forfeitures and distributions. 
(1)  A share participant shall receive a distribution of benefits from this share program on or before December 31st after the September 30th immediately following the share participant's termination of employment, award of disability retirement benefits, or death of the participant who qualifies for death benefits from the retirement system. However, no participant shall receive a benefit from the share program in excess of the amount allocated to the share participant's account. 
(2)  Termination of employment or disability retirement. 
a.  If a share participant (i) terminates employment as a police officer for any reason whatsoever or (ii) is awarded a disability retirement benefit from the retirement system, having accrued at least ten (10) years of credited service under the retirement system, then the participant shall receive a benefit equal to entire amount of the participant's account. 
b.  In the event a share participant, having accrued less than ten (10) years of credited service under the retirement system, is awarded a service incurred disability benefit from the retirement system, then the participant shall receive a benefit equal to the entire accrued amount of the participant's account as of the date of the award of the service incurred disability retirement. 
(3)  Death. 
a.  If a share participant dies, having accrued at least ten (10) years of credited service under the retirement system, before complete distribution of the entire amount of the share participant's account, then such undistributed portion(s) of the share participant's account shall be paid to the participant's beneficiary. 
b.  In the event a share participant suffers a service incurred death having accrued less than ten (10) years of credited service under the retirement system, then the entire accrued amount of the share participant's account, as of the date of death, shall be paid to the participant's beneficiary. 
c.  The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary to receive the value of the account of a deceased participant as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(4)  Forfeitures. 
a.  Forfeiture for cause. Notwithstanding anything in the plan to the contrary, if a share participant is convicted of a specified offense as set forth in F.S. § 112.3173, as same may be amended from time to time, the provisions of F.S. § 112.3173, as same may be amended from time to time, shall apply and the participant shall forfeit all rights to receive a benefit from the share program in accordance with the provisions of such F.S. § 112.3173. For purposes of this paragraph, "convicted" and "specified offense" shall have the meanings given to them in F.S. § 112.3173. 
b.  Non vesting forfeiture. 
1.  If a share participant terminates employment and receives a refund of contributions, then the share participant's account shall be forfeited and allocated as set forth herein and not paid to the participant. 
2.  Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) above, if a share participant, having accrued less than ten (10) years credited service under the retirement system, is (a) awarded a service incurred disability retirement benefit in accordance with the retirement system, or (b) suffers a service incurred death, then the participant's account shall not be forfeited and allocated as set forth herein, but shall be distributed and paid to the participant or his or her beneficiary as set forth herein. 
(5)  Payment of benefits. 
a.  Benefits shall be payable as soon as possible following the yearly valuation date coincident with or next following (a) the participant's termination of employment as a police officer, or (b) award of disability retirement benefits under the retirement system. Acceptance of any partial or full payment of a participant's account shall be in full settlement of all claims of a participant against the share program as to the partial or full payment received. 
b.  Provided a participant has ten (10) years or more credited service under the retirement system, then on or before December 31st after the yearly valuation date next succeeding (i) the participant's termination of employment as a police officer or (ii) award of disability retirement benefits under the retirement system, the then existing balance of the participant's account shall be distributed to the participant, including allocation of forfeitures and allocations of share program net investment returns accruing through the date of termination or award of disability benefits. 
c.  On or before December 31st after the next succeeding subsequent annual allocation of state premium tax revenues, the allocable portion of the participant's allocation of subsequent state premium tax revenues, and the allocable portion of the participant's allocation of forfeitures shall be distributed to participant. 
(6)  Required distributions. In no event shall the provisions of this share program operate so as to allow the distribution of a participant's account to begin after the later of April 1st following (i) the calendar year in which the participant attains age seventy and one-half (701/2) or (ii) the calendar year in which the participant terminates employment (the "required beginning date"). In the event a participant is required to begin receiving payments while in service, the participant may elect to receive payments while in service in accordance as follows: 
a.  A participant may receive one (1) lump sum payment on or before the participant's required beginning date equal to the entire account balance and annual lump sum payments thereafter of amounts accrued during each calendar year; or 
b.  A participant may receive annual payments of the minimum amount necessary to satisfy the minimum distribution requirements of I.R.C. Section 401(a)(9). Such minimum amount will be determined on the basis of the joint life expectancy of the participant and the designated beneficiary. Such life expectancy will not be recalculated. An election under this subparagraph shall be made by a participant by giving written notice to the board within the (90) ninety-day period prior to the participant's required beginning date. Upon the participant's subsequent termination of employment or award of disability benefits under the retirement system, payment of the participant's account shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph. In the event a participant fails to make an election under this subparagraph, payment shall be made in accordance with subparagraph a. above. 
(7)  Distribution limitation. 
a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this share program, all distributions from this share program shall conform to the regulations issued under I.R.C. Section 401(a)(9), including the incidental death benefit provisions of I.R.C. Section 401(a)(9)(G). Further, such regulations shall override any provision of this share program that are inconsistent with I.R.C. Section 401(a)(9). 
(8)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. 
a.  Notwithstanding any provision of this share program to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this paragraph (8), a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly by the share program to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. The following definitions apply to the terms used in this paragraph (8): 
1.  Eligible rollover distribution means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code, and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income; 
2.  Eligible retirement plan means an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code, a deferred compensation plan described in Section 457 of the Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. 
3.  Distributee means an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse; and 
4.  Direct rollover means a payment by the fund to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(g)  Participation. Establishment of share program account. An account shall be established for each share participant. Provided however, a terminated police officer who is vested but not yet receiving monthly benefits shall not have any additional allocations to his account, except for the net investment return. 
(h)  Conflict of laws. To the extent that any provision of this share program is in conflict with F.S. § 112.60-112.67, or those provisions of F.S., Chapter 185, that apply to local law plans established by municipal ordinance, or to the extent that any provision of this section would result in the loss of tax exempt status of the retirement system, the board of trustees is hereby delegated the authority to adopt by rule changes to this program in order to comply with said laws, which shall have the force of law. 
(i)  Administration of program. 
(1)  Rules. The board of trustees shall make such rules as are necessary for the effective and efficient administration of this share program, provided that such rules are not inconsistent with the terms of any collective bargaining agreement entered into by the city and the certified bargaining agents for police officers concerning the share program. Notwithstanding any other provision of this program to the contrary, any provision of this program shall be construed and administered in such manner that such program will qualify as a qualified governmental pension plan under existing or hereafter enacted provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, and the board of trustees may adopt any rule necessary to accomplish the purpose of this share program as is necessary to retain tax qualification, which rule shall have the force of law. 
(2)  Payment of costs, expenses and fees. All costs, expenses and fees of administering the share program shall be paid from the assets of the share program in such fashion as the board shall determine. Any allocation to a participant's account shall be net of the participant's allocable portion of the share program's costs, expenses and fees of administering the share program during the relevant period. 
(3)  Exclusive benefit rule. No part of the assets of the share program shall be used for, or diverted to any purpose whatsoever other than for the exclusive benefit of share participants and beneficiaries thereof. No person shall have any interest in, or right to, any part of the assets of the share program, except as and to the extent expressly provided in the share program. 
(4)  Custody of fund assets. The board shall hold all assets of the share program in trust solely for use in paying the benefits provided by the share program in accordance with the terms hereof and paying expenses of the share program. 
(j)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  Non alienation of benefits. The benefits provided by this share program shall not be subject to garnishment, attachment, execution any other legal process, except the board may authorize the deductions in accordance with F.S. Chapter 185. 
(2)  City's responsibilities. The city shall have no responsibility for the operation of this share program except those specified herein. 
(3)  Facility of payment. If the board shall find that a share participant or other person entitled to a benefit is unable to care for the participant's affairs or is a minor, or is legally incapacitated, the board may direct that any benefit due the share participant shall be paid to the share participant's duly appointed legal representative. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of this share program for that benefit. 
(4)  Information. Each share participant, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to the share participant or on the participant's account under the fund, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish the share participant's rights and benefits under the plan. 
(5)  Amendment. The provisions of the plan are intended to meet the requirements of a qualified profit sharing plan under I.R.C. Section 401(a) and to be tax-exempt under I.R.C. Section 501(a). Should any changes be required to this share program for it to comply or to continue to comply with the provisions of I.R.C. Sections 401(a) and 501(a), the board shall recommend to the city council any such required changes to the share program. 
(6)  Severability of provisions. If any provision of this share program is for any reason held unconstitutional, inoperative or void, such holding shall not affect the remaining provisions of this share program. It is the intent of the city council to create this share program without such unconstitutional, inoperative or void provision and the remainder of the share program, after the exclusion of such provision, shall be deemed and held to be valid as if such provision had not been included herein. 
(7)  Gender. Whenever used in this share program, the masculine shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
(8)  Captions. The caption preceding the paragraphs and subparagraphs of this share program are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the caption shall control. 
(9)  Reports. The board shall issue a report of this share program's operations at least annually. 
(10)  Reservation of right to amend share program. Subject to the provisions of F.S., Chapter 447, Part II, and Chapter 185, the city reserves the right at any time to amend or modify this share program, provided that no amendment shall cause any part of the share program assets to be used or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the share participants and their beneficiaries. 
(11)  Termination and discontinuance. 
a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this share program to the contrary, upon the date of either full or partial termination of this share program, upon complete discontinuance of contributions of state premium tax revenues to this share program, an affected participant's right to their accrued benefit under the terms and conditions of this share program shall be one hundred (100) percent non forfeitable. 
b.  Subject to the provisions of F.S., Chapter 447, Part II, and Chapter 185, this share program may be terminated by the city. Upon termination of this share program, the share program assets shall be apportioned and distributed in accordance with the accrual formulas set forth herein. 
( Ord. No. 1418, § 1, 4-4-2017 ) 
Secs. 2-282-2-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; municipal borrowing, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; financial matters pertaining to political subdivisions, F.S. ch. 218. 

Sec. 2-309. - Fees and charges. 
    All fees and charges levied, imposed or required by the city shall be as established by the city. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance language providing that a fee or charge is as established by the city, such language (or substantially similar language) means that the fee or charge may be established by ordinance, by resolution or by any other lawful means. Nothing in this section prevents the city council from lawfully delegating the authority to fix a fee or charge to a city officer, board, commission or authority. 
Sec. 2-310. - Refunds of amounts paid for permits issued by city departments. 
(a)  Procedure. No person shall be entitled to any refund of the amount paid for any permit issued by any department of the city unless such refund is applied for in writing within six (6) months from the date of issuance of such permit, or within the extended time thereof if the same has been extended under an applicable ordinance. 
(b)  Service charge. Except as otherwise provided, the city department which issues a permit for which a refund is claimed pursuant to the preceding section shall, before making any such refund, retain and deduct therefrom a sum equal to ten (10) percent of the amount originally paid for the permit, which sum shall constitute a service charge and shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 2001, §§ 1.160, 1.165) 
Sec. 2-311. - Emergency appropriation. 
    In case of disaster or other circumstances creating an emergency, the council may, at any time in any budget year, make an emergency appropriation for the purpose of repairing damages caused by such disaster or meeting such public emergency to the end that the public health, safety or welfare will be protected. 
(Code 2001, § 1.175; Ord. No. 433, 4-6-1982) 
Sec. 2-312. - Indemnification in contracts. 
(a)  Unless required by state law or federal law, no contract entered into on behalf of the city shall contain any provision by which the city agrees to indemnify any other party to the contract. The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply to contracts by and between the city and state and federal governmental entities. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by state law and federal law, this prohibition shall be applied both prospectively and retrospectively to existing contracts containing any provision whereby the city has purported to indemnify any other party. 
(Code 2001, § 1.180; Ord. No. 1196, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 1216, 1-15-2008; Ord. No. 1267, 2-2-2010) 
Secs. 2-313-2-344. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act, F.S. § 287.055. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-345. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout this article. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
    Commodity means any of the various supplies, materials, goods, merchandise, equipment, services, and other personal property purchased, leased, or otherwise contracted for by the city unless coming within the definition of public works contracts. However, commodities purchased for resale are excluded from the provisions of this article. 
    Lowest responsible bidder means the lowest bidder whose offer best responds in quality, fitness, and capacity to the requirements of the proposed work or usage as specified. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the following shall be considered in addition to price: 
(1)  The quality of supplies offered; 
(2)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the supplies or services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the supplies or services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(4)  The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources and the effect thereof on the bidder's ability to perform the contract or provide the supplies or services; 
(5)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(6)  The quality of the bidder's performance on previous orders or contracts with the city; 
(7)  Litigation by the bidder on previous orders or contracts with the city; 
(8)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with local laws and ordinances relating to the purchase or contract; and 
(9)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service is essential. 
    Public works contracts means all contracts involving construction for the city. Any construction involving a project related to, but not included in, a project for which the city has contracted is not exempted from the competitive bidding procedures set forth in this article, notwithstanding its relationship to a project which has been previously bid upon. 
(Code 2001, § 5.500) 
State Law reference- Required bond for contracts performing public works contracts, F.S. § 255.05. 
Sec. 2-346. - System adopted. 
    In order to establish efficient procedures for the acquisition or use of supplies, equipment, and commodities; to secure for the city supplies, equipment, and commodities at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed; to exercise positive financial control over purchases; to clearly define and implement the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted as provided in this article. 
(Code 2001, § 5.505) 
Sec. 2-347. - Purchasing agent. 
    The city manager is the purchasing agent for the city with ultimate responsibility under this article. The city manager may delegate some or all authority, except authority to make the final decision, to any city employee or employees. The city manager or delegated authority shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Purchase or lease or contract for the purchase of commodities required for or by the city in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this article, and in accordance with such administrative regulations as the city manager may prescribe for internal management and operation of the finance department; 
(2)  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of commodities; 
(3)  Act to procure for the city the needed quality in commodities at least expense; 
(4)  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain full and open competition on all purchases; 
(5)  Prepare revisions and amendments to the purchasing regulations and recommend the same to the city council; 
(6)  Prepare rules governing the purchase of commodities for the city; 
(7)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products; 
(8)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations; 
(9)  Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications; 
(10)  Recommend the transfer of surplus and unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed; 
(11)  Conduct all sales of personal property that has become unnecessary or unfit for the city's use. 
(Code 2001, § 5.510) 
Sec. 2-348. - Submittal of requests to purchase commodities. 
    Departments shall submit requests to purchase commodities to the purchasing agent, or the representative thereof, on purchase requisition forms or by other means as may be prescribed by the finance department. The department director's electronic authorization, or the electronic authorization of the director's designated representative, on that requisition shall signify that funds are available for the purchase; that the requisition has been coordinated and approved within that department or other department as necessary; and specifications described fit the minimum needs of that department. 
(Code 2001, § 5.515) 
Sec. 2-349. - Purchase orders to be used. 
    Purchases of commodities shall be made only by purchase order. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no purchase order shall be issued without the prior approval of the city manager or designee. 
(Code 2001, § 5.520) 
Sec. 2-350. - Purchase under $25,000.00. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, purchases of an estimated value in an amount less than $25,000.00, and all leases of commodities terminable by the city, may be made in the open market, pursuant to the following procedure and without observing the procedure prescribed in section 2-378. 
(b)  The city manager or designee shall adopt operational procedures for making purchases under $25,000.00. Such operational procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for the supply or service being purchased. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the purchases made. 
(Code 2001, § 5.530) 
Sec. 2-351. - Cancellation or rejection of bids or request for proposals or other solicitations. 
    The city reserves the unqualified, absolute right to cancel invitations for bids, requests for proposals, or other solicitations, and to reject any or all bids or proposals in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation. 
Secs. 2-352-2-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMPETITIVE BIDDING 

Sec. 2-376. - Exceptions to bidding procedures. 
(a)  The bidding requirements set forth in this division may be dispensed with when one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  A department director certifies in writing to the purchasing agent that an emergency exists in regard to the purchase of any commodity so that the delay in giving opportunity for competitive bidding would be detrimental to the interest of the city. The responsible department director shall provide a detailed summary outlining the facts demonstrating the existence of an emergency. Upon determining that an emergency exists, the purchasing agent may authorize the emergency purchase of $25,000.00 or more, subject to city council approval at its earliest regular public meeting thereafter. 
(2)  Commodities are available only from a single source after determination by the purchasing agent upon review of a written summary of the facts from the department director requesting the purchase. 
(3)  It is to the city's advantage to purchase commodities in cooperation with another governmental entity or to purchase commodities from contracts previously awarded by other governmental entities. 
(4)  The purchasing agent determines that because of the nature of the commodity, competitive bidding is impossible, impractical, or cannot be obtained. 
(b)  Purchases of $25,000.00 or more made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the city council for approval. 
(Code 2001, § 5.540) 
Sec. 2-377. - Determination of irresponsible bidder. 
    A bidder may be found irresponsible and the bid may be rejected if it is determined that any or all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  A bid submitted by a bidder did not strictly conform to the required bid specifications; provided, however, the city shall have the authority to waive inconsequential deviations from the specifications where a change does not occur resulting in an increase in price to the city and where no other bidder will be prejudiced by such a waiver. 
(2)  A bidder has demonstrated, through documented past performance or through prior dealings with the city, an inability to satisfactorily meet the responsibilities required of a successful low bidder. 
(3)  A bidder's product has been demonstrated, through documented past performance or through prior use by the city, to be incapable of satisfactorily meeting the accepted demands to be placed upon the product. 
(Code 2001, § 5.535) 
Sec. 2-378. - Purchase over $25,000.00. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, the purchase of commodities of an estimated value of $25,000.00 or more shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder whose bid has been solicited, received, and approved pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Notice inviting sealed bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and all specifications may be obtained, and shall state the time and place for opening of sealed bids. Bids shall be solicited by published notice, published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice for invitations to bid shall be given not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the bid opening date set forth in the notice. Along with published notice, sealed bids may be solicited from responsible prospective suppliers known to the city. 
(2)  Bidders' security. When deemed necessary by the city manager or designee, bidders' security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award the contract to the next lowest bidder. The amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(3)  Bid opening procedures. Sealed written bids shall be returned to the city and identified as "bids" (to include the name of the commodity or service) on the envelope. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place stated in the public notices. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information that the city manager or designee deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded and made available to the public. 
(4)  Correction or withdrawal of bids. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before bid opening may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before the bid opening may be modified or withdrawn, by written or telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation to bid, prior to the time set for the bid opening. After the bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. During the bid opening, vendors may be required to give clarifications regarding their bid submittal. 
(5)  Negotiated adjustment. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for construction or capital equipment exceeds available budgeted funds, the purchasing agent is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder in order to bring the bid within the amount of available budgeted funds. Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation to bid and shall be presented to the city council for approval prior to the processing of a purchase order. 
(6)  Rejection of bids. At its discretion, the city council may: 
a.  Reject all bids; or 
b.  Reject all bids and readvertise for bids pursuant to the procedures prescribed above. 
(7)  Award of contracts. Except as otherwise provided in this article, contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(8)  Performance bonds. A performance bond may be required before entering into a contract in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Code 2001, § 5.525) 
Sec. 2-379. - Public works contracts over $25,000.00. 
    Each public works project estimated to cost in excess of $25,000.00 or more shall be constructed pursuant to a written contract with the lowest responsible bidder whose bid has been solicited, received and approved pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Notice inviting sealed bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The first publication shall be not less than ten (10) days before the date of opening bids. The second publication shall not be less than five (5) days from the date of the first publication. Along with published notices, sealed bids may be solicited from responsible prospective suppliers known to the city. 
(2)  Bidders' security. When deemed necessary, bidders' security may be required in an amount described in the notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security, provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit the bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, or if the city is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(3)  Bid opening procedures. Sealed bids shall be returned to the city and shall be identified as "bids" (to include the project name) on the envelope. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place stated in the notices. The amount of each bid and other relevant information that the city manager or designee deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded and made available to the public. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. The city council may: 
a.  Reject all bids; 
b.  Reject all bids and readvertise for bids pursuant to the procedures prescribed in this division; or 
c.  Reject all bids and direct that the public works project be performed by the city upon determining that the project can be performed timely for an amount less that each of the bids submitted. 
(5)  Correction or withdrawal of bids. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before bid opening may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before the bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation to bid prior to the time set for the bid opening. After the bid opening, no changes in bid process or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. During the bid opening, vendors may be required to give clarifications regarding their bid. 
(6)  Negotiated adjustment. In the event the low, responsive, and responsible bid for construction or capital equipment exceeds available budgeted funds, the purchasing agent is authorized when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder in order to bring the bid within the amount of available budgeted funds. Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation to bid and shall be presented to the city council for approval prior to the processing of a purchase order. 
(7)  Award of contracts. Except as otherwise provided in this article, contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(8)  Performance bond. A performance bond may be required before entering into a contract in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(9)  Change orders. Any change in the contract price, scope of work, or time for completion of any project following the award of a contract shall be by a written change order approved by the city council and executed with the same formalities as the contract. However, the city manager or designee may approve and execute change orders without city council approval, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Contract price increases shall not exceed ten (10) percent over the original contract price, in any one change or cumulatively for the same contract. No contract price increase shall be approved unless there are sufficient funds available for such purpose. 
b.  Contract price decreases may be approved without limitation. 
c.  The time for completion may not be extended by more than thirty (30) days in any one change or cumulatively for the same project. 
d.  No change order shall change the scope of the work unless approved by the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 5.545; Ord. No. 740, 6-19-1990; Ord. No. 1140, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 1248, 7-21-2009) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, F.S. chs. 561-569; local powers relative to alcoholic beverages preserved, F.S. § 562.45; sales of alcohol to underage persons, F.S. § 562.11; sales to be on licensed premises, F.S. § 562.06. 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The terms "alcoholic beverages," "beer," "wine," "liquor," "sale," "licensed premises" and all other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as are and shall be defined by the laws of the state unless otherwise defined herein. 
(b)  The term "school" is defined as a public school or other school (including private or parochial), either offering a curriculum substantially equivalent to that of a public school with comparable grades and meeting the requirements of the state department of education or an educational facility or school offering a similar curriculum designed to remediate or supplement educational instruction. 
(Code 2001, § 3.300; Ord. No. 83, 6-6-1961; Ord. No. 820, 11-3-1992; Ord. No. 919, 5-7-1996; Ord. No. 1098, 10-7-2003) 
State Law reference- General definitions applicable to state alcoholic beverage laws, F.S. §§ 561.01, 563.01, 564.01, 565.01. 
Sec. 4-2. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 4-3. - Adoption of state beverage law. 
    The provisions of F.S. title XXXIV (F.S. chs. 561-569) (the beverage law) are adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference and may be enforced by police officers of the city as well as by officers of the state; provided, no penalty shall be imposed for violation of such laws in excess of the fine and/or imprisonment as provided in section 1-39. 
(Code 2001, § 3.305; Ord. No. 83, 6-6-1961; Ord. No. 337, 2-15-1977; Ord. No. 820, 11-3-1992) 
Sec. 4-4. - Beverage department rules. 
    Rules of the State Beverage Department, Beverage Tax Division, as promulgated by the director, together with the amendments thereto, except wherein they conflict with this chapter, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(Code 2001, § 3.345; Ord. No. 83, 6-6-1961; Ord. No. 820, 11-3-1992) 
Sec. 4-5. - Proof of approval by state beverage department; compliance with fire and health ordinances. 
    Before the issuance of any business tax receipt for an establishment licensed under the beverage law (F.S. chs. 562-568), the applicant shall present satisfactory proof to the city manager or designee of approval of the license by the state division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco for a city business tax receipt to conduct a business for which a city business tax receipt is sought. Before beginning the operation of such business the person shall comply with all provisions of the fire and health ordinances of the city and proof of such compliance shall be by certificates of the heads of the departments or agencies entrusted with the duty of enforcing fire and health ordinances. 
(Code 2001, § 3.360; Ord. No. 83, 6-6-1961; Ord. No. 820, 11-3-1992) 
Sec. 4-6. - Zoning districts and locations where sale of alcoholic beverages permitted; distance requirements. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in accordance with chapter 12. 
(1)  Package stores shall neither be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of any other package store within the corporate limits, nor shall package stores be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any existing church, synagogue or any other place of worship, school, child care facility as defined by F.S. § 402.305, library, public recreation center, or community center within the corporate limits. 
(2)  Churches, synagogues and other places of worship, schools, child care facilities as defined by F.S. § 402.305, libraries, public recreation centers, and community centers, shall hereinafter be called a protected facility or protected facilities. 
(3)  Bars, cocktail lounges, or other establishments containing bars or cocktail lounges, not meeting the criteria outlined in subsections (4) and/or (5) of this section, shall neither be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other bar, cocktail lounge, or restaurant selling alcoholic beverages, or other establishment containing a bar or cocktail lounge within the corporate limits; nor shall they be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any protected facility, together with Temple Terrace City Hall. 
(4)  Restaurants with bars or cocktail lounges may be established provided said restaurants are located no closer than four hundred (400) feet from an existing protected facility, and provided further that said restaurant meets the following criteria for on-premises consumption: 
a.  The restaurant encompasses at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of service area under a permanent roof; 
b.  The restaurant shall be equipped with full accommodations for the service of full course meals to one hundred fifty (150) or more patrons at one time; 
c.  Alcoholic beverages shall be served only during the hours in which the restaurant is serving full course meals; 
d.  At least fifty-one (51) percent of the restaurant's gross revenues are attributable to the sale of food; and 
e.  The restaurant possesses all of the qualifications necessary to obtain state 4-COP-SX beverage license. 
(5)  Restaurants meeting the following criteria may serve beer and wine, without regard to separation distances between one another or between themselves and any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages, whether such sales are for on-premises or off-premises consumption, or a protected facility: 
a.  The restaurant shall encompass at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of service area, under a permanent roof; 
b.  The restaurant shall be equipped with full accommodations for the service of full course meals to at least fifty (50) patrons at one time; 
c.  Alcoholic beverages shall be served only during the hours in which the restaurant is serving full course meals; provided, however, that no alcoholic beverages shall be served or sold before 11:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.; 
d.  At least seventy (70) percent of the restaurant's gross revenues are attributable to the sale of food; 
e.  Alcoholic beverages shall be served to patrons at the table and no bar or cocktail lounge shall be located in the restaurant; 
f.  The restaurant shall not provide drive-through or drive-up facilities; and 
g.  The restaurant possesses all of the qualifications necessary to obtain a state 2-COP beverage license. 
(6)  There are no required separation distances between establishments selling beer, or beer and wine, when such sales are incidental to the establishment's principal use (e.g., food stores, drugstores, gas marts, convenience stores, etc.), and such sales are in sealed containers for off-premises consumption only. This exemption from separation distance does not apply between said establishments and any protected facility, which separation distance is four hundred (400) feet. 
(7)  Any restaurant which sells alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall maintain separate books and records reflecting the gross sale of nonalcoholic beverages for each calendar year. Failure to maintain such books and records shall be grounds for the city council to revoke the right to sell alcoholic beverages on the property and to notify the Division of Beverage, Department of Business Regulation, State of Florida, that prior certification of the licensed premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages is no longer valid. 
a.  Any such restaurant shall prepare and submit to the city manager or designee an unaudited report every ninety (90) days and an audited report prepared by a certified public accountant at the end of each calendar year. Failure to file the reports required herein shall be grounds for the city council to revoke the right to sell alcoholic beverages on the property pursuant to said exception and to notify the Division of Beverage, Department of Business Regulation, State of Florida, that prior certification of the licensed premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages is no longer valid. 
b.  The city manager or designee may, during normal working hours, request to inspect and audit the books and records of any such restaurant to verify the gross sales of the restaurant. Refusal of an owner or operator of such restaurant to allow said inspection shall be grounds for the city council to revoke the right to sell alcoholic beverages on the property and to notify the Division of Beverage, Department of Business Regulation, State of Florida, that prior certification of the licensed premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages is no longer valid. 
c.  If the required reports and/or the audit conducted by the city reveal that the combined gross sales of such restaurant do not comply with the requirements of this section, or if any restaurant fails to submit said reports or audit or in any other way fails to comply with the requirements of this section, the city manager or designee shall notify the owner or the operator of the business that the property upon which the business operates has reverted to a dry status and shall notify the Division of Beverage, Department of Business Regulation, State of Florida, that prior certification of the licensed premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages is no longer valid. 
d.  Upon adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the city manager or designee shall transmit a copy of this section to all owners or operators of businesses operating pursuant to the aforesaid exception; further, the city manager or designee shall notify all such businesses that if all existing noncompliances with the requirements of this section are not fully cured and all required reports and audits are not filed within ten (10) days of the date of said notice, said business shall revert to dry status. 
(8)  Distance requirements between establishments selling alcoholic beverages, not meeting the criteria established in subsections (a)(4)a.-e. and (a)(5)a.-g. of this section, shall be measured by following the shortest straight line from the main entrance of one establishment selling alcoholic beverages to the main entrance of the other establishment selling alcoholic beverages. Otherwise, distances shall be measured by following the shortest route from the main entrance of any business selling alcoholic beverages to the nearest point of the nearest property line of the site, including the parking areas of related facilities, in which any protected facility, together with Temple Terrace City Hall, is located. The main entrance of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages shall be the entrance facing the most frequently traveled public thoroughfare adjacent to the property on which the establishment is located. In the event that portion of the establishment which faces the most traveled public thoroughfare has no building entrance, measurement of distance shall be made from the center of that portion of the establishment's frontage which represents the addressable frontage of the establishment. In the event of any dispute regarding the measurement of distances or the location of the main entrance, the determination of the city manager or designee shall be conclusive. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the above, alcoholic beverage sales may also be permitted at any bona fide hotel/motel consisting of one hundred (100) guestrooms or more which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its gross revenue from the rental of hotel or motel rooms; and which possesses all the qualifications necessary to obtain a state 4COPS beverage license. 
(10)  Any property owner or other party aggrieved by the distance separation requirements set forth herein may request a waiver from the city council. The waiver may be granted only if the city council finds unique or special circumstances applicable to the subject property and that granting the waiver will not have a significant negative impact on surrounding land uses. Except for premises licensed on or before July 1, 1999, and except for locations that are licensed as restaurants, which derive at least fifty-one (51) percent of their gross revenues from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages, an establishment for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages may not be located within five hundred (500) feet of the real property that comprises a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school unless the city council, approves the location as promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community through a duly adopted ordinance. The applicant for a waiver shall: 
a.  Provide written justification for granting a waiver to the distance requirements. 
b.  Provide written notice to the owners of protected facilities and residentially zoned property that are located within the applicable distance requirements to which a waiver is sought advising of the scheduled hearing date and time for the requested waiver. Notices shall be sent by U.S. mail at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty (20) days, prior to the scheduled hearing for such waiver. If after the notices are mailed the waiver request is continued to a later hearing date at the request of the applicant, then written notice of the new hearing date for the waiver request must be provided to all property owners described herein. 
(11)  Commercial areas within P-D, planned developments, which cannot meet the provisions herein including minimum distance requirements shall require a conditional use approval in accordance with section 12-259 of this Code. However, effective July 19, 2017, if said alcoholic beverage use was approved as part of a planned development rezoning, conditional use, or previously approved by the city or another jurisdiction, such approvals shall remain in effect unless the type of alcoholic beverage use changes. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages may continue for on-premises consumption only, in conjunction with a club, lodge or golf course, restricted to members and their guests, when such sale was in actual operation and duly licensed by the city and the state prior to or on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(c)  Where the sale of alcoholic beverages is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, said sale may continue in accordance with the following terms and conditions at any place of business which was in actual operation and duly licensed by the city and the state and which had previous approval as to location by an existing or prior city or county ordinance as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived: 
(1)  Only those classifications of alcoholic beverage licenses which were permitted at any such place of business on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and no others, are approved; and 
(2)  Any such approved place of business shall continue to comply with the reporting requirements applicable to it at the time it was first licensed or permitted to sell alcoholic beverages in the city; and 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained hereinabove, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the sale of alcoholic beverages at any place of business meeting the following criteria shall be discontinued if: 
a.  For a period of more than ninety (90) days, it has been discontinued; and 
b.  Within said ninety-day period, the owner or operator of said place of business had not filed a petition to city council requesting authority to continue to sell alcoholic beverages at said place of business and showing that said sale was discontinued due to fire, casualty, or natural disaster or due to remodeling or reconstruction. 
(4)  The city manager or designee's determination as to compliance with the terms and conditions of this section shall be final, subject only to appeal to the city council. 
(d)  This section shall be consistent with F.S. ch. 565. In the event this Code is silent, such statutory provisions shall dictate. 
(Code 2001, § 3.330; Ord. No. 83, 6-6-1961; Ord. No. 238, 12-1-1970; Ord. No. 241, 1-12-1971; Ord. No. 290, 11-20-1973; Ord. No. 324, 9-2-1975; Ord. No. 334, 1-4-1977; Ord. No. 337, 2-15-1977; Ord. No. 404, 5-20-1980; Ord. No. 543, 3-29-1985; Ord. No. 552, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 563, 11-5-1985; Ord. No. 624, 8-25-1987; Ord. No. 820, 11-3-1992; Ord. No. 919, 5-7-1996; Ord. No. 936, 12-3-1996; Ord. No. 978, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 1016, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 1041, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 1058, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 1099, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 1245, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 1422 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
State Law reference- Location restrictions authorized, F.S. § 562.45(2). 
Sec. 4-7. - Hours beverages may be sold. 
(a)  For consumption on premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or other person to sell, serve, deliver or permit to be sold, served or delivered any alcoholic beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight in any place in the city holding a license under the state beverage department, or in any public place within the city for consumption on the premises during the following hours: 
(1)  3:00 a.m. through 7:00 a.m., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  3:00 a.m. through 11:00 a.m., Sunday. 
(b)  For consumption off premises; including package stores. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or other person to sell, serve, deliver or permit to be sold, served or delivered any alcoholic beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight in any place in the city holding a license under the state beverage department or in any public place within the city for consumption off the premises during the hours hereafter described: 
(1)  3:00 a.m. through 7:00 a.m., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  3:00 a.m. through 11:00 a.m., Sunday. 
(Code 2001, § 3.325; Ord. No. 83, 6-6-1961; Ord. No. 117, 3-19-1963; Ord. No. 126, 2-21-1964; Ord. No. 163, 6-7-1966; Ord. No. 177, 2-7-1967; Ord. No. 239, 1-5-1971; Ord. No. 402, 3-4-1980; Ord. No. 820, 11-3-1992; Ord. No. 1099, 10-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of hours of sales of alcohol, F.S. §§ 562.14, 562.45(2). 
Sec. 4-8. - Sale, consumption or possession of opened or unsealed container of alcoholic beverage prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, drink, consume or possess any opened or unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to beer and wine, at any of the following places: 
(1)  On or in any public street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or parking lot open to the public in the ordinary course of business. 
(2)  In any public park. For purposes of this section, the term "park" means all parks and athletic fields, and all grounds used in the city for park or playground purposes, excluding Temple Terrace Golf and Country Club and Golf Course and the Woodmont Clubhouse. 
(3)  On any city-owned building except when the consumption of alcoholic beverages has been authorized by the terms of any lease or other agreement approved by the city council. 
(b)  A person found in or upon any motor vehicle or any other form of conveyance which is located on or in any place described in this section shall be deemed to be on or in such place. 
(Code 2001, § 3.335; Ord. No. 847, 8-17-1993; Ord. No. 919, 5-7-1996) 
State Law reference- Local ordinances prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages in vehicles authorized, F.S. § 316.1936. 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means any city employee or other person specifically designated by the city manager or designee to enforce this chapter or any portion thereof. 
    At-large means off the premises of the owner and not under control of any owner either by leash, cord, chain, or other physical constraint. 
    Cat means any member of any breed of the species Felis domestica. 
    Dog means any member of any breed of the species Canis familiaris. 
    Humane officer means an animal control officer of the county whose duties include the maintenance of impounded animals at an animal shelter established for such purpose. 
    Other domestic animal means and includes any other animal not prohibited within this chapter and normally and customarily kept within the confine of a house and described as a pet, including but not limited to birds, snakes, turtles, rabbits, ferrets. 
    Owner means and includes any person or persons, firms, corporations, or associations exercising any rights or property in an animal, without the right of possession as a keeper or custodian, with or without pay. 
(Code 2001, § 4.405; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 6-3. - Animals or fowl that disturb neighbors or damage property declared a nuisance and prohibited. 
    No owner shall keep, house, own, maintain or have in custody any dog, cat, or other animal or fowl, within the limits of the city, which by loud or raucous noises or by the destruction or damage of property creates a nuisance or disturbs the peace, comfort, and quiet or infringes on the property rights of adjoining neighbors. 
(1)  Form of complaint. Any persons who are disturbed in their peace, comfort, and quiet, or who have their property destroyed or damaged, in violation of this section, shall have a right to file a complaint with the city's chief of police in the following written form: 
"I, or we, ___________ residing at ___________, and I, or we, ___________ residing at ___________, Temple Terrace, Florida, do hereby complain that ___________ is the owner or keeps, houses, or has the custody of ________ at ___________, Temple Terrace, Florida, which animal or fowl has created a nuisance as follows: ___________ and I, or we, request the City of Temple Terrace to require that said nuisance be abated." 
___________(signature) 
___________(signature) 
(2)  Verification of complaint. If said written complaint is not signed by two (2) persons who reside in separate dwellings, both of which are proximate to the alleged nuisance, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made to verify the allegations of the complaint. 
(3)  Service of complaint. Upon receipt of such written complaint, duly signed by two (2) persons residing in two (2) separate dwellings proximate to the alleged nuisance or upon verification of the complaint, the chief of police shall cause a copy of such complaint to be served upon the person complained against. If such nuisance is not abated, within three (3) days after the service of such complaint upon the party complained against, the city, in its sole discretion, may request a hearing before the municipal code enforcement board in accordance with the procedures of that board. 
(Code 2001, § 4.410; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-4. - Abandoning animals or fowl. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to abandon or set loose, with the intention of avoiding the responsibility for the custody and care of, any animal or fowl within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 4.415; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-5. - City declared bird sanctuary. 
(a)  Area designated. The entire area now and hereafter embraced by the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. Except as provided hereinbelow, it shall be unlawful to hunt, kill, maim, or trap, or in any manner to attempt to shoot or otherwise molest birds or any wild fowl; to rob or otherwise molest or destroy the active nests of birds nesting or located within the limits of the city. 
(c)  Declaration of nuisance or health menace. If the city determines a nuisance or health menace to exist by reason of starlings, pigeons, or other birds or fowl not declared a protected species found roosting, nesting, or inhabiting any area within the city limits, the city manager or designee may designate one or more animal control officers, which may include representatives from an Audubon society or a humane society, to assist in eliminating such conditions by trapping or other humane means of removal. If the condition has not been corrected by such means within a reasonable time, then the city manager or designee may designate such animal control officers as deemed necessary or appropriate to eliminate such conditions or health menace or nuisance. 
(Code 2001, § 4.420.1; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-6. - Harboring of certain nondomestic animals and fowl prohibited. 
    No owner shall keep, own, harbor, house, or permit to run at-large, any cattle, horses, pigs, hogs, sheep, goats, mules, chickens, lions, tigers, ocelots, bears, wolves, panthers, or other nondomestic animals and fowl within the corporate limits of the city, without the specific approval of the city council. This section does not prohibit agricultural uses in the A-U Agricultural Urban zoning district. 
(Code 2001, § 4.420.2; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-7. - Beekeeping prohibited. 
    The keeping of bees shall be prohibited within the city. This section does not prohibit agricultural uses in the A-U Agricultural Urban zoning district. 
(Code 2001, § 4.420.3) 
Secs. 6-8-6-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER DOMESTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-33. - Running at large. 
(a)  No owner shall cause, permit, or allow any dog, cat, or other domestic animal to stray, run, go, or in any other manner to be at-large in or upon any public street, sidewalk, or park, or on private property of others without the express or implied consent of the owner of such private property. 
(b)  No owner while in control of any animal whether by leash or other manner shall allow such animal to trespass upon the property of another. 
(c)  Any person who has dogs, cats, or other domestic animals running, straying, or being at-large, uninvited on the person's property, may contact the humane officer to remove said animal from the premises. In addition, any person who has dogs, cats, or other domestic animals running, straying or being at-large, uninvited, on the person's property may file a complaint in accordance with section 6-3. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take, or attempt to take, by trap, or any other means or device, any dog, cat, or other domestic animal not belonging to that person, except under the direct supervision of a humane officer or animal control officer. 
(Code 2001, § 4.425.1; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-34. - Bites and rabies. 
(a)  In the event that a dog, cat, or other domestic animal which has been vaccinated for rabies during the previous twelve (12) months bites any human being, the owner of such animal shall confine the animal at home within the dwelling place or chained on the premises for a period of ten (10) days or in the alternative may confine the animal at a veterinary hospital, dog pound, or humane animal shelter for said time period. 
(b)  In the event that a dog, cat, or other domestic animal which has not been vaccinated for rabies during the previous twelve (12) months bites any human being, the owner of such animal shall confine the animal at a veterinary hospital, dog pound, or humane animal shelter for a period of ten (10) days. If such unvaccinated dog, cat, or other domestic animal bites another animal, the owner of such unvaccinated dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall confine the dog, cat, or other domestic animal for a period of ten (10) days as provided in subsection (a) of this section. In either event, the owner shall cause the dog, cat, or other domestic animal to be vaccinated against rabies upon termination of the confinement period or within ten (10) days thereafter. 
(c)  In the event that any dog, cat, or other domestic animal is bitten by an animal diagnosed by a veterinarian as rabid, the dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall be immediately and humanely destroyed. If any dog, cat, or other domestic animal is bitten by an animal and the other animal is not available for rabies examination, or if the dog, cat, or other domestic animal is exposed to, but not bitten by, an animal diagnosed by a veterinarian as rabid, the owner shall observe the dog, cat, or other domestic animal for a period of one year and report any change in behavior or mannerisms of the dog, cat, or other domestic animal to the animal control officer and to a veterinarian. 
(d)  If a dog, cat, or other domestic animal dies during any ten-day confinement period prescribed herein, the owner shall immediately notify the animal control officer and the county health officer, if the confinement was for biting a human being, or the animal control officer and a veterinarian, if the confinement was for biting another animal. In either case, the owner shall make the remains available for rabies examination as may be directed. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat, or other domestic animal to keep or maintain such dog, cat, or other domestic animal unless it shall have been vaccinated against rabies, when such vaccination is required by state or county law. 
(Code 2001, § 4.425.2; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, F.S. § 767.10 et seq. 
Sec. 6-35. - Cruelty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to overwork, deprive of necessary sustenance, torture, torment or cruelly beat, mutilate any dog, cat, or other domestic animal, or to permit such animal to be without proper protection from the weather and from fleas or other insects. Confinement of any dog, cat, or other domestic animal in an automobile, truck, pen, or other enclosure without adequate ventilation shall be construed as cruel and a violation of this section. The words "torture," "torment," and "cruelty" shall include every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted. 
(Code 2001, § 4.425.3; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
State Law reference- Animal cruelty, F.S. § 828.12 et seq. 
Sec. 6-36. - Keeping domestic animals in unsanitary condition. 
    No owner shall keep, harbor, or shelter any dog, cat, or other domestic animal on any premises which in any manner will cause unsanitary or offensive conditions to arise therefrom. 
(Code 2001, § 4.425.4; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-37. - Duty of owner of domestic animals to remove deposit of excreta. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat, or other domestic animal to fail to remove deposits of excreta made by said animal in that person's control, when the deposit of excreta occurred in the presence of the owner or person in control on any public property, including, but not limited to, public parks, golf courses, rights-of-way, or on private property not belonging to the owner or person in control of the animal. If such depositing of excreta occurs, the owner or person in charge of the animal shall immediately cause its removal for disposal at the premises of the owner or person in charge of said animal. 
(Code 2001, § 4.425.5; Ord. No. 25, 11-1-1955; Ord. No. 65, 1-22-1960; Ord. No. 97, 12-5-1961; Ord. No. 123, 11-5-1963; Ord. No. 153, 10-19-1965; Ord. No. 214, 5-20-1969; Ord. No. 279, 3-13-1973; Ord. No. 510, 5-1-1984; Ord. No. 658, 6-21-1988) 
Chapter 7 - FILM ACTIVITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTION AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY PRODUCTION PERMITTING 

Sec. 7-11. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City of Temple Terrace Motion and Still Photography Production Permitting Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-12. - Authority. 
    The City of Temple Terrace is a Charter City and this article is enacted under the home rule powers of the city, pursuant to Florida Constitution Article VIII, § 1(g). 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 2, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-13. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Completed application shall mean an application submitted to the City of Temple Terrace by the executive director of the Tampa Hillsborough Film and Digital Media Commission, referred to herein as the film commissioner, which contains each and every required submission set out in subsection 7-15(b). 
    City equipment shall mean any tangible property, other than real property, purchased by public funds and utilized in the normal course and scope of providing governmental service by the City of Temple Terrace. 
    City facility shall mean any public street, sidewalk, place or building owned or controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city including, but not limited to, city parks and recreation facilities. 
    Motion photography shall mean the commercial taking or making of a motion picture, television, videotape or film production (to include all activity attendant to staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows, commercial still photography, video tapes, computer based programs or other visual reproduction technology) utilizing city equipment or city facilities or productions on private property. This term shall include, and a production permit shall be required for, the following productions on private property, not performed at a studio: 
(1)  Involving the erection of tents or other temporary structures. 
(2)  Involving the use of pyrotechnics, explosives, or other incendiary devices or any stunts which could impact the public. 
(3)  Emitting noise sufficient to violate the City of Temple Terrace's section 16-7, noise control. 
(4)  Involving vehicles, personnel or equipment which would impact a city facility or the public. 
    This term shall not include the activities titled exemptions as further defined and set out in subsection 7-14(f) below. "Motion photography" as defined herein may include "still" photography productions for which a permit will be required unless exempted under subsection 7-14(f) below. 
    Motion or still photography production permit (also referred to herein as "production permit" or "permit") shall mean the permit required herein. 
    Still photography shall mean the process of staging, shooting and producing non-moving images. 
    Studio shall mean a major entertainment company or motion picture company or independently owned facility that is fully enclosed and is used to make films. 
    Tampa Hillsborough Film Commissioner shall mean the executive director for the Tampa Hillsborough Film and Digital Media Commission ("film commission") and may also be referred to as the "film commissioner." 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 3, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-14. - Permit required; suspension and/or revocation; violation; enforcement and abatement. 
(a)  No person knowingly shall advertise, engage in, participate in, and/or start any motion or still photography production unless a production permit shall first have been obtained from the city manager or his/her designee. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided for in chapter 1, article II of the city's code of ordinances and persons engaged in motion or still photography production activities without a permit, or otherwise in violation of a permit, shall be subject to enforcement by the Temple Terrace Police Department or Code Enforcement officers. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit, once issued, shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the production by the city manager or his/her designee until such time as the noncompliance is remedied. The suspension shall be initially communicated orally, followed by a written suspension order. Continued failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the production permit may result in revocation of the permit. Continuation of the production in violation of the suspension and/or revocation shall be punishable as provided for by law. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for, any motion or still photography production for which a permit is required to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit and such failure to comply shall be punishable as provided for by law. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(e)  Permits shall be maintained at the site on which the motion or still photography production occurs. Upon the request of any police officer or code compliance officer of the city, the owner, lessee of the property or representative of the production company shall produce such permit for inspection. 
(f)  Exemptions: No permit shall be required for the following: 
(1)  News media: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or camerapersons in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print media, publishing or broadcasting, of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest or the production of documentaries or "live" coverage of sporting events. 
(2)  Personal/family video: The recording of visual images (motion or still photography) solely for private personal use, and not for commercial use, which involves a production crew of five (5) or fewer people using only hand carried and self-contained equipment. 
(3)  Studio filming: Filming activities (motion or still photography) conducted at a studio. 
(4)  Pro bono public service announcements for a governmental purpose: Public service announcements recorded at the request of the city by either a private or a public entity for which there is no fee or charge. 
(5)  Still photography: The recording of non-moving visual images which involves a production crew of five (5) or fewer people using only hand-carried and self-contained equipment. 
(6)  In addition to the foregoing, to the extent that the filming activity in question is being conducted in an area subject to the jurisdiction of a superior governmental agency, including, but not limited to, the Federal Aviation Administration or United States Coast Guard, any applicable regulations of those agencies shall prevail, to the extent they conflict with any provision of this article. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the exempt status of the filming activities above, persons or entities engaged in filming in, on or over city owned or controlled property must comply with all other applicable local, state and federal laws, and shall conduct the activities so as not to interfere with the peaceful use or enjoyment of the property by all others entitled to be present at the time. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 4, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-15. - Application for permit and prerequisites to issuance. 
(a)  Any person seeking the issuance of a motion or still photography production permit shall file an application on forms prepared by the film commissioner. The completed application shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee. Said application shall be filed not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before, and not less than seven (7) working days before the commencement of production. The application shall be signed, under oath, by an authorized representative of the applicant. The application process shall be automated to the fullest extent practicable so that it may be completed on line. The city manager or his/her designee shall ensure that all completed permit applications receive expedited review. The film commissioner shall be a resource to applicants to facilitate the application process as set out herein. The city manager or his/her designee shall then be responsible for the issuance or denial of the permit. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location(s) of the production and whether it is for motion or still photography. 
(2)  Duration and type of the production. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance coverage in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 with the city and the property owner of the location of the production named as an additional insured. 
(4)  Special effects to be utilized, especially stunts and incendiary or explosive devices with proof of $5,000,000.00 liability insurance therefore. In addition, the application shall list the person in charge (pyrotechnician or stunt coordinator) of such special effects together with his qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and/or state agencies. 
(5)  Necessity for closures of public streets or sidewalks and for what duration. 
(6)  Proposed utilization of city equipment. 
(7)  Number and type of vehicles and/or equipment and number of personnel to be on location with the production. 
(8)  A written summary or explanation of the portion of the production to be shot within unincorporated areas of the city. 
(9)  An agreement to pay for extraordinary services provided by the city. 
(10)  Certificate to the city manager that all affected private property owners and tenants have been notified of the filming and that arrangements have been made to cause the least disruption as possible for the property owners and tenants. 
(11)  Written consent of any private property owners of any property where equipment, cast or crew will enter on said private property. 
(12)  Certificate that the film shall not be a pornographic film. The term "pornographic," for the purposes of this ordinance, means film or tape of activities of one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Acts of human masturbation, actual sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality and in a graphically sexual context the following: masochism, sadism or sadomasochism; 
b.  Depiction of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(13)  Any additional information that shall be reasonably deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(14)  Hold harmless agreement. The applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement in favor of the city saving, defending and holding harmless the city, its agents, employees and representatives, from any claim arising as a result of the activities of the applicant, his agents, representatives or employees, within the city. This agreement shall be executed by an individual and/or entity capable financially and otherwise of honoring the terms thereof, and the agreement shall be in a manner and form acceptable to the city and deemed to provide the protection necessary to the city as intended by this section. 
(15)  Approval by any city department whose area of responsibility covers the area where filming will occur, or as deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(16)  Verification by the film commissioner that the application is complete. 
    With regard to subsection (15) above, applicable city representatives shall review and provide approval or denial of the permit application or identify issues needed for resolution of the permit request within five (5) working days of receiving the application. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 5, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-16. - Standards for issuance of permits; rules and procedures. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall issue a permit for motion or still photography production as provided herein if, from a consideration of the application and from other information as may otherwise be obtained, it appears that: 
(1)  The production activity to be permitted will not unduly interrupt the safe and orderly movements of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in or contiguous to the location of the production activity. 
(2)  The conduct of the production activity will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the Temple Terrace Police Department or personnel of Temple Terrace Fire Department as to prevent normal police and fire protection from being furnished to other parts of the city. 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles and/or the intrinsic nature of the production activity will not interfere unduly with the fire, police and other emergency services and protection to areas contiguous to the production activity area and other areas of the city. 
(4)  The conduct of the production activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct as defined in F.S. § 877.03. 
(5)  Adequate sanitary and other required health facilities are, or will be made available, in or adjacent to the production activity area. 
(6)  The conduct of the production activity will not result in noise of a level inappropriate for the areas surrounding the assembly. 
(7)  Neither the conduct of the production activity nor the inherent nature of the production activity may present a threat or an undue hampering to the public health, welfare and safety of the city or the property and/or personnel of the city. 
(b)  Permit applications for filming activities may be denied for the following reasons: 
(1)  The activity requested represents an unreasonable threat to the land, property or other assets or resources of the city. 
(2)  The activity requested will create an unreasonable danger of death, injury or disruption of wildlife, or of damage or destruction to trees or similar plant life. 
(3)  The activity will require an unreasonable burden on city staff or staff of other governmental agencies to supervise the activity. At the discretion of the city manager, this restriction may be excepted if the applicant agrees to pay for the additional staff supervisory costs. 
(4)  The activity will unreasonably deprive average visitors or patrons of the use of the city property or facility for an extended period of time. 
(5)  The activity would require entry into or access to areas of city property or facilities which are closed to the general public, or which would allow activities not permitted to the average visitor or patron. At the discretion of the city manager, this restriction may be excepted if the applicant agrees to pay for additional staff supervisory costs, and/or complies with such other terms or conditions the city manager determines are necessary to safely allow the activity to occur while not damaging city property or facilities. 
(c)  City council may adopt, from time to time, by resolution, such rules and procedures as are necessary or proper to implement the process of the issuance of motion photography production permits; provided, however, that such rules and procedures shall conform to the standards set forth hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 6, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-17. - Exemption from other city ordinances. 
(a)  Once a production permit has been issued, and notwithstanding any other provisions of City of Temple Terrace's Code of Ordinances to the contrary, no other city permits shall be required for any of the activities forming a part of a permitted motion photography production. 
(b)  Provisions of the rules and regulations of the city parks and recreational areas, or provisions of the rules and regulations of any other division or department of the city government, insofar as certain acts are required or prohibited, may be suspended by the city manager or his/her designee in connection with the conduct of a permitted motion photography production activity pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 7, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-18. - Fees and costs for extraordinary services. 
    No permitting fees will be attached to obtaining a permit for motion or still photography production. Where fees are applicable for city facilities usage, the city manager may waive the fees. In the event that these fees are not waived and only in the event that film production activities occurred in the City of Temple Terrace, the city manager shall have the authority to use funds from any film production incentive fund, when available, to cover these costs. 
    However, the city shall recover reasonably estimated expenses for extraordinary services rendered in connection with a production, including, but not be limited to, charges for personnel and/or equipment committed in support of the production that are outside the normal scope of government services. Based on the information contained in the permit application and such consultations as may be required between the applicant and appropriate city officials, an estimate of these costs will be provided to the applicant and submitted by the applicant with his application for the permit when such is filed with the city manager. The city manager may require prepayment of all or a portion of these estimated costs prior to issuance of the permit. At the conclusion of the production, expenses below or in excess of the estimates will be refunded by the city or paid by the applicant, respectively. Any film incentive fund will not be used to offset these extraordinary services unless authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 8, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-19. - Use of city equipment or personnel in filming activities. 
(a)  Should the producers of a film project request the use of city staff, equipment or other resources to appear in any scenes or still photos, the city manager shall examine the nature and topic of the project in question and make a determination whether to honor the request. Such requests shall only be honored if they are of a limited nature, and would further one (1) or more public purposes, including contributing to local economic development, helping foster a local film-making industry, improving tourism to the city, creating positive economic spinoff effects, exposing a local viewing audience to the dedication and professionalism of city staff, or other similar public purposes. 
(b)  To the extent the city manager authorizes the limited use of city staff, equipment or resources in such a manner, the city's risk manager shall review the proposed involvement and may, after consultation with the city manager place such terms and conditions on the participation as that official deems necessary to protect the city's financial interests and the health and safety of its staff and citizens. 
(c)  The producers of the film project shall, when any use of city staff, equipment or resources is granted, agree to give suitable credit to the city (and/or any other participating agencies) within the printed film credits. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 9, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-20. - Film commissioner assistance for filming on private venues. 
    In addition to facilitating filming activities in, on or over government property, the film commissioner is authorized to assist persons or entities seeking to conduct filming activities in or on privately owned property or facilities within the city. Such assistance may include identification of suitable locations, maintenance of lists of private property owners or businesses which have expressed willingness to permit such activities, and ensuring such persons or business entities receive public credit from the city and the film producers for their willingness to support the filming activity. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 10, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-21. - Moratoria. 
    The city manager, at his sole discretion, is authorized to place a temporary moratorium on the issuance of motion photography or still production permits for locations and/or neighborhoods which have experienced overuse as a result of high volume and/or heavy impact filming or for extraordinary neighborhood impacts that have caused complaint. The moratorium shall remain in effect for a maximum period of six (6) months, but may be renewed for additional six-month periods if, in the discretion of the city manager, the impact of the prior filming activities in the area warrants extension. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 11, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 7-22. - Intergovernmental cooperation. 
    The film commissioner is authorized to facilitate the permitting process, counsel and advise private persons and entities in motion photography activities, and provide such additional assistance to the city as the city may grant to the film commissioner by resolution or other lawful means; provided that the film commission shall not be delegated any governmental decision making authority, governmental responsibility, nor any governmental function. The city shall not assert or collect any fee or charge for the film commissioner's work or for any other reason from any municipality or district which elects to adopt the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 12, 11-18-2014) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1356, § 2, adopted April 15, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1, 8-21-8-32, 8-53-8-58, 8-90-8-97, 8-102, 8-133-8-137, 8-158-8-166, and enacted a new Ch. 8 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553; fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Certification. 
    All persons desiring to engage in the business of contracting or act in the capacity of any type of contractor or subcontractor shall maintain a certificate of competency and be registered with the state, in accordance with F.S. ch. 489, and/or F.S. ch. 320. Specific building trade areas requiring certification, and the qualifications and allowed scope of work for those trade areas, shall be as delineated in the interlocal agreement between Hillsborough County and the City of Temple Terrace and any subsequent amendments to that agreement. Violations of this section shall be punished as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of chapter 8, certain terms and words are defined as follows except that whenever the terms "structure," "building," "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "premises," or any derivation thereof are used, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any parts thereof." 
    Accessory structure means a building which is customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use of property and is located upon said property. 
    Alter or alteration means any change, rearrangement, enlargement, extension or reduction of or modification in construction or occupancy of any building, structure, dwelling, accessory structure, or dwelling unit or part thereof on the same site. 
    Assessed value means the most recent assessment performed and recorded in the ad valorem tax rolls by the property appraiser of the county. 
    Attic means any story, so designated, arranged, or built to be used for storage, and situated wholly or partly in the roof. 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having more than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Building means a fully enclosed, weatherproof structure, permanently attached to the ground and built or used for the shelter of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building code means the City of Temple Terrace Construction Code as stated in chapter 8. 
    Code enforcement board means the City of Temple Terrace Municipal Code Enforcement Board created pursuant to F.S. ch. 162. 
    Condemnation means a declaration by the city through its appropriate employee(s) under its police power notifying that a property or structure is unsafe, unfit or unsanitary for use or habitation or dangerous to persons or other property. 
    Construction code means the City of Temple Terrace Construction Code as stated in chapter 8. 
    Debris means material which is stored outdoors and shall include, but is not limited to, the following: discarded household items; inoperative or discarded machinery, vehicles or appliances; refuse, rubbish, trash or junk; and used, scrap or discarded lumber, pipe, steel, plumbing fixtures, insulation and other building materials. 
    Deterioration means a lowering in quality in the condition or appearance of a building or parts thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay or neglect, or excessive use, or lack of maintenance. 
    Dilapidated means substantial deterioration of a building or parts thereof, such that said building, or portion thereof, is no longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was originally intended. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, trailer, mobile home or roominghouse which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not such structure, building, trailer, or mobile home is occupied or vacant. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, whether or not such unit is occupied or vacant. 
    Family means any number of persons occupying a dwelling as a single housekeeping unit, provided that unless all members of the family are related to each other by blood, adoption, or marriage, a family shall consist of no more than three (3) unrelated persons. 
    Fire prevention code means the City of Temple Terrace Fire Protection and Prevention Code as stated in chapter 8. 
    Garbage means the putrescible animal, fruit and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste food containers of any type. 
    Garbage regulations means the provisions and standards as stated in chapter 10, article II, sanitation. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets, storage space or utility rooms. 
    Infestation means the presence within or around a dwelling of insects, rodents or pests which are detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents or occupants; and, if in the case of a structure, if left unattended may result in structural deterioration. 
    Inoperative vehicle means a vehicle which is missing parts, including, but not limited to, the chassis, engine, wheels or tires; or any vehicle without a valid, current registration; or any vehicle which is incapable of movement under its own power and will remain so unless major repair or reconstruction occurs. 
    Municipality means the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Municipal code enforcement board means the city municipal code enforcement board created pursuant to F.S. ch. 162. 
    Nuisance conditions means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any nuisance as defined by law, whether general law or city code; 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may be detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied job site. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned wells or shafts; unsecured basements or excavations; abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, or motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; lumber, trash/debris, or any other materials which may provide a hazard; 
(3)  Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health including, but not limited to: the emission of odors, sewage, human waste, liquids, gases, dust, smoke, vibration, noise, or whatever may render air, food, or drink detrimental to the health of human beings; 
(4)  Physical conditions such as, but not limited to: old, dilapidated, abandoned scrap or metal, paper, building materials and equipment, bottles, glass, appliances, furniture, rags, rubber, motor vehicles, and parts hereof; 
(5)  Physical conditions posing fire hazards; 
(6)  Physical conditions posing a hazard such as, but not limited to, dead or damaged trees. 
    Occupant means any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit within the confines of any building or structure. 
    Openable area means any part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge or consent of the owner. 
    Owner means a person who, or entity which, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity (including without limitation, an authorized agent, attorney, executor, personal representative or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property in question, or a tenant, if the tenancy is chargeable under the lease for the maintenance of the property; or, the requisite owner of a vehicle, as determined by the division of highway safety and motor vehicles (or corresponding agency) of the several states. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land and may include any building or structures thereon. 
    Related family member means a person or persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage. 
    Rent means any transaction of value in which one or more persons provides consideration to a property owner for the use of a dwelling unit, whether or not money is exchanged. 
    Rental unit means any dwelling which is (i) leased or offered for lease by any arrangement, written or otherwise, or (ii) advertised or marketed by the owner as being available to lease by any arrangement, written or otherwise. All oral rental agreements shall be included within the scope of this Code. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling containing one or more dwelling units in which space is let by the owner or operator to one or more persons who are not the wife, husband, son, daughter, sister, brother, father or mother of the owner or operator. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, boxes, crates, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials as ordinarily accumulate about residential property. 
    Skylight means an opening through the roof and ceiling to admit light to a room, including the window portion therein. The assembly may or may not have an operable section to provide ventilation. 
    Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms which form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another, within or attached to the exterior of a building or structure. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished ceiling level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six (6) feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, installed or portable with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, educational, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. The term "structure" includes, but is not limited to, the following terms defined herein: accessory structure, building, dwelling, dwelling unit, habitable room, rental unit, and roominghouse. The term "structure" also includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools, pole, fences, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, advertising signs, and to the extent not superseded by federal law or regulation, radio and television antennae and dishes. Driveways, walkways, bird feeders, light posts, pads for recreational or decorative uses, gas or liquid storage tanks that are located principally above ground, and mailboxes, which are not an integral or related part of a major structure shall not be considered as structures for the purposes of this article. 
    Trash means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, boxes, crates, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials as ordinarily accumulate about residential property. 
    Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any structure, building, or dwelling. 
    Weatherproof means able to withstand exposure to weather without damage or loss of function. 
    Weathertight means able to exclude wind and rain under normal conditions. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except by trees or shrubbery or as otherwise provided in the city code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Secs. 8-3-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Florida Building Code, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 

Sec. 8-21. - Title. 
    The provisions of this article and the incorporated references shall constitute and be known and be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Construction Code," hereinafter known as the "construction code." 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-22. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code of Ordinances. In addition, the city may institute any other remedies and appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate violations of this article which shall include, but not be limited to, temporary safeguards and/or condemnation. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-23. - General. 
    The provisions of this article shall govern the administration and enforcement of the Florida Building Code which establishes the technical standards that shall apply to buildings, structures, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings or appurtenances used, as well as to the method of construction, installation, alteration, repair, removal, replacement, or connection to any system and the equipment usage, occupancy, locating, maintenance and demolition of every building or structure and any appurtenances or systems connected or attached to such buildings or structures in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-24. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. The construction code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to be the minimum standards necessary to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of the construction code, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-25. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the construction code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, as set forth in F.S. ch. 553, pt. IV (F.S. § 553.70 et seq.), including all subparts of the Florida Building Code, as adopted by the Florida Building Commission and all subsequent amendments, are incorporated by reference and shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
    Pursuant to the authority provided in F.S. § 553.73(5), the city adopts the following administrative amendments to the Florida Building Code: 
Sec. 104.10.1 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Building Official shall coordinate with the Floodplain Administrator to review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 117. 
Sec. 107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Section 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
Sec. 117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(c)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. Where construction code requirements promulgated by separate agencies of government conflict, the more stringent standard shall be enforced unless prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1368, § 3(Exh. A), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 8-26. - Department of community development. 
(a)  Establishment. The construction code shall be administered and enforced by the department of community development, referred to herein as the "department." The city manager or designee shall designate a building official and that person's duly authorized representatives shall act as building officials. 
(b)  Employee qualifications. 
(1)  Building official. The building official shall have such qualifications as deemed appropriate by the city manager or designee. The building official shall be certified as a building code administrator in compliance with F.S. ch. 468. Failure to maintain such certification shall be grounds for dismissal as building official. 
(2)  Inspector. The building official, with the approval of the applicable governing authority, may appoint or hire such number of inspectors as shall be authorized from time to time. All inspectors shall be certified in compliance F.S. ch. 468, when the inspection category is regulated by that statute. 
(3)  Other employees. Any employees functioning in other capacities requiring certification for compliance with F.S. ch. 468 must obtain and retain such certification. 
(c)  Restrictions on employees. An employee of the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless the employee is the owner of such. Those employees shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with their duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(d)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(e)  Liability. Any employees charged with the enforcement of the construction code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of duties, shall not hereby render themselves personally liable, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of their duties. Any suit brought against any employees or members because of such act performed by that employee in the enforcement of any provision of the construction code shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-27. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction code and such other responsibilities created in chapter 8. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction code, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Inspections. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction code, or whenever a building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the construction code and such other duties imposed by chapter 8. If such building or premises are occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry, except when a building permit has been issued for such, in which case the permit shall imply a right of entry has been granted. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  Warrants. When a building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the code. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction code, being done without benefit of permit or in violation of any city ordinance shall immediately cease. The building official is authorized to post a dated notice to stop work on any site on which work is being performed. A person shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided by state law if the person: 
(1)  Continues to perform work with actual or constructive knowledge that the work site has been posted by such notice, which notice has not been withdrawn by a signed order or removal by the building official. 
(2)  Removes, defaces, conceals or alters such notice to stop work, without signed authority of the building official. 
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, a building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the code, in cases where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the code. 
(e)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this construction code or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. This determination may be appealed to the appropriate board of adjustment, appeals and examiners and such appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the written request for appeal by the building official. 
(f)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction code and other technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by a building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. The building official's denial of a request for such alternate may be appealed to the appropriate board of adjustment, appeals and examiners and such appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the written request for appeal by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-28. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. 
a.  Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the department and obtain the required permit for the work. 
b.  Exception. Permits shall not be required for work involving: 
1.  Roofing, recovering, reroofing or repairing of an existing roof involving less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
2.  Application of stucco or siding involving less than five hundred one (501) square feet of coverage. 
3.  Installation of soffit or fascia coverings involving less one hundred one (101) linear feet. 
4.  Placement or moving of any premanufactured accessory building or structure involving less than one hundred fifty-one (151) square feet of ground coverage. 
5.  Nonstructural slabs less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
6.  Work of a nonstructural nature, which does not involve electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, a change in usage of the building or structure, or an increase in the total interior area of a building, and in which the aggregate fair market contract price for labor, materials and all other items will or would be less than $1,000.00, provided the work is not part of a larger overall operation segmented to evade normal permitting requirements. 
7.  Ordinary minor repairs and maintenance to a one- and two-family residence or farm building under the supervision of the owner. 
8.  Any portable heating appliance. 
9.  Any portable ventilation equipment. 
10.  Any portable cooling unit. 
11.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the code. 
12.  Replacement of equipment parts which do not alter equipment approval or make it unsafe. 
13.  Any portable evaporative cooler. 
14.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746W) or less. 
15.  Any activity specifically exempted by federal or state law. 
The waiving of building permit requirements under these exceptions shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any other requirements of the construction code, including, but not limited to, certification requirements, or of any permit requirements set forth by any other jurisdiction or agency with the power to enforce building code regulations. 
(2)  Temporary structures. A special building permit shall be obtained before the erection of temporary structures such as, but not limited to, construction sheds, seats, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work or for temporary purposes such as reviewing stands. Such temporary permits shall be limited to a time period appropriate to the permitted usage, but shall not exceed one year. Such structures shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit. 
(3)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(4)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs and maintenance may be made by an owner or maintenance employee, without a permit, provided that the repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction code or other technical codes, and all the following conditions are met: 
a.  The repairs or regular maintenance will cost less than $1,000.00. 
b.  The structure or system involved is or is part of a commercial, industrial, educational, or institutional occupancy or is a residential occupancy containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
c.  The building official shall determine whether the repair or maintenance is minor in nature and exempt from permitting. 
(5)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with any required fees, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, a contractor certified by the state or city to practice in the area of work proposed, or an authorized agent of either. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(6)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of first completed plans review, unless before then a permit has been issued. 
(b)  Drawing and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to a scale of at least one-fourth (1/4) inch to the foot with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction code or other technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part nor shall the terms "to code," "legal" or their equivalents be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by design professionals shall be dated, affixed with their official seal and signed. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix such professional's official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All new construction not exempted by other provisions of the construction code. 
b.  All renovation of Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
For all claims of exemption from these requirements, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that a specific legal exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the locations of all recorded easements, the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The drawing shall also show the proposed foundation elevation and lot grading. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous material storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction code and other technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction code and other technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the foregoing codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the foregoing codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the foregoing codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances and provide the building official with a signed and sealed statement to this effect prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the accompanying documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction code and other technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the building official shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction code and other technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the documents to the applicant. Such refusal shall be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special permits. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building or for interior work under an existing roof has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may issue a special structural permit for the foundation only or an early start. Electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing permits entailing work under or through the foundation or associated with the interior work may be issued based on the existence of a special permit. The holder of any such special permit is proceeding at such holder's own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction code or other technical codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction or movement of any building over a right-of-way, easement, or conservation area unless the applicant has obtained the required authorization from the appropriate regulatory body. 
(5)  Contractor's responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state and/or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted and to properly supervise the work permitted. When work involving the electrical, plumbing, gas or mechanical systems is being performed, a certified contractor appropriate to the category of work being performed must be on site. 
(e)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work detailed in the approved plans and specifications and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction code or other technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced and an inspection conducted within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit goes without an inspection for any period of six (6) months exclusive of an extension or if the work authorized demonstrates no progress between requested inspections. One extension of time, for a period not more than ninety (90) days, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction code and other technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employee in the owner's stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed and approved by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, the building official shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, any associated plans "reviewed for building code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and all other sets shall be returned to the applicant. One set of approved drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or the official's authorized representative. 
(4)  Work performed by owner-occupants. A building permit may be issued to the owner-occupant of real property to construct or cause to be constructed, while the owner-occupant is present on site, a one- or two-family residential structure for such owner's-occupant's own use and not offered for sale or lease or to repair the structure without being required to be a qualified contractor in accordance with licensing laws. The owner-occupant may not construct or repair or cause the construction or repair of more than one such structure during any one-year period. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit application shall not be accepted or a permit issued until the fees prescribed by the city are paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fees, if any, due to the amendment or an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, are paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. In the event that any work for which a permit is required is commenced or is in process prior to the issuance of a permit by the building department, the building official may impose a penalty fee to the specified permit fees. The payment of a penalty fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. The fee for work commenced without a permit shall be as established by the city. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of obtaining the permit or submitting the application, as appropriate and in accordance with the schedule as established by the city. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building based on the most current building valuation data published by the SBCCI, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-29. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. The building official shall inspect all structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. The building official shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, the building official shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by the construction code. The building official may accept reports of state certified inspectors not employed by the city, provided that after investigation the building official is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction code or other technical codes shall not be based on the report of a registered inspector unless the same are in writing and certified by that inspector. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder, or the holder's agent, posts the permit card in a conspicuous place near the front of the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion or final inspection approval is received, when the work will not result in a certificate of occupancy or completion, from the building official. Property addresses corresponding to the permit address shall be posted in a readily visible location from an adjacent public street throughout the term of the work in no less than four-inch characters. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or the agent thereof shall make the following minimum inspections, when applicable, and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or the agent thereof of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with construction code and other technical codes: 
(1)  Building inspections. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and prior to the placement of concrete. 
b.  Slab inspection. To be made after reinforcement is in place and prior to placement of concrete. 
c.  Lintel inspection. To be made after the walls are in place and prior to the start of framing. 
d.  Sheathing inspection. To be made after the roof sheathing is in place and prior to the start of roof covering installation. 
e.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete and prior to the installation of insulation. 
f.  Insulation inspection. To be made after the frame inspection is completed and insulation is in place. 
g.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical inspections. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to be concealed are in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing inspections. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical inspections. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas inspections. 
a.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(g)  Reinspection. Failure to be found in compliance during any requested inspection may result in a reinspection and associated fee for each inspection type disapproved because of a violation of the construction code or other technical codes observed. Within ten (10) days of its imposition, a person may appeal a reinspection fee in a written submission to the building official. The building official shall investigate all matters relating to the appeal, and shall provide a reasonable basis in either sustaining or denying the appeal. Payment of any reinspection fee shall be made before the building official will approve any further inspections relating to the permit. 
(h)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
(i)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(j)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or the agent thereof shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-30. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction code and other technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction code and other technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection and payment of any outstanding fees due the city, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction code or other technical codes for which a permit is required, or to any devices and appliances to be used in connection with any carnival or show, or in any place, tent or building to be used as a temporary place of assembly, until such connection has been released by the building official. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction code or other technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(d)  Posting of occupancy loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new structure shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when the building official is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of storage and factory-industrial occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every structure or part of a structure used for storage, educational, assembly, industrial or hazardous purposes, the occupancy loads, as determined by the building official, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed, or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-31. - Tests. 
    The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or the agent thereof, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. Copies of test reports or the results of such tests shall be kept on file in the department. The building official may also require such testing as necessary to ensure the integrity of installed components or systems and that such testing will be conducted in the presence of a building official. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for any test required by the building official shall be furnished by the owner or the agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-32. - Board of adjustment, appeals and examiners. 
    The city will utilize the county board of adjustment, appeals and examiners under the terms of an interlocal agreement entered into by the county and the city. The purpose of this board under this article is to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and to consider variances to the construction code and technical codes and violations committed by contractors. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Secs. 8-33-8-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Florida Fire Prevention Code, F.S. § 633.012; uniform fire safety standards, F.S. § 633.022; minimum, fire safety standards, F.S. § 633.025. 

Sec. 8-53. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. In addition, the city may institute any other remedies and appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate violations of this article which shall include, but not be limited to, temporary safeguards and/or condemnation. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-54. - Purpose; short title. 
(a)  This article is hereby adopted to provide the city with rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire hazards and other emergencies; providing emergency medical services; maintaining a risk reduction program; regulating the installation, use and maintenance of equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises and open areas; providing for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities and procedures for fire code enforcement; and setting forth the standards for compliance and achievement of these objectives. 
(b)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Fire Protection and Prevention Code." 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1455 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 8-55. - Administration. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The fire chief shall have charge and control of the fire department, firefighting personnel, fire equipment and apparatus of the city. The fire chief shall order and superintend the work of such company and shall make recommendations from time to time as the chief deems appropriate for the better and more adequate protection of the city. In the absence or disability of the fire chief, the assistant fire chief shall have charge and control of the fire department to the same extent as that of the fire chief. 
(2)  All regulations issued by the state fire marshal shall be enforceable by the fire chief. The fire chief is hereby authorized to perform within the city any duties that may be imposed upon the city by such law and regulations, or in accordance therewith, and to have such assistance as the fire chief may find necessary from other officials of the city in the discharge of such duties. 
(3)  The fire chief is hereby appointed by the city manager or designee to act as the fire marshal for the city. 
(4)  Whenever the term "fire chief" is used in this article, it shall be construed to mean the chief of the fire department or designated representative. 
(b)  Evacuation of occupied buildings or structures. The fire chief shall order the immediate evacuation of any occupied building or structure or assembly area when such building, structure, or assembly area is deemed hazardous due to fire hazard, obstruction of exits, overcrowding of the premises, or any other hazard or potential hazard which presents immediate danger to the occupants. The premises, or any portion thereof, may not be reoccupied until it has been examined and deemed free of the hazard or potential hazard which caused the evacuation to be ordered. Persons refusing to obey either a verbal or written order from the fire chief may be subject to arrest. 
(c)  Preventing or obstructing extinguishment of fire. 
(1)  Any person who willfully and maliciously injures, destroys, removes, or in any manner interferes with the use of any vehicles, tools, equipment, water supplies, hydrants, towers, buildings, communication facilities, or other instruments or facilities used in the detection, reporting, suppression, or extinguishment of fire shall be guilty of a felony of the third degree. 
(2)  Any persons who willfully or unreasonably interferes with, hinders, assaults, or attempts to interfere with any firefighter in the performance of duty shall be guilty of a felony in the third degree. 
(d)  Cease and desist order or stop work order. Whenever the violation of any provision of this article presents an immediate danger to life, or when any new construction or existing building is occupied in whole or in part in violation of the provisions of this Code, or when any fire, explosion or other such disaster occurs and presents an immediate danger to life, the fire chief shall immediately post a cease and desist order or a stop work order on the premises and shall suspend any and/or all use of the building, structure or premises until such time that the danger to life has been removed or the correction of the violation(s) has been made. 
(e)  Closing of private driveways, roadways and entrances. It shall be unlawful for any person to have or cause to have any driveway, roadway or entrance barricaded or blocked by obstacles which would interfere with the response of fire department vehicles. If an existing building requires the changing of access to the properties, the owners shall provide revised site plans to the community development department and to the fire chief for approval. A facility use agreement, which may be obtained through the leisure services department, must be executed prior to any road closure. 
(f)  Modifications. 
(1)  The fire chief may grant waivers of the provisions of the code as it relates to a building upon written request by the building's representative. The written request shall address each of the following elements: 
a.  Strict compliance with the code would be a practical impossibility or would create an unnecessary hardship; or 
b.  Extraordinary and exceptional circumstances pertain to the particular piece of property or building because of its size or shape or because of the property's topography; or 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property; or 
d.  Modification would not cause a substantial detriment to the public health, safety and welfare or impair the purpose of the code; or 
e.  The building representative proposes an alternative which conforms to the general intent and spirit of the code and which provides equivalent fire safety protection. 
(2)  The fire chief shall specify all approved modifications in writing. Signed copies of approved written modifications shall be retained by the fire department and provided to the applicant. 
(g)  Appeals. Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove a request or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire chief to the city manager or designee within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the decision appealed. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager or designee to the city council within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(h)  Penalties for violations. 
(1)  This article shall either be enforced by the fire chief or designee, any law enforcement officer or any code enforcement officer of the city. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of the Code and subject to fines and other orders that may be imposed by a court or by the municipal code enforcement board. The power and authority granted by this article is supplemental to and in addition to any other remedies available to the city to achieve the abatement of such violations or nuisances, including civil judicial enforcement in whatever form or forum deemed necessary, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief. Any person against whom such civil relief is successfully sought shall be responsible for all reasonable attorney's fees and court costs. In addition, the city may issue noncriminal citations or institute municipal code enforcement board proceedings. Violations of any provision of the fire prevention code for which municipal code enforcement board proceedings are initiated shall be governed by chapter 1, article II of the Code and F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1455 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-19-2018) 
State Law reference- Persons authorized to enforce laws and rules of state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121; cease and desist orders, F.S. § 633.161; preventing or obstructing extinguishment of fire, F.S. § 806.10. 
Sec. 8-56. - Standards. 
(a)  Fire prevention code adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Fire Prevention Code as now or hereafter promulgated by the state. 
(b)  Definitions in fire code. In addition to the definitions set forth in section 8-2, the following additional definitions apply to the fire prevention code: 
(1)  Authority having jurisdiction or official, when used in the code adopted by this article, means the fire chief. 
(2)  Construction type(s). Reference NFPA 220 for definitions of all construction types. 
(3)  Barbecue means grill, pit, or outdoor fireplace for cooking purposes. 
(4)  Building representative means the building's owner, lessee, or the duly authorized agent of either. 
(5)  Outdoor cooking appliance means any portable and nonportable cooking appliance, grill, stove or smoker, fueled or powered by electricity, wood, charcoal, liquefied petroleum gas, natural gas, or other liquid or gaseous fuel. 
(6)  Private fire hydrant means a valved connection on a water supply system having one or more outlets and that is used to supply hose and fire department pumpers with water on private property. 
(c)  Alterations. All alterations performed to any structure shall adhere to the guidelines set forth in the Florida Building Code: Existing Building; Alterations. For the purpose of this code, all Level 3 alterations will be considered new construction. 
(d)  Occupancies requirements. 
(1)  All new construction including all Level 3 alterations regardless of occupancy type shall be required to install a fire alarm system per NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code. A weatherproof strobe device shall be provided on the exterior of the building side which faces the main thoroughfare visible to responding emergency vehicles, or as directed by the fire chief. 
(2)  For occupancies requiring an automatic sprinkler system, and where water is inadvisable as a fire extinguishing agent, the fire chief may approve a foam, chemical or other acceptable extinguishing system in fire hazard areas. 
(3)  All NFPA 13 and NFPA 13R sprinkler systems will require connection to an Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., listed twenty-four-hour central station alarm system to summon the fire department. All 13D sprinkler systems will require proper signage on the exterior of the building to prompt occupants and/or other persons in the area to summon the fire department; signage size, wording, and location to be approved by the fire chief. 
(4)  Assembly occupancies including, but limited to, all buildings or portions of buildings used for gathering together persons for such purposes as deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, amusement, or awaiting transportation. Assembly occupancies will be required to install a sprinkler system as required in NFPA 101 or where the following condition is met: 
a.  Is of wood frame construction and has a floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more. 
(5)  Educational occupancies including all buildings or portions of buildings used for educational purposes through the twelfth grade by six (6) or more persons for four (4) or more hours per day or more than twelve (12) hours per week. Educational occupancies will be required to install a sprinkler system as required in NFPA 101 or where the following condition is met: 
a.  Is of wood frame construction and has a floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more. 
(6)  Mercantile occupancies include stores, markets, and other rooms, buildings, or structures for the display and sale of merchandise. Mercantile occupancies will be required to install a sprinkler system as required in NFPA 101 or where the following condition is met: 
a.  Is of wood frame construction and has a floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more. 
(7)  Business occupancies are those used for the transaction of business, for the keeping of accounts and records, and for similar purposes. Business occupancies will be required to install a sprinkler system as required in NFPA 101 or where the following conditions are met: 
a.  Has a floor area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more regardless of construction type; or 
b.  Is of wood frame construction and has a floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more. 
(8)  Industrial occupancies including factories making products of all kinds and properties devoted to operations such as processing, assembling, mixing, packaging, finishing or decorating, and repairing. Industrial occupancies will be required to install a sprinkler system as required in NFPA 101 or where the following conditions are met: 
a.  Has a floor area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more regardless of construction type; or 
b.  Is of wood frame construction and has a floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more. 
(9)  Storage or warehouse occupancies, including all buildings or structures utilized primarily for the storage or sheltering of goods, merchandise, products, vehicles, or animals. Storage occupancies will be required to install a sprinkler system as required in NFPA 101 or where the following conditions are met: 
a.  Has a floor area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more regardless of construction type; or 
b.  Is of wood frame construction and has a floor area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more. 
(e)  Fire department connections. Fire department connections are required for all NFPA 13 and 13R sprinkler systems. All buildings that are required to have a fire sprinkler system by this article shall have the fire department connection so located, with respect to fire hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscaping, that fire apparatus and hose connected to supply the fire sprinkler system will not obstruct access to the building for other fire apparatus. All fire department connections shall have a five-inch Storz-type adapter, unless otherwise approved by the fire chief. All fire department connections shall be marked in a manner that is clearly visible to approaching emergency vehicles, unless otherwise approved by the fire chief. The fire department connection shall be located no more than fifty (50) feet from the center of the roadway and no more than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest fire hydrant. Final location shall be approved by the fire chief. 
(1)  No person shall place or keep any post, fence, vegetation growth, trash or other materials, which, would alter the existing grade level, or in any way obstruct visibility or operations within five (5) feet of any fire department connection, or between any fire department connection and a street, such that the fire department connection is not immediately seen, accessible or operational to the fire department. 
(f)  Existing fire or smoke alarms. 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved by the fire chief, all buildings or structures that are equipped with an existing fire or smoke alarm system shall be connected to an Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., listed twenty-four-hour central station alarm system to summon the fire department in the event of an activation. Single-station smoke detectors shall not require monitoring. 
(2)  All existing buildings or structures including multi-family occupancies, shall be equipped with smoke detectors which will provide for detection of products of combustion other than heat, located near each sleeping area. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1359, § 2(Exh. A), 7-15-2014 ; Ord. No. 1455 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-19-2018) 
State Law reference- Fire Prevention Code adoption required, F.S. § 633.025(2); Life Safety Code adoption required, F.S. § 633.025(3). 
Sec. 8-57. - Fire safety. 
(a)  Report of fire. Each owner, manager, person in charge of any building of any kind, or occupant of any building of any kind shall, immediately upon discovery of a hostile fire in or adjacent to such building, or upon discovery of evidence that there has been a fire even though it has apparently been extinguished report such an occurrence to the fire department immediately, giving complete information as to the location and type of fire in order that an appropriate response by the fire department may be initiated. 
(b)  Protection systems. 
(1)  Emergency lighting in publicly occupied structures. Emergency lighting shall be provided in all publicly occupied structures when any area of the structure is subject to darkness due to power failure. The emergency lighting shall illuminate all means of egress as defined by NFPA 101. 
(2)  Fire extinguishers. All fire extinguishers shall be maintained and inspected in accordance with F.S. § 633.065(2) and the Department of Insurance, Division of State Fire Marshal Uniform Fire Safety Rules and Standards, F.A.C. ch. 4A-21 (Fire Extinguishers and Pre-engineered Systems). 
(3)  Emergency power. Buildings of four (4) or more stories shall be fully equipped with a standby emergency generator of sufficient size to provide power supply for the emergency lighting, the fire alarm system, and a minimum of one elevator. In addition, power must be available at all times for all fire pumps. 
(4)  Fire hydrants. 
a.  Fire hydrants in single-family residential areas shall be spaced no more than five hundred (500) feet apart measured along the line of street travel distance, no building shall be farther than five hundred (500) feet from a hydrant and shall be connected to water mains no less than six (6) inches in diameter. The location and placement of fire hydrants shall be approved by the fire chief. 
b.  Fire hydrants in commercial, industrial and residential areas where residential units exceed six (6) or more dwelling units per gross acre shall be spaced no farther than five hundred (500) feet apart measured along the line of street travel distance. No building shall be farther than two hundred (200) feet from a hydrant and shall be connected to mains no less than six (6) inches in diameter. Certain occupancies, at the discretion of the fire chief, may require a hydrant connected to a main larger than six (6) inches. The location and placement of fire hydrants shall be approved by the fire chief. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall have a minimum of three (3) discharge outlets; one outlet shall be a pumper outlet of like size and two (2) other outlets shall be two and one-half (21/2) inches in diameter. A valve shall be provided on all connections between fire hydrants and street mains. 
d.  The city fire hydrant barrels shall be painted white, and private fire hydrant barrels shall be painted red. The top or bonnet for city or private hydrants shall be painted as follows: 
1.  Flows of less than five hundred (500) gallons per minute-Red. 
2.  Flows of five hundred (500) to one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute-Orange. 
3.  Flows of one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute or greater-Green. 
e.  Blue reflective roadway markers shall be placed in the roadway or parking area as follows: On divided roadways, one marker shall be placed on both sides of the divided roadway on the centerline of the road. An additional marker shall be placed halfway between the centerline and the curbing adjacent to the fire hydrant. On non-divided roadways, one marker shall be placed on the centerline of the road and an additional marker shall be placed halfway between the centerline and the curbing adjacent to the fire hydrant. In parking areas one marker shall be placed in the centerline of the roadway. 
f.  No persons shall place or keep any post, fence, vegetation growth, trash or other materials, which would alter the existing grade level, or in any way obstruct visibility or operations within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, or between any fire hydrant and a street, such that the hydrant is not immediately seen, accessible or operational to the fire department. 
(c)  Fire lanes. 
(1)  New developments or structures. The fire chief, after finding that a fire lane is reasonably necessary to provide adequate fire protection and emergency service to structure(s) shall establish fire lanes on private or public property, where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress or egress of emergency vehicles for the protection of persons or property, such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches, alleys, apartments, condominiums and similar locations. 
(2)  Existing developments or structures. The fire chief, upon receiving written request from the owner and after finding that a fire lane is reasonably necessary to provide adequate fire protection and emergency service to a structure shall establish fire lanes on private property, where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress or egress of emergency vehicles for the protection of persons or property, such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches, alleys, apartments, condominiums and similar locations. 
(3)  After notification by the fire chief of the necessity to establish one or more fire lanes upon a particular property, the owner or person in possession and control of the property shall submit two (2) sets of site plans of the property to the fire chief for review and approval of the design and location of the fire lanes. The site plans shall be drawn to scale and shall show all related buildings, driveways, streets, and other information necessary to evaluate the sufficiency of the fire lanes. 
(4)  Approval of the fire lanes by the fire chief shall constitute authorization for the installation of official signs prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles within the fire lanes. Such signs and necessary pavement markings and striping shall be furnished by and at the cost of the owner or person in possession and control of the property, who shall thereafter be responsible for the maintenance of the signs, marking and striping in a state of good repair. 
(5)  Fire lanes designated by the fire chief shall be marked with a six-inch-wide diagonal yellow line and located two (2) feet from the curb or edge of roadway. If there is a curb, the entire curb shall be painted yellow. The words, "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall be painted on the roadway every fifty (50) feet using letters no smaller than twelve (12) inches tall and two (2) inches thick. Fire lane signs shall also be installed pursuant to this section. They shall have red lettering not less than two (2) inches or more than three (3) inches in height, on a white background. Each sign shall be twelve (12) inches wide by eighteen (18) inches in height and shall not be inconsistent with the manual on uniform traffic control devices of the state department of transportation and installed no less than every fifty (50) feet. The sign shall read "No Parking-Fire Lane." 
(6)  Obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(d)  Posting of addresses. 
(1)  All occupancies, including single-family residences, shall be numbered and marked in a manner and size as to be easily identified from the public roadway by responding emergency vehicles. 
(2)  The size of letters and numbers will be determined by occupancy, as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwelling, minimum of three-inch numbers affixed to the building front and additionally can also be posted to a separate structure, such as a mailbox, post, wall, fence or other area. 
b.  Other residential and commercial structures, minimum of five-inch numbers. 
c.  Multifamily residential, three (3) units or more, shall have a minimum of five-inch numbers to identify the building and three-inch numbers to identify each unit, affixed to the exterior wall of the building facing the parking lot or roadway access. 
d.  Each unit shall have a minimum of one-and-one-half-inch numbers affixed to the door or the wall space surrounding each door, in breezeways where doors cannot be viewed from the parking lot area. 
(3)  All numbers and letters shall be non-script. 
(4)  All numbers and letters shall be contrasting color to background. 
(5)  All commercial businesses shall have their address attached to the building or monument sign visible to responding emergency units. 
(6)  All commercial businesses shall have their address, including suite number, marked on all rear doors, and shall be no smaller than three (3) inches. 
(e)  Inspections/plan reviews. 
(1)  No site plan or development plan shall be approved by any official or agency of the city unless the fire chief has stated in writing that the plans submitted demonstrated that the proposed construction will be able to satisfy the requirements of this article and any and all codes or ordinances adopted by the city to prevent or control fire loss within buildings of the city. 
(2)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any commercial building, or residential building containing any fire suppression system unless the fire chief has stated in writing that the proposed work will satisfy the requirements of this article and any and all codes or ordinances adopted by the city to prevent or control fire loss within these buildings in the city. No building permit shall be issued for the alteration of any commercial building unless the fire chief has stated in writing that the proposed work will satisfy the requirements of this article and any and all codes and ordinances adopted by the city to prevent or control fire loss within buildings of the city. 
(3)  The fire chief shall examine the submitted plans for evidence of compliance with this article. 
(4)  Shop drawings of fire alarm and sprinkler systems and hood and extinguishing system drawings shall be submitted at the time application for building permit occurs. 
(5)  The fire chief shall have the authority to inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings and premises as often as may be necessary for ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, endanger life from fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this code and of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard but nothing herein shall impose any duty on the municipality to make any inspections nor shall the municipality be liable in any way if inspections shall not be made. Said inspections shall in no way waive compliance with this code. 
(6)  Whenever the fire chief finds in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials as follows, the fire chief shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as may be specified by the fire chief. 
a.  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; 
b.  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; 
c.  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly combustible materials; 
d.  Accumulations in ventilation systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts or in adequate clearances to unprotected combustible material from hoods, grease extractors, and ducts; 
e.  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, fire hydrants designated access openings in exterior walls for fire department use, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire; 
f.  Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from other causes, creates a hazardous condition. 
(f)  Investigations. 
(1)  The fire department shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. 
(2)  Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire by the fire chief. The fire chief shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence, and in the prosecution of the case. 
(g)  Required access for fire apparatus. 
(1)  All premises including existing and under construction premises that the fire department may be called upon to protect in case of fire and that are not readily accessible from public roads shall be provided with suitable gates, access roads and fire lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus. 
(2)  Where automatic gate openers are used, the owner, occupant or agent shall provide a public safety key box system as outlined in this section (key box system). 
(3)  Fire and emergency access, either paved or stabilized ground, shall be provided on all sides of all commercial buildings, if possible. Variances to this rule shall be approved by the fire chief. This access shall: 
a.  Have an unobstructed width of fifteen (15) feet. 
1.  On one-, two-, or three-story buildings, the access roadway shall begin at least ten (10) feet to fifteen (15) feet away from the building. 
2.  On four-story or greater buildings, the access roadway shall begin at least fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet away from building. 
b.  If stabilized ground is used, it shall be a minimum of six (6) inches and compacted to a modified proctor density of ninety-five (95) percent. 
c.  Paved, stabilized ground or turf block used for emergency access shall be identified as to location with approved vegetation or markers. 
d.  Paved, stabilized ground or turf block used for emergency access shall be kept unobstructed at all times and from any future growth and shall be dedicated on the approved final site plan for the life of the building. 
(h)  Posting of fire safety regulations for hotels and motels. All hotels and motels shall have posted, on the back side of the door or next to the door of each rental or living unit, fire safety regulations approved by the fire chief and shall also have posted a customized plan showing evacuation routes. (Reference N.F.P.A. No. 1, § 16-2.4.1) 
(i)  Open burning. All open burning shall be prohibited within the city limits, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  When utilizing a barbecue, gas and charcoal grill or other outdoor cooking appliance (for cooking purposes only). 
(2)  When utilizing an exterior fireplace, with adequate ember control. 
(3)  When open burning is approved by the fire chief by permit for special events or training purposes. 
(4)  Air curtain incinerator burning shall be permitted for land clearing during construction with the approval of the Environmental Protection Commission and the fire chief. 
(5)  Burn permit applications can be obtained during regular weekday business hours at the city fire department administrative office. 
(6)  It shall be at the discretion of the fire chief to determine if and when a fire is deemed unsafe and will require full extinguishment. 
(7)  The fire chief has the authority to issue a no burning ban, which would not allow burning of any type to occur within the city. 
(j)  Special events (indoor or outdoor). 
(1)  A special event is defined as a special public event, public celebration or similar circumstance, whether of a commercial or noncommercial nature or occurring indoors or outdoors in the city. 
(2)  Tents. 
a.  Anyone wishing to erect a tent for display, sales or assembly purposes in the city, for a commercial or religious use, must furnish a certificate of flame-proofing to the fire chief. 
b.  No barbecue grills, including but not limited to gas and charcoal grills, and other cooking equipment utilizing an open flame or combustible materials shall be used under or within five (5) feet of any tent. 
(3)  Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishing equipment of approved types shall be furnished and maintained in tent at locations approved by the fire chief. Minimal fire extinguisher shall be 2-A:10-B:C. 
(4)  Electrical. The electrical system and equipment shall be isolated from the public by proper elevation or guarding and all electrical fuses and switches shall be enclosed in approved enclosures. Cables on the ground in areas traversed by the public shall be placed in trenches or protected by approved covering. 
(5)  Compressed gas cylinders. All compressed gas cylinders must be secured in accordance with NFPA 58 and the approval of the fire chief. Cooking equipment shall be protected from exposure to the general public. 
(6)  When special public events, public celebrations or similar circumstances whether of a commercial or noncommercial nature, are to occur in the city, the fire department shall make a determination as to the necessity for fire and medical services, based upon the potential for danger to persons or property at such event. Cost for services may be passed on to the responsible parties. 
(7)  A fire safety inspection shall occur at all special public events, public celebrations or similar circumstances, whether of a commercial or noncommercial nature to ensure the highest level of public safety. This inspection shall take place prior to the admittance of the general public. 
(k)  Key box system. 
(1)  When a structure is equipped with a fire alarm system, sprinkler system or standpipe system or where rapid entry would be required, the owner, occupant or agent shall provide a public safety key box system. The location of the key box shall be approved by the fire chief. Keys shall be provided within the key box to gain access to fire alarm panels, electrical rooms, sprinkler rooms, and any other areas that may require fire related access. The city is not responsible for any damage that might occur as a result of the fire department gaining entry or access in the structure. Application for the key box may be obtained by visiting www.knoxbox.com and entering "Temple Terrace" in the department search. 
a.  If the owner, occupant or agent desires not to participate in the key box system, a statement shall be provided to the fire chief, indicating the key box system option was declined. The city will not be responsible for any damage that might occur as a result of the fire department gaining entry or access in the structure. 
(2)  When an access gate, rolling overhead doors (except single-family garage doors) or similar devices are used in commercial or residential occupancies, the owner, occupant or agent shall provide a public safety key box system. Utilization of the key box shall allow the opened device to remain open at all times, preventing firefighters from being trapped inside the structure or property. The location of the key box shall be approved by the fire chief. Application for the key box may be obtained from the fire department. 
(3)  Installation height of key box shall be a maximum of six (6) feet or as approved by the fire chief. 
(4)  Type of key box shall be by the approval of the fire chief. 
(l)  Dumpster location. Dumpsters and other combustible storage shall be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from buildings if overhangs are combustible or if dumpsters are within ten (10) feet from door or window openings. 
(m)  Fire extinguisher required in structures. All structures shall have a minimum of one 2-A:10-B:C fire extinguisher or larger based on NFPA requirements, except for detached buildings of less than four hundred twenty (420) square feet, unless required by another section of this code. 
(n)  Notification of fumigation. The fire chief shall be notified, in writing, at least twenty-four (24) hours before any building or structure is to be closed in connection with the use of any toxic fumigant. 
(o)  Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. Ashes, smoldering coals or embers, greasy or oily substances and other matter liable too spontaneous ignition shall not be deposited or allowed to remain within ten (10) feet of any combustible materials or construction made up of combustible materials, except in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles shall be placed on noncombustible stands, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building and shall be kept at least two (2) feet away from any combustible wall or partition. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1359, § 3(Exh. B), 7-15-2014 ; Ord. No. 1455 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-19-2018) 
State Law reference- Failure to control or report dangerous fire, F.S. § 877.15; permits, applications, issuance and inspections, F.S. § 553.79; inspection of buildings and equipment, F.S. § 633.081; investigation of fires, F.S. § 633.03. 
Sec. 8-58. - Hazardous materials. 
(a)  Storage. 
(1)  Storage of flammable liquids in outside above-ground tanks shall be in accordance with guidelines of NFPA 30 regulations, except in residential occupancies less than one hundred ten (110) gallons of fuel oil or kerosene may be stored and used for cooking or heating. 
(2)  Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas (L.P. gas) is prohibited, except less than five hundred (500) gallons of liquefied petroleum gas may be stored. 
(3)  Storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited. 
(b)  Sale. Containers used for dispensing gasoline shall be an approved type container, with the identifying name plainly shown thereon. No flammable liquid will be dispensed into a glass container of any kind at any time. 
(c)  Tanks. Underground storage tanks not used in six (6) months must be removed. 
(d)  Dumping of flammable, combustible or oil waste materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any oil waste from motors, gasoline pumps or filling stations, or any other liquid waste or flammable or combustible material or substance, to run or to be poured or emptied upon or into the ground of any premises or street, or to allow any such waste or flammable or combustible material to accumulate or to be kept in any building receptacle. Such receptacle shall be emptied when full and the contents disposed of in such a manner as to prevent danger of fire, subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(e)  Recovery of costs. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein: 
a.  Discharge means any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance upon public or private property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
b.  Hazardous substances means any substances or materials in a quantity or form which in the determination of the city poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property within the city, or poses a risk of harm to the environment, and including, but not limited to those substances listed in the NFPA Guide on Hazardous Materials or the EPA's list of extremely hazardous substances, or the Florida Substance List promulgated by the state department of labor and employment security. Bio-hazardous waste would also be considered in this category. 
c.  Response actions means any activity which is carried out in response to any discharge or threatened discharge of a hazardous substance, including: 
1.  The cleanup or removal of discharged hazardous substances from the environment; 
2.  Such actions as may be necessary taken in the event of the threat of discharge of hazardous substances into the environment; 
3.  Such actions as may be necessary to investigate, monitor, assess, and evaluate the discharge or threatened discharge of hazardous substances; 
4.  The disposal of removed material; 
5.  The taking of such other actions as may be necessary to prevent minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare or to the environment, which may otherwise result from a discharge or threatened discharge; 
6.  Response actions also include the provision of security fencing or other means to limit access, the provision of alternative water supplies, temporary evacuation of threatened individuals, and restoration of the site to pre-discharge conditions. 
d.  Response costs means any costs incurred in undertaking response actions. 
(2)  The city is hereby authorized to undertake response actions in the event of discharges or threatened discharges of hazardous substances upon or into public or private property or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  Any person responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized discharge or threatened discharge of hazardous substances which requires response actions by the city or its authorized agents in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare or the environment, shall reimburse the city for the full amount of all response costs. Reimbursement shall be made within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized bill for response costs from the city. 
(4)  When responding to the emergency caused by the unauthorized discharge or threatened discharge of hazardous substances, the city shall keep a detailed record of the response costs. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1455 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-19-2018) 
Secs. 8-59-8-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-90. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Minimum Housing Code," hereinafter referred to as the "housing code." 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-91. - Enforcement and penalty. 
    Violations of this article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of the city code. In addition, the city may institute any other remedies and appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate violations of the housing code which shall include, but not be limited to, temporary safeguards and/or condemnation of buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-92. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide a minimum standard to which all dwellings and related premises located within the city limits must be maintained to ensure safe and sanitary housing conditions. 
(b)  The housing code is provided for and shall be construed to secure the public safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  The provisions of the housing code shall apply to every building or structure and related premises used in whole or in part as a dwelling unit or as two (2) or more dwelling units, irrespective of the primary use of such building or structure and irrespective of when such building or structure was constructed, altered, or repaired. 
(d)  The owner and operator of such structure shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of the housing code. 
(e)  The housing code establishes minimum standards for occupancy of said buildings and structures and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, replacement or repair of buildings and structures except as are contrary to the provisions of the housing code. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-93. - Prevalence of state laws and local ordinances. 
(a)  The minimum standards established by the housing code do not replace or modify standards established by any other applicable laws or ordinances for the construction, replacement, or repair of structures. 
(b)  In any case where the provisions of the housing code impose a higher standard than those set forth in any other city ordinance or under the state statutes, then the standard set forth herein shall prevail. Should the provisions of the housing code impose a lower standard than those set forth in any other city ordinance or pursuant to the state statutes, then the higher standard set forth shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-94. - Code enforcement board. 
(a)  Violations of housing code. Violations of any provision of the housing code shall be governed by, but not limited to, the requirements and remedies of the code enforcement board pursuant to the provisions of section 1-61 and F.S. ch. 162. 
(b)  Other remedies. The proper authorities may institute any other remedies and appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate violations of the housing code which shall include, but not be limited to, temporary safeguards and/or condemnation of buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-95. - Housing official. 
(a)  The housing official is hereby designated as the investigating and enforcing authority pursuant to the provisions of the housing code. The housing official is hereby authorized and directed to receive all complaints of a violation of the housing code, to gather all relevant information concerning said complaints, to conduct field investigations and inspections of structures and premises and to enter upon structures and premises in the conduct of its official business pursuant to the housing code. The housing official shall also be responsible for providing all notices to affected property owners required by the housing code and to take such other action as is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of the housing code. 
(b)  The housing official shall be the chief of the fire department and shall be responsible for the daily exercise of jurisdiction and control over the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the housing code. The housing official shall designate an acting deputy who shall, at the direction of, in the absence of, or disability of the housing official, exercise all powers of the housing official. The housing official may appoint other duly authorized representatives to carry out the provisions of the housing code. 
(c)  The housing official shall establish administrative rules of procedure for the administration and enforcement of the housing code. 
(d)  Any action to be taken by the housing official pursuant to the housing code or as otherwise provided in chapter 8, in regard to the enforcement of any section hereof, shall be considered cumulative and in addition to penalties and to other remedies provided elsewhere by ordinance or general law. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-97. - Inspections. 
(a)  All structures and premises subject to the housing code shall be subject to inspection by the housing official or the duly authorized representative when, in the judgment of the housing official, it is determined that a violation of the housing code may exist. The housing official shall present to the building representative, as such term is defined in section 8-56, official identification at the time of inspection, and shall explain to the owner, occupant or operator the purposes of their inspection before entering any structureor premises subject to the housing code. Where practical, the housing official shall notify the owner or operator or occupants of the structure or premises to be inspected, prior to said inspection. Inspection shall take place during regular business hours of the city or at a time mutually agreed upon by the housing official, representatives, and the owner, operator or occupants, unless the housing official has probable cause to believe a violation of the housing code exists of such nature as to constitute an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of persons in and/or about the structure or premises which would require inspection without delay. 
(b)  Before entering into any structureor premises subject to the housing code, the housing official shall attempt to secure the consent of the owner, operator or occupant of said structure or premises. Should the housing official have probable cause to believe a violation of the housing code exists of such a nature as to cause an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons in or about the structure or premises and the right of entry is refused by the owner, operator, occupant or any person, the housing official may forthwith obtain a warrant authorizing the entry, pursuant to F.S. §§ 933.20-933.30. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Secs. 8-98-8-101. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-102. - Minimum standards. 
    No person shall occupy, let, or sublet to another, for occupancy any building, dwelling unit, structure, accessory structure, designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping or cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth, nor shall any vacant dwelling, building, structure, or premises be permitted to exist which does not comply with the applicable following requirements: 
(1)  Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain not less than one kitchen sink with counter work space, one lavatory, one tub or shower, and one water closet, all in good working condition and properly, actively connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste-pipe connection shall be properly installed in accordance with the applicable plumbing code and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. Every plumbing fixture shall be located within the dwelling unit, and be accessible to the occupants of same. The primary water closet, tub or shower, and lavatory shall be located in a room affording appropriate privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum floor space of thirty (30) square feet. 
(2)  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling, or dwelling unit, shall have an adequate supply of both hot and cold water connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system actively connected to a potable water supply for the subject dwelling. 
(3)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a minimum temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit and a maximum temperature of not more than one hundred thirty (130) degrees Fahrenheit. All water heaters shall be fitted with a pressure relief valve with a drain line to the exterior of the unit, and installed in accordance with the applicable plumbing code. 
(4)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be equipped with permanent heating equipment which shall be capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms to a temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at a distance of three (3) feet above the floor under ordinary minimum winter conditions. Any electrical heating equipment shall be permanently installed and connected to electrical circuits as prescribed in the applicable electrical code unless such equipment is approved for portable use by a nationally recognized testing agency. All unvented fuel-fired heaters shall be equipped with an oxygen depletion sensitive safety shutoff system. The system shall shut off the gas supply to the main and pilot burners when the oxygen in the surrounding atmosphere is depleted to the percent concentration specified by the manufacturer. Heaters that have been affixed a label, seal, or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory or inspection agency designating such heater for unvented operation shall not be required to be vented. An appliance which has been converted from a vented to an unvented heater shall not be used under any conditions. 
(5)  Cooking equipment. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain a stove or range and refrigerator of appropriate size. All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be installed in accordance with the applicable building, gas, mechanical and/or electrical codes, and shall be operable and maintained in safe, working condition. 
(6)  Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit, building or structure shall have adequate garbage or trash disposal facilities or garbage or trash storage containers which shall be in accordance with the provisions and standards as provided in chapter 10, article II, Sanitation. 
(7)  Smoke detector systems. See section 12-863(c)(8). 
(8)  Light and ventilation. Every habitable room of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten (10) percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or portions of other structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstructing structures are located less than five (5) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of each room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of such room. Each window or skylight required for minimum light shall be easily opened, and the total of the openable window area in each habitable room shall equal to a least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum window or skylight area size, as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. Year-round mechanically ventilating air systems installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable mechanical and electrical codes may be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window-type air conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
(9)  Bathroom. Every bathroom shall comply with the minimum light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as stated in subsection (8) of this section, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an accepted mechanically ventilating air system. 
(10)  Electric lights and outlets. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights and convenience outlets, and shall maintain active service when occupied. Every room shall contain wall-type electrical convenience outlets as specified in the basic electrical facilities table as shall be hereinafter stated. Every convenience outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable electrical code and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. Compliance with the requirements of the following table shall be sufficient: 
BASIC ELECTRICAL FACILITIES TABLE 
Area Wall-type electric 
convenience outlets Ceiling or wall type fixture Switch Bedroom 2 1 Yes Kitchen * 2 1 Yes Bathroom 1 1 Yes Corridor/hallway 1 1 Yes Porches Not required 1 Yes Living room 2 1 Yes Dining room 2 1 Yes Family room 2 1 Yes Laundry room 1 1 Yes Utility/storage 1 1 Yes Other habitable room 2 1 Yes  
* Receptacles rendered inaccessible by appliances fastened in place or by appliances occupying dedicated space shall not be considered as these required outlets. 
(11)  Light in public halls and stairways. Every public hall and stairway in a structure containing five (5) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Structures with less than five (5) dwelling units shall be supplied with a conveniently located light switch that controls an adequate light system which can be turned on when needed if continuous lighting is not provided. 
(12)  Electrical systems. All fixtures, convenience receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be installed, maintained, and connected to the source of electrical power in accordance with the applicable electrical code. In addition, the following conditions shall be met: 
a.  Switches and electrical receptacles in bathrooms shall be at least three (3) feet from tub or shower. 
b.  Any exposed electrical cable within eight (8) feet of the ground must be encased or protected. 
c.  When it is determined, upon examining the existing electrical supply, that such supply is obsolete or being used in a manner which constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building, structure, dwelling, dwelling unit, accessory structure, the following shall be used for determining adequacy of said service supply and main disconnect switch: 
Total # of Lighting Supply & Convenience Outlets Capacity of Main Service and Main Disconnect Switch 0-24 100-amp service 25-50 150-amp service  
d.  The minimum capacity of the electrical service supply and main disconnect switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load required for the building, structure, accessory structure, dwelling, or dwelling unit in accordance with the applicable electrical code, but in no case less than one-hundred-amp service. 
e.  Electrical receptacles shall have ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection when located in: 
1.  Bathrooms; 
2.  Kitchens (where receptacles are installed to serve the countertop surfaces); 
3.  Wet bar sinks (where receptacles are installed to serve the countertop surfaces and are located within six (6) feet of the outside edge of the wet bar sink). 
f.  Electrical receptacles shall have ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection when located within twenty (20) feet (six (6) meters) of the inside of a pool or fountain, indoor or outdoor installations. 
g.  All electrical receptacles installed on the exterior of a structure or dwelling shall have ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection. 
(13)  Exterior and interior of structures. 
a.  Foundation. The building foundation walls, or other structural elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and be capable of supporting the load which normal use may place thereon. 
b.  Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially weathertight and weatherproof, and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair so as to prevent infestation and deterioration, and otherwise free of holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, staining, fading, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect, or lack of maintenance. 
c.  Roofs. Roofs and related elements (eaves, soffit, ridge vents, fascia, chimney, skylights, etc.) shall be kept clean and free of trash, debris, vegetation or any other element which is not a permanent part of the building or a functional component and shall be maintained according to the manufacturer's specifications in a clean, safe manner, sound condition and good repair, and shall have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. Gutters shall also be maintained to allow unhindered passage of rainwater. 
d.  Means of ingress/egress. Every dwelling or dwelling unit, building or structure shall have safe, unobstructed means of ingress/egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. 
e.  Attic access. Access to attic shall be provided by means of a conveniently located access panel within the dwelling unit. The minimum access opening shall be not less than twenty-two (22) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. 
f.  Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stairway, stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto, shall be maintained in safe condition and capable of supporting a load that normal use may place thereon. 
g.  Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed dwelling, dwelling unit, building or structure over five (5) feet from the ground level or on any steps containing four (4) or more risers. Protective railings for interior stairs and stairwells more than four (4) risers high shall have handrails located in the manner prescribed by the building code. Such handrails (or protective railings) shall be maintained in good condition and be capable of bearing normally imposed loads. 
h.  Windows and exterior doors. Every window, exterior door, garage and basement door shall be properly fitted within its frame, provided with the proper hardware, and shall be weathertight and waterproof, fully intact and maintained in good repair, and shall be properly fitted with locking devices adequate to reasonably prevent unauthorized entry. Every window required for light and ventilation for habitable room shall be capable of being opened easily. Windowpanes or approved substitute shall be maintained without cracks or holes. Shutters, awnings and other window accessories shall be clean, fully intact and maintained in good repair. 
i.  Window sash. Window sashes shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame. 
j.  Hardware. Every door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. 
k.  Screens. Every door or window opening directly from the dwelling unit or dwelling to outdoor space shall have screens if they are necessary to meet the minimum requirements for ventilation or the prevention of infestation. Dwellings or dwelling units which contain central heating furnaces and central air-conditioning systems for mechanically ventilating the building year-round are not required to have screens on doors or windows. When present on windows and structures, all screens must be untorn and maintained in good repair. 
l.  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a manner so as to avoid deterioration. All exterior surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements by paint or other protective covering applied and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications. No lead-based paint shall be used on any surface of any structure. 
m.  Accessory structure. All accessory structures shall be maintained in a manner so as to avoid deterioration, and shall be kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
n.  Interior doors. Every interior door shall be properly fitted within its frame and be provided with the proper hardware. 
o.  Interior floor, wall and ceiling. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall have a permanent floor of approved material prescribed by the building code. All interior walls and ceilings shall be of an approved material prescribed by the building code. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be kept free from infestation and in good repair and shall be capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. No finished flooring material which requires "face nailing" shall be used. Floors in kitchens and bathrooms shall be covered with asphalt tile, vinyl-plastics, rubber tile, ceramic tile, terrazzo, linoleum or other durable, waterproof, nonabsorbent material. Every interior wall, floor, door, door frame, window, window frame, ceiling, and all painted trim shall be free of any peeling, flaking, chipped, or chalking paint. 
p.  Structural supports. Every structural element of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be maintained in good repair and shall show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(14)  Fences/walls. 
a.  All fences and walls, including but not limited to chain link, wood, brick, and masonry construction, shall be kept in good repair, sound structural condition, and shall provide a neat appearance in keeping with the character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Fences and walls which are stained or painted shall be maintained with the same and like materials. 
c.  Perimeter buffers such as fences and/or walls surrounding apartment complexes, condominiums, and subdivisions, shall remain uniform in design and color. 
d.  Structural supports for fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. 
e.  At all times, fences and walls shall be kept free from graffiti, undergrowth, weeds and other unsightly matter. 
f.  In the case of exterior subdivision fences and walls, the homeowner's association or condominium association shall be jointly and severally responsible with the home/unit owner for the maintenance of said fence and/or wall. 
g.  These standards shall not conflict with those of fences and walls which serve as swimming pool barriers. 
(15)  Required space, dwellings. Every dwelling unit or dwelling shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. In every room occupied for sleeping purposes in any dwelling or dwelling unit, there shall be at least seventy (70) square feet for the first two (2) occupants and at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area per additional occupant. 
(16)  Minimum ceiling height. At least half of the floor area of every habitable room, corridor or foyer shall have a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet. 
(17)  Occupancy of basements. No basement shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
a.  Walls and floors are impervious to leakage of underground and surface water and are insulated against dampness; and 
b.  Total window area in each room shall be equal to at least the minimum window area size as required in this section. Said window area shall be located entirely above ground except where there is another device which affords adequate ventilation. 
(18)  Sanitation. 
a.  All public or shared areas, habitable rooms or any dwelling or dwelling unit, structure, accessory structure, or building shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition by the occupant or owner, free of trash, litter, debris, wasp nests, unmanicured vines, and other foreign substances at all times. 
b.  All garbage or rubbish shall be disposed of and kept in the manner prescribed in the garbage regulations. 
c.  Nothing shall be placed, constructed, or maintained on any premises that shall in any way constitute a nuisance or fire hazard. 
d.  All buildings, structures, accessory structures, dwellings, or dwelling units shall be free from infestation. 
e.  The plumbing fixtures of every dwelling or dwelling unit, building or structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition as prescribed by the applicable plumbing code. 
(19)  Fire safety. 
a.  Smoke detectors. Operational smoke detectors shall be required outside the sleeping areas of all dwellings or dwelling units, and shall be installed in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association's National Fire Alarm Code as amended. 
b.  Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be required in all dwellings that include two (2) or more units and all dwelling units which are required to obtain a rental permit as outlined in subsection 8-134(a). The required fire extinguishers shall, as a minimum, be rated 2A-10BC. 
c.  Burglar bars. It shall be required that burglar bars that cover any primary or secondary means of egress of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be equipped with quick-release mechanisms or that the burglar bars be able to be opened without the use of a key or other tool. 
d.  Egress requirements. 
1.  In any dwelling of more than two (2) rooms, every bedroom and living room shall have at least two (2) means of egress. 
2.  The dwelling shall have at least one door or stairway providing a means of unobstructed travel to the outside of the building at street or ground level. 
3.  No bedroom or living room area shall be accessible by only a ladder or folding stairs or through a trap door. 
4.  No required path of travel to the outside from any room shall be through another room or apartment not under the immediate control of the occupant of the first room or the occupant's family, nor through a bathroom or other space subject to locking. 
5.  No door in the path of travel of a means of escape shall be less than twenty-eight (28) inches wide. 
6.  Every closet door shall be such that children can open the door from within the closet. 
7.  Every bathroom door lock shall be designed to permit the opening of the locked door from the outside in an emergency. 
8.  No stove or heater shall be located as to block escape in case of fire arising from malfunctioning of the stove or heater. 
9.  The use of double cylinder dead bolts which require a key on both sides shall not be permitted on exterior doors required for egress, when such door is the only means of egress to the exterior of the dwelling within that same room. 
(20)  Mobile home tie-downs. It shall be required that all mobile homes/manufactured homes be equipped with tie-downs, piers, bases, anchors, and specified associated equipment and devices, installed in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of the Florida Department of Highway and Motor Vehicles, Division of Motor Vehicles, Chapters 15C-1 and 15C-2, as amended and adopted as a part of the city construction code, as amended. 
(21)  Mold. The interiors of all buildings and facilities must be kept free of any visible or otherwise demonstrable growth of mold or mildew. 
(22)  Maintenance of structures. All buildings, structures, patios, porches, carports, screened cages and parts thereof shall be maintained in sound condition, good working order, in a safe, uncluttered and sanitary manner and kept free of markings or graffiti. Any repairs or alterations which may be caused, directly or indirectly, by the enforcement of this article shall be executed in a workmanlike manner to standards acceptable in the construction industry. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1359, § 4(Exh. C), 7-15-2012 ) 
Secs. 8-103-8-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM 

Sec. 8-133. - Applicability. 
(a)  Sections 8-133-8-137 comprise the city's rental housing program, and shall apply to all attached and detached single-family dwelling units, including townhouses and condominiums, two-family dwelling units, three-family dwelling units, and mobile homes, which are located within the city and not occupied by the property owner of the dwelling as a homesteaded primary residence. However, if a dwelling unit falls into one or more of the following categories of exceptions, the property owners are not required to satisfy the requirements of the rental housing program, but only if the property owners do not advertise or market that a dwelling unit is available for lease, sublease or rent and do not request or receive rent (any transaction of value in which one or more persons provides consideration to a property owners for the use of a dwelling unit, whether or not money is exchanged) in exchange for the use of the dwelling unit: 
(1)  Seasonal residence when used only by the property owners and/or related family members for a portion of the year, and remaining unoccupied the rest of the year. 
(2)  Residence when vacant for more than ninety (90) days. 
(3)  Residence when ownership is held in trust and occupied by a beneficiary of the trust and/or related family member. 
(4)  Residence when occupied solely by the property owner's related family members. 
(5)  Dwelling unit is the primary residence of the property owner; however, it does not have homestead exemption. 
(6)  Dwelling unit, with or without homestead exemption, when occupied by property owner and rent-paying tenants and when in no case does the combined occupancy include more than three (3) unrelated persons, one of whom is the property owner. 
(b)  The rental housing program shall not apply to multifamily dwelling units, including all apartment, dormitory and hotel/motel dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-134. - Rental permits. 
(a)  Application for permit. Every property owner of a dwelling unit described in section 8-133 that does not fall within one of the exceptions is required to obtain an annual rental permit from the fire marketing that a dwelling unit is available to lease, sublease, or rent. In the case of multiple property owners, it shall be sufficient for any one of the owners to have obtained a permit on the unit. The application shall be in writing and on a form provided by the fire department. By applying for a permit, the property owner consents to periodic inspections of the dwelling unit for violations of the minimum housing code and other related codes at any reasonable time; however, this provision shall not be interpreted as authorizing the city to conduct an inspection of an occupied dwelling unit without obtaining either the consent of an occupant or a warrant. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. This rental permit shall be valid for the calendar year of issue and shall be issued and not revoked if: 
(1)  The required rental permit fee is paid (section 8-137). 
(2)  The applicant provides a sworn statement that the applicant's property is not in violation of all applicable codes, and all permit inspections confirm compliance. 
(3)  The applicant has provided to the tenant the required guidelines for rentals in residential neighborhoods. 
(4)  The applicant provides property owner's local representative contact information for property covered by this housing code. 
(c)  Nontransferable. A rental permit is issued to the subject property owner/applicant for the subject dwelling unit, and the certificate of inspection is issued for the subject dwelling unit location that has an approved inspection. A rental permit shall not be transferred to any other owner. A certificate of inspection shall not be transferred to any other dwelling unit. 
(d)  Failure to apply for permit. It shall be unlawful for any property owner/agent of an applicable dwelling unit to allow any tenant to occupy that dwelling unit if the required rental permit application and fee has not been provided to the city. If the housing official or other designated representative has reasonable cause to believe that a dwelling unit described in section 8-133 is being leased, subleased, or rented without a permit, in violation of this article, the property owner shall be given notice that a permit is required and that an application must be filed with the fire department within thirty (30) days of the notice. If the housing official or other designated representative has reasonable cause to believe that a dwelling unit described in section 8-133 was previously leased, subleased, rented at any time during the current calendar year without a permit, in violation of this article, the property owner shall be given notice that the rental permit fee must be paid to the fire department within thirty (30) days of the notice. Failure to apply, or pay the rental permit fee within the time frames specified in section 8-137, shall subject the property owner to enforcement proceedings and penalties in accordance with section 1-61 et seq., municipal code enforcement board; section 1-39, general penalty; and F.S. ch. 162. 
(e)  Applicant/permit holder requirements and certifications. The applicant for a rental permit will be required to make the following certifications, and failure to comply with the provisions of these requirements and certifications as stated below shall be grounds for revocation of the permit for that unit: 
(1)  At no time shall more than three (3) unrelated persons reside within any one dwelling unit located within the city. The permit holder and appointed agent, if any, shall maintain a written list of the names of tenants in each dwelling unit. Such lists and a copy of the current lease agreement shall be available to the fire department within fifteen (15) days of the city's request for such information. 
(2)  In the event the city, either through its housing official or other designated representative, provides notice to the property owner or permit holder of repeated violations of city ordinances at the dwelling unit that is the subject of a permit, the property owner, or permit holder shall promptly pursue all lawful remedies available to it under state law, including but not limited to the Florida Landlord and Tenant Act codified in F.S. ch. 83, including, but not limited to, termination of the rental agreement 
(3)  No permit shall be issued or renewed until the applicant, property owner or permit holder has provided the name, permanent address, and phone number of a natural person eighteen (18) years of age or older who can be contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, regarding the dwelling unit. This contact person may be the property owner, the owner's agent, or any other person other than a resident of the dwelling unit who has agreed to be the owner's local representative contact person. Such contact shall maintain a local telephone number and a current local physical street address, not a public or private post office box, within one of the following counties in Florida: Hernando, Hillsborough, Manatee, Pasco, Pinellas or Polk. For convenience, post office box addresses may be used for contact person's mailing address if local street address is also provided for such contact person. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-135. - Permit inspections. 
(a)  All dwelling units described in section 8-133 that are required to obtain an annual rental permit from the fire department will receive periodic inspections to ensure the dwelling unit complies with the requirements of all applicable codes, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this article. 
(b)  After a dwelling unit has been inspected, a certificate of inspection shall be issued by the housing official or designee, if that dwelling unit complies with all applicable city codes. If the dwelling unit and/or property do not comply with the applicable provisions of city codes, the dwelling unit and/or property must be brought into compliance before a certificate of inspection will be issued. The permit fee, as shown in section 8-137(a), includes the initial inspection and one re-inspection, if necessary. All subsequent inspections shall be at the rate established by the city for each additional reinspection required. The city may retain the services of a collection agency to pursue payment of any unpaid fees assessed for additional reinspections. Failure to comply with the applicable provisions of all city codes in the time frame provided shall be considered just cause for denial and/or revocation of the rental permit; and further, shall subject the property owner to enforcement proceedings and penalties in accordance with section 1-61 et seq., municipal code enforcement board; section 1-39, general penalty; and F.S. ch. 162. 
(c)  The rental housing program inspection is meant to supplement and enhance, and not supersede, limit or replace the, minimum housing code, section 8-97, inspections, in any way. Inspections of properties subject to section 8-133, applicability of rental housing program, shall be conducted in accordance with section 8-97 to ensure that such properties are in compliance with the provisions of section 8-102, minimum standards, and other related codes. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-136. - Renewal of rental permit. 
(a)  Application for renewal permit. Rental permits shall be renewed annually on a calendar year basis. Renewal applications will be made available to the permit holder for the dwelling unit and should be returned prior to the due date. 
(b)  Issuance of renewal permit. Rental renewal permits shall be issued and not revoked if: 
(1)  The required rental renewal permit fee is paid (section 8-137). 
(2)  The applicant provides a sworn statement that the applicant's property is not in violation of all applicable codes and all permit inspections confirm compliance. 
(3)  The applicant has provided to the current tenant the required guidelines for rentals in residential neighborhoods. 
(4)  The applicant provides property owner's local representative updated contact information for property covered by this Code. 
(c)  Failure to apply for renewal permit. It shall be unlawful for any property owner/agent of an applicable dwelling unit to allow any tenant to occupy that dwelling unit if the required permit has expired and not been renewed by the fire department. Failure to renew by the applicable due date or provide evidence that a permit is not required within the time frames specified in section 8-137 shall subject the property owner to enforcement proceedings and penalties in accordance with chapter 1, article II of the city code and F.S. ch. 162. 
(d)  Applicant/permit holder requirements and certifications for renewal. The applicant for a rental renewal permit will be required to provide a sworn statement to reconfirm the obligations of section 8-134(e) regarding the maximum number of unrelated tenants, requirements to terminate lease upon repeated violations of city ordinances, and required current contact information for owner/agent. Failure to comply with the provisions of these certifications as earlier stated shall be grounds for denial of the rental renewal permit. If the subject dwelling unit is occupied, a copy of the denial notice shall be mailed to last known tenants. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-137. - Fees. 
(a)  New permit issue. Permit fees for new rental housing program applications are based upon occupancy date and shall be as established by the city. 
(b)  Proration. For each new permit obtained between January 1 and June 30, the full permit fee for one year shall be paid; for each permit obtained between July 1 and December 31, one-half of the full permit fee shall be paid. 
(c)  Renewal. Permit fees for rental housing program renewal applications shall be as established by the city. 
(d)  Rebate. No portion of any rental permit fee assessed in this section shall be rebated, unless the permit holder clearly established that no permit fee was due to the city under the rental housing program and that payment of the fee was erroneous. Before returning any erroneously paid fees to a permit holder, all permit fees that are properly due and owing to the city must be paid in full. 
(e)  Late payment/failure to pay. If payment of permit fees is not received the city within sixty (60) days of occupancy for properties for which a new rental permit program application is due, or within ninety (90) days of invoice date for renewal applications, the property owner and agent of an applicable dwelling unit shall be subject to enforcement proceedings and penalties in accordance with chapter 1, article II of the city code and F.S. ch. 162. The city may retain the services of a collection agency to pursue payment of any unpaid fees assessed for late payments. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1359, § 5(Exh. D), 7-15-2014 ) 
Secs. 8-138-8-157. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-158. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Commercial Property Maintenance Code," herein referred to as the "commercial property maintenance code." 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-159. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-160. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. In addition, the city may institute any other remedies and appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate violations of this article which shall include, but not be limited to, temporary safeguards and/or condemnation. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-161. - Purpose and scope. 
    It shall be the purpose and general intent of this section to ensure regular maintenance, upkeep, and ongoing improvement to existing buildings, structures, and exterior property located on commercial, office, institutional, research corporate park lands, or residential lands used for commercial purposes; to safeguard against blight and preserve property values and community standards; to establish minimum maintenance standards to safeguard life, limb, health, safety, property, and public welfare; to assist in the continued revitalization of areas throughout the city; and to attract new businesses and promote the public interest in continued development. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-162. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The code compliance department shall be the investigating and enforcing authority pursuant to the provisions of the commercial property maintenance code, and shall designate other regulatory division staff as necessary to serve as duly authorized representatives to enforce the commercial property maintenance code. 
(b)  The code compliance department shall establish administrative rules of procedure for administering and enforcing the commercial property maintenance code. Any action taken pursuant to the commercial property maintenance code shall be considered cumulative and in addition to penalties and to other remedies provided elsewhere by ordinance or law. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-163. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All buildings, structures, premises, and property subject to the commercial property maintenance code shall be subject to inspection when it is determined that a violation of the commercial property maintenance code may exist. Inspection shall take place during regular business hours of the city or at a time mutually agreed upon by the inspector and the owner, operator or occupants unless there is probable cause to believe a violation of the commercial property maintenance code exists that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of persons in and/or about the buildings, structures, premises, and property which would require inspection without delay. 
(2)  Should there be probable cause to believe a violation of the commercial property maintenance code exists as an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of persons in or about the buildings, structures, premises, and property and the right of entry is refused by the owner, operator, occupant or any person, the inspector or the duly authorized representative may forthwith obtain a warrant authorizing the entry, pursuant to F.S. §§ 933.20-933.30. 
(b)  Rental units. All commercial buildings, structures, premises, and property shall be subject to periodic inspections for compliance with the commercial property maintenance code when it is determined that a violation may exist. If a violation or hazard is found and a reinspection is required to establish or confirm compliance, a reasonable fee, as determined and established by city council, may be charged for the reinspection. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-164. - Code enforcement board. 
(a)  Violations of any provision of the commercial property maintenance code shall be governed by, but not limited to, the requirements and remedies of the code enforcement board pursuant to the provisions of section 1-61, and F.S. ch. 162. 
(b)  Other remedies. The city may institute any other remedies and appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate violations of the commercial property maintenance code including, but not limited to the use of citations or condemnation of buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-165. - Prevalence of state laws and local ordinances. 
(a)  The minimum standards established by the commercial property maintenance code do not replace or modify standards established by any other applicable laws or ordinances for the construction, replacement, or repair of structures. 
(b)  In any case where the provisions of the commercial property maintenance code impose a higher standard than those set forth in any other city ordinance or under the state statutes, then the standard set forth herein shall prevail. Should the provisions of the commercial property maintenance code impose a lower standard than those set forth in any other city ordinance or pursuant to the state statutes, the higher standard set forth shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 8-166. - Minimum standards. 
    The owner of the premises shall maintain buildings, structures, and property used for commercial purposes free of nuisance conditions and in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this article. Owners, operators, occupants, and tenants are jointly responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the buildings, structures, premises, and property which they occupy and control, consistent with the applicable following requirements: 
(1)  Exterior of structures. 
a.  Foundation. The building foundation walls, or other structural elements, shall be maintained safely and be capable of supporting the load which normal use may place thereon. 
b.  Exterior walls and surfaces. All exterior surfaces including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, breezeways and trim shall be secure and maintained in good condition and shall be clean, neat, and attractive. All defective structural and decorative elements shall be repaired or replaced, to match as closely as possible the original materials and construction. Exterior surfaces, other than decay-resistant materials, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. Exterior surfaces shall be kept free of markings, carvings or graffiti. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weathertight and watertight and in sound condition and good repair to prevent infestation. 
c.  Roofs. Roofs shall be kept clean and free of trash, debris, or any other element which is not a permanent part of the building or a functional element of its mechanical or electrical system and shall be maintained according to the manufacturer's specifications in a safe manner, sound condition, and good repair and shall have not defects or excessive worn surfaces which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or exterior portion of the building. Gutters shall be maintained to allow unobstructed flow. 
d.  Structural supports. Structural elements of a building shall be maintained in good repair with no deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads. 
e.  Means of ingress/egress. Every building or structure shall have safe, unobstructed ingress/egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet leading to a safe, open space at ground level. 
f.  Stairs and elevators. Every inside and outside stairway and elevator, and any appurtenance thereto, shall be maintained safely and capable of supporting a normal load. 
g.  Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed building or structure over thirty (30) inches from the ground level or on any steps containing four (4) or more risers. Protective railings for interior stairs and stairwells more than four (4) risers high shall have handrails located in the manner prescribed by the building code. Such handrails (or protective railings) shall be maintained in good condition and be capable of bearing normally imposed loads. 
h.  Windows and exterior doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement door shall be properly fitted within its frame, provided with the proper hardware and shall be weathertight and waterproof, maintained in good repair, and properly fitted with locking devices adequate to reasonably prevent unauthorized entry. All storefront windows shall be kept unbroken, in a clean and harmonious condition, free of dirt, filth, cobwebs, marks, or foreign substances. Window panes or an approved substitute shall not be painted and shall be maintained without cracks or holes. Window openings shall not be filled or boarded up. 
i.  Hardware. Every door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. 
j.  Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be maintained to avoid deterioration and shall be kept in good repair and sound structural condition. All exterior surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements by paint or other protective covering applied and maintained according to the manufacturer's specifications. 
k.  Miscellaneous elements. Mechanical equipment, air conditioning units, antennas, ducts, pipes, etc., shall be inconspicuously located. All nonfunctional elements on the building exterior; i.e., such as empty electrical conduit, unused sign brackets, etc., shall be removed and the building surface repaired or rebuilt to match adjacent surfaces. 
(2)  Exterior storage and display. 
a.  Storage. All equipment, materials, and merchandize shall be stored and located at all times within an enclosed structure and no exterior storage of merchandise for sale shall be permitted unless authorized by special approval or permit. 
b.  Trash receptacles. Garbage and trash shall be deposited only in dumpsters, cans, or other receptacles specifically manufactured and intended for such purpose and secured at all times with a tightfitting cover or lid. 
(3)  Interior of structures. 
a.  Interior doors. Every interior door shall be properly fitted within its frame and be provided with the proper hardware. 
b.  Interior premises. Every building or structure shall have a permanent floor of material prescribed by the building code. Every floor and interior wall shall be kept clean and sanitary, free from infestation, and in good repair. The interior premises shall be maintained and safe for employees, visitors, and customers. 
c.  Structural supports. All structural elements of a building or structure shall be maintained and shall show no deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads. 
d.  Kitchens and restrooms. All kitchens and restrooms shall meet health code requirements and shall be ventilated and illuminated. All restrooms shall be provided with toilet paper, soap, and means of drying. 
e.  Aisles and shelves. All aisles shall be safe and passable. Aisles and shelves shall be free of accumulations of rubbish, loose cords and extension lines, waste paper, boxes, or other materials detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(4)  Parking lots and walkways. 
a.  Maintenance. Parking and walkway areas shall be kept safe, in good repair, sound structural condition, and shall provide a neat, clean appearance. 
b.  Surfaces. All off-street parking areas shall provide a durable, stabilized, dustless surface; free of potholes; and shall effectively dispose of surface water. 
c.  Wheel stops. All parking areas shall be equipped with wheel stops, guards, or similar devices properly anchored or secured to prevent vehicles from overhanging into public rights-of-way, sidewalks, or planting areas. 
d.  Use. All parking areas shall be used for vehicular parking only and not for sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling, or servicing of any kind unless otherwise specifically provided for. Delivery and service vehicles shall not excessively interfere with or obstruct the use of primary service drives or fire lanes, or block minimum required sight or visibility triangle and/or public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Buffers. 
a.  All buffers, fences, and walls including, but not limited to, chain link, wood, brick, and masonry construction shall be kept in good repair, sound structural condition, and shall provide a neat, clean appearance. 
b.  Fences and walls which are stained or painted shall be maintained with the same and like materials, uniform in design and color. 
c.  Structural supports for fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. 
d.  At all times, fences and walls shall be kept free from graffiti, undergrowth, weeds, and other unsightly matter. 
e.  These standards shall not conflict with those of fences and walls which serve as swimming pool barriers. 
(6)  Signs. 
a.  Maintenance. See section 12-986, pertaining to maintenance requirements and standards, regarding signs. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Maintenance. See section 12-1047, pertaining to maintenance, regarding landscaping. 
b.  Vacant parcels. A vacant parcel shall be kept free of trash and debris, with grass or other city-approved ground cover. 
(8)  Sanitation. 
a.  All public or shared areas, parking lots, landscaped areas, breezeways, walkways, overhangs, buildings, structures, premises, and property shall be kept clean, neat and sanitary by the occupant or owner, free of trash, litter, debris, gum, tobacco butts, cobwebs, wasp nests, and other foreign substances at all times. 
b.  All garbage or rubbish shall be disposed of and kept in the manner prescribed in the garbage regulations. Dumpsters and dumpster enclosures shall be maintained, clean, and neat. 
c.  Nothing shall be placed, constructed, or maintained on any premises that shall constitute a nuisance condition or fire hazard. 
d.  All buildings, structures, or accessory structures shall be free from infestation. 
e.  The plumbing fixtures of every building or structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition as prescribed by the plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1423 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-167. - Condemnation. 
(a)  Authority. The building official shall have authority to condemn and placard any structure applying the standards set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, when it is determined that a structure is unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupation or dangerous to other persons or property, and, except as set forth herein, to issue orders requiring the property owner to abate, demolish, secure, and/or repair the condemned structure within a fixed period of time, and to take such other and further actions as provided for herein. 
(b)  Inspection of structure. To the extent permitted by law, the building official shall inspect those structures which in his sole but reasonable determination may be unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupation or dangerous to other persons or property and which are within the jurisdiction of the city. Whenever reasonably practicable, such inspections shall be conducted by the building official and the housing official jointly, and may include such other city employees as deemed appropriate. 
(c)  Standard for determining whether a structure is unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupation or dangerous to other persons or property. The following structures may be found unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupation or dangerous to other persons or property: 
(1)  Structures that are structurally unsafe or unstable, including, but not limited to structures found to have the following: 
a.  Interior walls or other vertical structural members which list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base. 
b.  Supporting members show a thirty-three (33) percent or more of damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting walls or coverings which show a fifty (50) percent or more damage or deterioration. 
c.  Floors and roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the intended use. 
(2)  Structures that are unsanitary. 
(3)  Structures that constitute a fire hazard; 
(4)  Structures that are unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put causing a hazardous or unsafe condition; 
(5)  Structures that constitute a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; 
(6)  Structures that are dangerous to life or property; or, 
(7)  Structures that are in violation of the city's housing code, fire protection and prevention code, or construction code. 
(d)  Criteria to demolish. Whenever the building official determines that a structure poses a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the community, or is damaged, deteriorated or defective to such an extent that the cost of restoration or repair thereof, as determined by the building official, will exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the subject structure to be demolished, less the land value upon which such structure is located, as determined by the most current information available from the Hillsborough County Property Appraiser, the building official may order the demolition or removal of the structure pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. 
(e)  Condemnation order. The building official may placard the structure and order the structure to be evacuated or closed to occupancy at any time after inspecting the structure and determining the structure is unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupancy or dangerous to other persons or property. Upon making the determination that the structure is unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupancy or dangerous to other persons or property, the building official shall (i) have a placard affixed to or otherwise posted at the structure to identify the structure as condemned, and (ii) issue a condemnation order, which shall require the owner, within a fixed period of time, to perform one or more of the following actions: vacate, abate, secure, repair and/or demolish the subject structure(s). The condemnation order shall be affixed to or posted at the structure in the same manner as the placard and a copy of the condemnation order shall also be provided to the property owner in the manner set forth in F.S. § 162.12(1), with copies of the condemnation order also being sent in the same manner to the tenants, if any, and other parties known by the city to have an interest in the structure. For the purposes of this section, interested parties shall mean any person or entity who has previously requested real property ad valorem notices with respect to the subject property in accordance with F.S. § 197.344. 
(1)  Form of condemnation order. At a minimum, the condemnation order shall: 
a.  Identify the location/address of the structure being condemned; 
b.  Provide the date(s) of the inspection(s) of the structure and the date of condemnation; 
c.  Describe the factual basis for the determination that the structure is unfit, unsafe or unsanitary for human occupation or dangerous to other persons or property; 
d.  Reference this section of the city code; 
e.  Provide the penalty for not complying with the condemnation order; 
f.  Order the property owner to take one or more of the following actions within a fixed period of time as appropriate for each required action: vacate, secure, abate, repair and/or demolish the structure; 
g.  Notify the property owner of the right to appeal the condemnation order, the time within which a notice of appeal must be filed to avoid waiver of appellate rights, and the location where a notice of appeal may be filed; and 
h.  Include the signature of building official or the duly authorized representative. 
(2)  Form of condemnation placard. At a minimum, the placard affixed to or posted at the structure shall contain the following information: 
a.  City seal; 
b.  Location/address of structure being condemned; 
c.  The word "CONDEMNED"; 
d.  Reference to this section of the city code, and setting forth the penalty for not complying with the condemnation order; 
e.  Date of condemnation; and 
f.  Signature of building official, or the duly authorized representative. 
(3)  Finality of condemnation order. All orders of the building official will become final either by failure to timely file an appeal as set forth under section 8-168 of the city code; or, if a timely appeal is filed with the condemnation appeals magistrate, thirty (30) days from the entry of a ruling by the condemnation appeals magistrate; or, if a timely appeal from the condemnation appeals magistrate is made to a court of competent jurisdiction, thirty (30) days from the entry of the court's order. 
a.  Failure to vacate, abate repair or secure. If the condemnation order is final, and the property owner has failed to timely vacate, abate, repair or secure the structure as required in the condemnation order, the building official may take whatever action is reasonably necessary, including, but not limited to, obtaining quotes and recommending to the city council the hiring of a contractor to abate, repair or secure the structure at the expense of the property owner. 
b.  Failure to demolish. If the condemnation order is final, and the property owner has failed to timely demolish the structure as required in the condemnation order, the building official may take whatever action is reasonably necessary, including obtaining quotes and recommending to the city council the hiring of a contractor to demolish the structure, at the expense of the property owner. 
(f)  Emergency orders. If, after inspecting the structure, the building official determines there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of such structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or toxic fumes, gases, materials, or the operation of defective or dangerous equipment, or when there exist unsanitary conditions which endanger the health or life of the occupant therein, or when there exists any other hazardous condition that is so unsafe as to imminently endanger life, limb, health, or property, the building official is authorized and empowered to issue emergency orders requiring the occupants to vacate the premises immediately, or as soon as deemed necessary, and directing immediate correction of the dangerous condition, which may include demolition of the structure. Whenever reasonably practicable, the determination that an imminent danger exists shall be made jointly by the building official and the housing official. Emergency orders shall, at a minimum, contain the information required for condemnation orders. 
(1)  Notice of emergency order. In addition to posting the emergency order at the structure in the same manner as the placard, the emergency order shall be provided to the property owner in the manner set forth in F.S. § 162.12(1), with copies of the emergency order also being sent in the same manner to the tenants, if any, and other parties known by the city to have an interest in the structure. In addition, a copy of the emergency order shall be provided to the property owner by any expedient means available, including but not limited to facsimile, or email if such contact information for the property owner is known to the city. 
(2)  Temporary safeguards. If immediate action is required to address an imminent danger threatening the safety of the public, the building official may enter the structure with such assistance as may be necessary, either using city forces or an independent contractor, and order work to be done to temporarily eliminate the imminent danger at the expense of the owner, occupant, operator, or other party interested. This work may include, but is not limited to, securing the structure, partial demolition, termination of utility services, and any other work necessary to temporarily eliminate the imminent danger or to ensure public safety. If the circumstances do not permit the hearing of an appeal before the city takes emergency abatement or curative actions, the owner, occupant, operator or other party having an interest in the structure shall have a right to an appeal hearing before the condemnation appeals magistrate as soon as practicable. 
(3)  Fire suppression activities. Subsection (f) of this section shall not (i) apply to any fire suppression activities the fire chief or the city fire department deems, in its judgment, to be reasonably necessary to address imminent fire danger threatening the safety of the public, or (ii) be interpreted to restrict or otherwise impair the fire chief or the city fire department's ability to engage in fire suppression activities the fire chief or the city fire department deems, in its judgment, to be reasonably necessary to address imminent fire danger threatening the safety of the public. 
(g)  Failure to comply with orders. The failure of any person to comply with an order issued by the building official within the time designated in the order shall be an offense. Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense for which enforcement actions under chapter 1, article II of this Code may proceed. Any unauthorized person removing, defacing or mutilating any such notice, order or placard issued or posted pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be in violation of the code. 
(h)  Authority to modify or rescind orders. If the property owner, tenant, or other person having an interest in the property establishes extenuating circumstances, the building official, exercising reasonable discretion, is authorized to rescind or modify any order previously issued or extend the time for compliance with any order issued. 
(i)  Billing of costs; imposition of lien. If the property owner fails to comply with an order issued by the building official and the city incurs expenses to (i) secure the structure, (ii) abate or correct the condition or situation that is the subject of the order, or (iii) demolish the structure, the city shall bill the property owner for all costs incurred by the city (collectively referred to as the "abatement costs"). For purposes of this subsection, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs associated with the repairing, securing, demolishing, or otherwise abating or correcting the conditions that were the subject of the building official's orders. All bills shall be immediately due and payable, and are considered delinquent if not paid within fifteen (15) days of the billing date. 
(1)  Notice of intent to lien unpaid bills. At the time of billing, the city will provide notice to the property owner that the city will impose a lien against the subject property if the abatement costs are not paid within fifteen (15) calendar days. The notice shall be provided in the manner set forth in F.S. § 162.12(1), and shall include, at a minimum: 
a.  A copy of the city's bill for abatement costs; 
b.  A copy of the proposed lien signed by the building official setting forth the total amount of the city's bill for abatement costs; 
c.  The property owner's right to file a written challenge to the abatement costs with the condemnation appeals magistrate, as provided in subsection (i)(2) herein. 
d.  A statement indicating that failure pay the abatement costs or file a written challenge as provided in subsection (i)(2) herein within fifteen (15) days from the date the notice of intent to lien unpaid bills is mailed or otherwise delivered shall (i) constitute a waiver of such right to challenge, and (ii) result in the city clerk recording the proposed lien attached to such notice in the official records of Hillsborough County, Florida, which shall, upon recordation, impose a lien against the subject real property. 
(2)  Challenge. The property owner shall have fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the notice of intent to lien unpaid bills is mailed or otherwise delivered to file with the city clerk a written challenge to the abatement costs. Failure to timely file the written challenge with the city clerk shall constitute a waiver of such right to challenge. The written challenge shall include a detailed explanation of the property owner's basis for challenging the abatement costs. Timely filing of a written challenge shall stay the time for payment of the abatement costs until the condemnation appeals magistrate issues its order on the property owner's written challenge. The condemnation appeals magistrate shall, upon receipt of such written challenge, promptly hear such challenge and issue an order upholding, modifying or rescinding the billed abatement costs. The condemnation appeals magistrate shall issue an order on the property owner's written challenge within three (3) days of concluding the hearing. Such order shall be provided to the property owner in the manner set forth in F.S. § 162.12(1). Abatement costs, as upheld or modified by the condemnation appeals magistrate, are due and payable within fifteen (15) days from the date the order is mailed or otherwise delivered. If the property owner fails to timely pay the abatement costs as upheld or modified by the condemnation appeals magistrate, the abatement costs revert back to the original amount set forth in the city's bill for abatement costs. 
(3)  Imposition of lien. The city clerk may record the proposed lien attached to notice of intent to lien unpaid bills if (i) the property owner fails to pay the abatement costs or file a challenge within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the notice of intent to lien unpaid bills is mailed or otherwise delivered to the property owner, or (ii) the property owner fails to pay the abatement costs as upheld or modified pursuant to an order issued by the condemnation appeals magistrate within fifteen (15) days from the date such order is mailed or otherwise delivered to the property owner. The proposed lien attached to notice of intent to lien shall, upon recordation by the city clerk in the official records of Hillsborough County, Florida, impose a lien against the subject real property in the amount set forth therein. Liens created pursuant to section 8-167 of the Code of Ordinances shall be superior to all other liens encumbering the property except taxes. Recorded liens shall accrue interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum, and shall be enforceable, if unsatisfied after the expiration of one year from the date of recording the lien, by foreclosure in the appropriate court in and for Hillsborough County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 1419 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 8-168. - Condemnation appeals magistrate. 
(a)  Appointment of condemnation appeals magistrate. Appeals from any condemnation order or emergency order of the building official shall be heard and decided by a condemnation appeals magistrate, who shall be appointed by the by the city manager with the consent of city council. 
(b)  Jurisdiction and function. The condemnation appeals magistrate shall have the power to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals from and review any condemnation order or emergency order of the building official. 
(2)  Hear and decide written challenges to any abatement costs billed to the property owner by the building official pursuant to subsection 8-167(i)(2). 
(3)  Permit a reasonable extension of time to perform any action required by section 8-167 in cases where application of the requirements of that section would cause undue hardship on an owner. 
(4)  Grant continuances of its hearings for good cause shown. 
(5)  Proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it, with due regard to the convenience and necessity of the parties involved. 
(6)  Issue subpoenas to compel (i) the production of documentary and other tangible evidence, and (ii) the attendance of witnesses in proceedings before the condemnation appeals magistrate. 
(c)  Appeals of condemnation orders. 
(1)  The owner, agent, custodian, lessee or occupant of the condemned property, or any party to whom the condemnation order was provided pursuant to subsection 8-167(e) shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the condemnation order to file with the city clerk a notice of appeal of such order to the condemnation appeals magistrate, which may be made on forms to be made available by the city clerk, or in any written manner reasonably describing the basis for such appeal. Failure to timely file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk shall constitute a waiver of the right of appeal. 
(2)  Unless a timely appeal is filed, any condemnation order or emergency order shall be final upon the thirty-first day after the date of physical placarding of the property. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to receive all notices of appeal filed with the condemnation appeals magistrate, to schedule all hearings within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal, and to notify the condemnation appeals magistrate and the appellant of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(4)  The filing of the notice of appeal with the city clerk shall operate to stay the condemnation order, excluding emergency orders, until a final order has been rendered by the condemnation appeals magistrate. Once a final order is rendered by the condemnation appeals magistrate, the appellant will have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city, but may appeal final order of the condemnation appeals magistrate with the circuit court as provided in subsection (e), herein. 
(d)  Hearing; notice. 
(1)  The hearing notice shall be served in a manner consistent with F.S. § 162.12. 
(2)  The hearing notice shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
You are hereby notified that on the _______ day of _______ 20___, at ___ o'clock, at _______, a hearing will be held before the City of Temple Terrace Condemnation Appeals Magistrate to consider the appeal from the order of the building official regarding property located at _______. You may present relevant evidence and will be given an opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel witnesses to appear and/or for the production of other supporting data or documentation, by filing a written request for issuance of subpoenas with the City Clerk who will accept the request on behalf of the Condemnation Appeals Magistrate. Any person wishing to appeal a decision made by the Condemnation Appeals Magistrate with respect to any matter considered at a hearing will need a record of the proceedings, and for such purpose he or she may need to ensure that a verbatim record of the proceedings is made, which record includes the testimony and evidence upon which the appeal is to be based. 
(3)  Unless otherwise provided for in this section, at the hearing provided, the appellant may show that the structure is not in violation of the construction code and/or fire prevention code and/or housing code, or is otherwise not unsafe, unfit, or unsanitary for human occupation, or is otherwise not dangerous to other persons or property; why the condition cannot be promptly corrected or terminated; or why the subject structure should not be removed or demolished. If the hearing concerns an appeal from a decision to deny, either in whole or in part, the appellant's written challenge to any abatement costs billed to the appellant by the building official pursuant to subsection 8-167(i) of the city code, the appellant shall be limited to presenting evidence concerning why such abatement costs are excessive or unjustified in light of the work performed. If the hearing concerns a request for an extension of time for compliance with a condemnation order wherein the building official has determined that the criteria for demolition have been met under subsection 8-167(d), the condemnation appeals magistrate shall apply a rebuttable presumption that such time extensions are unwarranted. 
(4)  At the hearing, both the city and the appellant may be represented by counsel and may introduce such witnesses and evidence as deemed necessary. The condemnation appeals magistrate shall not be governed by the strict rules of evidence but shall consider all relevant evidence at the hearing, giving due weight to the source and reliability of the evidence presented. All evidence shall be taken under oath or by affirmation. 
(5)  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Hearings shall not be required to be conducted in accordance with the technical rules relating to evidence and testimony, but shall be conducted in a manner that is fair to all parties. 
(6)  The condemnation appeals magistrate shall enter a final order containing findings of fact and conclusions of law. A copy of the final order shall be provided to the property owner in the manner set forth in F.S. § 162.12(1). 
(7)  The findings of the condemnation appeals magistrate shall be summarized in the final order. A permanent record also shall be made of all hearings and proceedings in the same manner as municipal code enforcement hearings and proceedings. Should any party seek to appeal an order of the condemnation appeals magistrate, the party may need a record of the proceeding, and for such purpose may need to ensure that a verbatim record of the proceeding is transcribed. Such party is responsible for the entire cost of said record. 
(e)  Appeal of condemnation appeals magistrate's final order. 
(1)  Any party, including the city, aggrieved by the final order of condemnation appeals magistrate, may appeal such final order to the circuit court. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of rendition of the order to be appealed. 
(2)  A final order of condemnation appeals magistrate shall be final upon the thirty-first day after rendition of the order if such order is not appealed to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED REAL PROPERTIES 

Sec. 8-169. - Legislative findings, purpose and intent. 
(a)  The City of Temple Terrace City Council hereby adopts and incorporates into this article the whereas clauses in Ord. No. 1477 as if fully restated herein. 
(b)  The city council finds that abandoned real property is unsightly, unsafe and has a negative impact on the community. The city council hereby declares that all abandoned real property in the city that has been foreclosed upon or is the subject of foreclosure actions or proceedings may become a public nuisance, the abatement of which, pursuant to the city's police power, is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Temple Terrace. 
(c)  The city council further finds that real property may remain in the foreclosure process for extended periods of time prior to foreclosure sale or other resolution of the foreclosure proceedings, and that such properties may be abandoned at any time during the foreclosure proceedings, often without warning or notice. 
(d)  It is the purpose of the city to establish a registration process to address abandoned real properties located within the city that are not code compliant. 
(e)  It is the city's intent to: 
(1)  Specifically establish an abandoned real property program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods within the city limits from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of such abandoned real properties; 
(2)  Deter the criminal activity and vandalism that often accompanies abandoned/vacant property; 
(3)  Limit the opportunity for abandoned/vacant property to become a nuisance or become occupied without legal authority; 
(4)  Assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties with respect to addressing trespassing, squatting and/or criminal activity that may occur on abandoned/vacant property. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-170. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates and requires a different meaning. 
    Abandoned real property means any property that is vacant and under a current notice of default and/or notice of owner/mortgagee's sale by the lender or the subject of a tax lien certificate sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure, and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure sale, a short sale or any other legal means. 
    City means Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Code compliance department means a department of the city, or its designee, tasked with assuring code compliance or enforcing the city's Code. 
    Code compliance officer or inspector means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty it is to assure code compliance, which includes performance of inspections. 
    Days means consecutive calendar days. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant, swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in violation of subsection 8-166(1)h. 
    Foreclosure means the legal process by which a parcel, tract, lot or other defined area of real property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is prepared for sale by the lender/owner/mortgagee to satisfy the debt if the borrower/mortgagor defaults. This definition shall include all processes, activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described process. 
    Legally inhabited means a building that is occupied by a person or persons with the right to do so as evidenced by ownership of the fee title, lease, or other legally recognized entitlement to enter into, remain, and use the building or structure. 
    Local means within the boundaries of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Local agent means the agent designated by the owner/mortgagee upon registration as required under this article. 
    Mortgagee means the creditor, including but not limited to: trustees; service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement. For purposes of this article only, the term "mortgagee" does not apply to governmental entities. 
    Nuisance means any condition including, but not limited to, an abandoned, unsafe or unsecured residence, building, structure, or real property with code violations on it that constitute a menace to life, property, public health, or the public welfare, or creates a fire hazard, any conditions which may be injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, or any conditions that constitute an attractive nuisance or otherwise endanger the public's safety while in the vicinity thereof. 
    Owner means every person, entity, or service company, who alone or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal or equitable title, or any real or contingent interest, to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, building, structure, or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park. The term owner shall include the owner's duly authorized agent, or in the case of a leased premises, the legal holder of the lease or his/her legal representative; 
(2)  Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, building, structure or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; 
(3)  Is an owner/mortgagee in possession of any such property, or is an owner/mortgagee with actual control of access to the property by means including, but not limited to, changing locks or putting on a lock box; 
(4)  Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested with possession or control of any such property; or 
(5)  Operates a rooming house. 
    Property means any real property, or portion thereof, located in the City of Temple Terrace, including building or structures situated on the property. For purposes of this article only, the term "property" does not include property owned or subject to the control of the city or any of its governmental bodies. 
    Property in foreclosure means any real property in the City of Temple Terrace that: 
(1)  Is under a current notice of default and is the subject of a foreclosure action or proceeding; 
(2)  Is the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the owner/mortgagee involved in the foreclosure; and/or 
(3)  Has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale to the owner/mortgagee. 
    Secure means any measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons. 
    Unauthorized person means any person accessing a premises without authority for such access and includes occupation or the continuing occupation by any person of a premises after the authority under which he/she was allowed to occupy the premises has expired or has been terminated for any reason. 
    Vacant property means any parcel of land in the city that contains any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings as evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition of "evidence of vacancy" above, which is without lawful tenant or lawful occupant or without a certificate of occupancy. Vacant property does not mean property that is temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation, personal matters, or business, or is not intended by the owner to be left vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-171. - Registration of property in foreclosure; duty to provide written notice of property in foreclosure. 
(a)  Any owner/mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the mortgage upon default by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed abandoned, and the owner/mortgagee shall within ten (10) business days of the inspection register the property with the code compliance department on forms provided by the city. A separate registration is required for each vacant property and for each vacant unit on a single property. 
(b)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the owner/mortgagee, or the owner/mortgagee's designee, monthly until: 
(1)  The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or 
(2)  It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned. 
(c)  Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the owner/mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the owner/mortgagee, a direct contact name and telephone number of the owner/mortgagee's contact, a facsimile number and email address and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area owner/mortgagee, the property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. The owner/mortgagee must also file a trespass affidavit with the Temple Terrace Police Department as delineated in section 8-176. 
(d)  All property registrations are valid for one calendar year. An annual registration fee of $10.00, or such other amount established by the city, shall accompany each registration form. Subsequent annual registrations and fees are due within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the previous registration. 
(e)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the mortgagee/beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
(f)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, and security and maintenance standards of this section, as long as they remain vacant and/or in foreclosure. 
(g)  Any owner who has or mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city which is in default and the subject of an outstanding notice of default shall perform a monthly inspection of the property. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed abandoned and the owner/mortgagee shall, within ten (10) business days of the inspection, register the property with the code compliance department on forms provided by the city. A separate registration is required for each vacant property. 
(h)  Once the property is no longer in foreclosure or is sold to a person or entity other than the owner/mortgagee, the owner/mortgagee must provide proof of sale or affidavit giving notice of termination of the foreclosure proceedings to the city's code compliance department. 
(i)  Any person or corporation that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. The city will not charge an additional fee for modifications to registrations. 
(j)  Failure of the property owner of record to properly register or to modify the registration from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article (Ordinance No. 1477 ) is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-172. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  All owners/mortgagees are responsible for maintaining their properties in foreclosure in accordance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable city codes and ordinances. 
(b)  The owner/mortgagee shall agree to allow the city to perform monthly inspections on the property, as required by section 8-174, to verify compliance with the requirements of this article and any other applicable laws for the duration of the foreclosure proceedings. 
(c)  Properties subject to this article must be maintained in accordance with the relevant sanitary codes, building codes, and local regulations concerning external and/or visible maintenance requirements. 
(d)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the city code and issuance of a notice of violation/notice of hearing by the city's code compliance department. Pursuant to a determination and recommendation by the city's municipal code enforcement board or special magistrate, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this article. A city order to secure a vacant or abandoned structure shall be complied with by the mortgagee and/or property owner within the time set forth in the order. If the securing has not been completed or does not comply with the requirements for securing the structure under the city's building code, the city may undertake remedial measures where there is an imminent threat of harm to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, but in no event shall the city be obligated to take such remedial actions. The mortgagee and/or property owner will be charged any costs incurred by the city for corrective action and, if not paid, the costs shall be recorded as a lien on the property. 
(e)  Adherence to this article does not relieve the owner/mortgagee of any applicable obligations set forth elsewhere in the city's Code of Ordinances or within any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowner's association rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-173. - Security requirements. 
(a)  All owners/mortgagees are responsible for maintaining their properties, either abandoned or in foreclosure, in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow access to the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or replacing of the window. Boarding of doors and/or windows shall be prohibited unless under a temporary basis due to emergencies or to deter unauthorized entry or as remedial efforts under condemnation proceedings. 
(c)  Any excavations, swimming pools, spas, or other attractive nuisances must be filled in with dirt or properly enclosed. Swimming pools and spas shall be secured according to city codes and maintained so the water remains clear and free of pollutants, algae, and debris, and free of mosquito breeding or vermin infestation. 
(d)  If the owner/mortgagee of the property is a company, the property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the owner and/or mortgagee's local agent. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be clearly visible from the street, but not readily accessible to vandals. The posting shall contain the following language: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY: 
TO REPORT ANY PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL: 
(e)  The property shall be posted with trespass notices as delineated in section 8-176. Posting shall not be removed until such time as a termination of foreclosure proceedings is issued and received. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-174. - Inspections. 
(a)  A local agent shall inspect the property on a monthly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance with this article. Upon request by the city, the local agent shall provide a copy of the inspection findings to the code compliance department. 
(b)  The city's code compliance department shall have the authority to inspect properties subject to this article for compliance to this article and to city codes and to issue notices for any violations. The city's code compliance department shall have the discretion to determine when and how such inspections are to be conducted, and may engage the local building official, provided that its policies are reasonably calculated to ensure that this article is enforced. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-175. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may enforce the provisions of this article by any means available to the city under the city's code of ordinances or as may be available under State law, including but not limited to the city's Construction Code Ordinance as it may be amended from time to time, or F.S. ch. 162 and F.S. § 125.69. 
(b)  The penalties for violation of this article shall be as set forth in the code compliance method asserted by the city under the city's Code of Ordinances or as may be available under State law, including but not limited to the city's Construction Code Ordinance as it may be amended from time to time, F.S. ch. 162 and F.S. § 125.69. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-176. - Trespass affidavit. 
(a)  At the time the owner/mortgagee registers the abandoned property with the city, the owner/mortgagee or agent thereof must also file a trespass affidavit with the Temple Terrace Police Department at no cost. 
(b)  The purpose of the trespass affidavit is to provide the Temple Terrace Police Department with the authority to enforce the provisions of F.S. ch. 810. 
(c)  Consistent with the provisions of F.S. § 810.11(5), the property must be posted with "No Trespassing" signs as follows: 
(1)  Signs must be posted no more than five hundred (500) feet apart and at each corner of the property and be clearly visible from outside the property boundary. 
(2)  The signs must include the words "No Trespassing" in letters not less than two (2) inches high and identify the name of the owner/mortgagee or entity executing the affidavit on behalf of the owner/mortgagee. 
(d)  The trespass affidavit must be renewed annually for as long as the property remains subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 8-177. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any property within the incorporated areas of Temple Terrace used for general agriculture or non-intensive agriculture uses; 
(2)  Any rights-of-way of municipal, county, state or federal roads or highways; 
(3)  Any property owned or under the control of any municipality, county, state or federal government or agencies thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1477 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-19-2019) 
Chapter 10 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; public heath, F.S. chs. 381-408. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 10-2. - State health rules. 
    All rules adopted by state agencies pursuant to F.S. ch. 381 are hereby adopted by reference. No person shall violate any of such rules. 
(Code 2001, §§ 11.110, 11.110.1, 11.110.2) 
State Law reference- Septic tanks and other onsite sewage disposal systems, F.S. § 381.0065 et seq. 
Sec. 10-3. - Weeds, grass, underbrush. 
(a)  Accumulation of weeds, grass and underbrush prohibited. The accumulation of weeds, grass and underbrush ("weeds") within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any building, structure, recreational area or street right-of-way upon real property within the city is prohibited. 
(b)  Duty of property owner; remedy available to city. 
(1)  In accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, all owners, agents, custodians, lessees and occupants of real property within the city ("property owners") shall cut and keep cut all grass, weeds and underbrush to a height of not exceeding twelve (12) inches or, when all such grass, weeds and underbrush under twelve (12) inches in height create a health hazard in the harboring of snakes, rodents, etc., shall remove all such grass, weeds and underbrush from said property. 
(2)  Upon failure of any property owner to cut, keep cut and remove grass, weeds and underbrush in accordance with provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, the code inspector may initiate enforcement actions in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 1-41. 
(Code 2001, §§ 11.135.1, 11.135.2; Ord. No. 616, 4-28-1987; Ord. No. 1353, § 5(Exh. D), 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 10-4. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board refers to the municipal code enforcement board created pursuant to section 1-41. 
    Nuisance includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Any conduct so designated by statute, including but not limited to those types of conduct defined in F.S. § 823.05; 
(2)  Any conduct specified in this section to constitute a nuisance; 
(3)  Any building condition or use of premises or buildings exteriors or land which causes substantial diminution of the value of property in the vicinity of said condition or use, or any continuing condition or use of premises or buildings or of land which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, repose, privacy or safety of the public through offensive odors, noises, substances, smoke, ashes, soot, dust, gas, fumes, chemical diffusion, smog, flooding, disturbance; 
(4)  Vibrations of earth, air, or structures, emanations, light, sights; 
(5)  Entry on adjoining property by unauthorized persons or vehicles; and 
(6)  Other unreasonable intrusions upon the free use and comfortable enjoyment of the public or private property of the citizens of the city. 
    Premises means the land and all structures and property appurtenant or attached thereto which are owned, leased, occupied or controlled by a person. 
    Vehicle includes automobile, motorcycle, truck, motorized van, recreation vehicle, bicycle, or any other device which any person or property is or may be transported on land, except devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  Duty of maintenance of private property. The following conditions and conduct are hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance: 
(1)  Any condition or use that causes a substantial diminution of the property value of premises in the vicinity of the condition or use. 
(2)  Any conduct prescribed by statute, including but not limited to the conduct described in F.S. § 823.05. 
(3)  Any condition or use of premises that unreasonably intrudes upon the free use, privacy, safety, and comfortable enjoyment of the property of the citizens of the city; provided, however, that the following uses or conditions shall be presumed to constitute an unreasonable intrusion upon the free use and comfortable enjoyment of property: 
a.  Repeated intrusion of odors, gases, smoke, ashes, soot, dust, fumes, chemical diffusion, smog, or other particles or gases upon premises adjoining or surrounding the use or condition; 
b.  Repeated intrusion or disturbances of earth or air, including but not limited to vibrations, explosions, loud raucous, unnecessary noise and light; 
c.  Repeated, unauthorized intrusion on adjoining premises by patrons or uses of property premises which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, privacy, and repose of owners or possessors of said adjoining premises in the enjoyment and the use of their premises; 
d.  Repeated, unauthorized intrusion upon property of persons or vehicles which disturb the privacy, comfort, peace, repose or use by owners or possessors of adjoining property; 
e.  Repeated attraction to the premises of persons, who, through frequent raucous or disorderly conduct, or through repeated disturbances of the peace, or through violation of any law of the state, county, or city, adversely affect ordinarily reasonable persons in the enjoyment and use of their property. 
(4)  Partially constructed, partially destroyed, abandoned, boarded up, or dilapidated buildings or structures which are: 
a.  Permitted to so remain for longer than ninety (90) days without occupancy, substantial construction or repair, especially where the appearance and condition of said building or structure detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the value of the property in the immediate neighborhood; or 
b.  Any building or structure which has been under construction for more than two (2) years; provided, however, that the owner of said property may file an application to the city council for an extension of the times set forth above. Said application shall be filed before the expiration of the applicable time period and shall be accompanied by sufficient evidence to establish that the applicant has made substantial efforts to abate or prevent the nuisance and to further establish the acts and time parameters within which the building or structure will be completed or rehabilitated. The city council may, in its sole discretion, grant extension of said time periods by resolution expressly conditioned on completion of specified curative measures within a certain time. 
(5)  Any condition that is both attractive and dangerous to children, including but not limited to broken or abandoned equipment, machinery, or appliances, hazardous pools, excavations and unfenced construction materials. 
(6)  Blocking of drainage pipes, ditches, channels, and streams. 
(7)  Any other continually or repeatedly maintained condition or use that constitutes a nuisance to the public, generally, as that term is defined in this article, or in general law, the abatement of which would be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  Enforcement and hearing procedures. This section may be enforced by injunction in accordance with the provisions of section 1-39; or in any other way provided by law. 
(Code 2001, § 14.185; Ord. No. 663, 8-4-1988) 
State Law reference- Public nuisances, F.S. ch. 823; sanitary nuisances, F.S. § 386.01 et seq.; nuisance abatement, F.S. §§ 60.05, 60.06. 
Secs. 10-5-10-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITATION 

Sec. 10-28. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Health Ordinance of Temple Terrace." 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.1) 
Sec. 10-29. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 10-30. - Duties of director of public works. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of public works or the director's authorized agent to see that the streets are kept clean and that all provisions of this article are enforced. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.5) 
Sec. 10-31. - Unlawful practices generally. 
    It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to do or permit to be done any of the following acts or practices: 
(1)  To deposit on or bury in, or cause to be deposited on or buried in any land, public property, street, alley, vacant lot or area, unoccupied lot or area, the waters of the Hillsborough River, or any other river, watercourse or ditch within the corporate limits of the city, any solid waste/trash/refuse or other noxious, malodorous or offensive matter. 
(2)  To fail or neglect to keep or cause to be kept clean and sanitary or tightly covered and in good state of repair all containers and solid waste receptacles. 
(3)  To place or allow to be placed upon the streets, alleys, curbings or sidewalks of the city any solid waste, sweepings, trash/refuse or hazardous waste materials of any kind which might be a menace to traffic both vehicular and pedestrian, or which might endanger the proper operation of the city's sewer or drainage system. 
(4)  To collect or permit to be collected by anyone the solid waste or recyclables from any solid waste or recycling bin, can, container or dumpster other than by persons regularly employed by the city for that purpose or by persons working under contract with the city by a special written permit from the director of public works or the director's authorized agent. 
(5)  To place or allow to be placed any solid waste/trash/refuse in any solid waste and/or recycling container by person or persons not authorized to do so. 
(6)  To place or allow to be placed any solid waste, trash/refuse, and/or recyclables not generated within the city in any solid waste and/or recycling containers for collection by the city. 
(7)  To start or to maintain any bonfire or trash fire; to burn off any area for clearing; or to knowingly furnish materials for or to authorize any such fire to be started or maintained on any street, alley, road, public land or ground or upon any private property in the city; provided, however, campfires, bonfires, practice burns by the fire department, and land clearing by means of air curtain incineration may be allowed with special permit approved by the fire chief and city manager or designee with special conditions as deemed necessary. 
(8)  To violate any of the provisions of this article or any reasonable interpretation of the same. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.11; Ord. No. 144, 2-16-1965; Ord. No. 162, 5-3-1966; Ord. No. 660, 7-5-1983; Ord. No. 1091, 6-3-2003) 
State Law reference- Littering, F.S. § 403.413 et seq. 
Sec. 10-32. - Excavation, filling. 
    No person shall permit any excavation, made for the purpose of mining, quarrying, building or for other purposes, of more than ten (10) feet of superficial area and more than four (4) feet in depth to remain open in the city on land belonging to such person for more than ninety (90) days. Such owner shall cause such excavation to be filled in with clean sand or dirt or covered over in such a manner and within such time as the public works director may direct. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.6) 
Sec. 10-33. - Sand, filling, etc., are prejudicial to health. 
    Any hole, low-lying ground, pit, or excavation, likely to be or become prejudicial to the health of the community, shall upon order of the public works director be filled, drained or otherwise placed in sanitary or salubrious condition by the owner thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.7) 
Sec. 10-34. - Duty to keep premises clean. 
    It shall be unlawful for the occupant, or if there be no occupant, then the owner of any house, yard, store or lot of land to refuse to keep the same clean, or to permit any trash, weeds or any offensive matter of any kind to accumulate in or upon such premises. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.9) 
Sec. 10-35. - Occupants and owners of abutting property to keep rights-of-way clean and sanitary. 
    All tenants or occupants of any real property abutting upon any street in the city, or, if no tenant or occupant, then the owner thereof, shall be required to keep that part of the street between such property lines and the curblines, including the sidewalk, curb and gutter of the street on which such property abuts, neatly trimmed and edged, and otherwise in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.10; Ord. No. 1353, § 6(Exh. E), 12-3-2013) 
Chapter 12 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; Community Planning Act, F.S. § 163.2511 et seq.; land development code required, F.S. § 163.3202(3); required provisions of land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3202(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Title. 
    This LDC shall be known as, cited as, and referred to as the "City of Temple Terrace Land Development Code." In subsequent sections, it may be referred to as the LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.100) 
Sec. 12-2. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this LDC are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II. 
Sec. 12-3. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this LDC are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this LDC shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this LDC. 
Sec. 12-4. - Authority. 
    The city land development code is adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.2511 et seq., the Community Planning Act), the city Charter and the general powers in F.S. ch. 166 (city government). 
(Code 2001, § 25.105) 
Sec. 12-5. - Findings. 
    The city council finds that: 
(1)  F.S. ch. 163 requires each Florida local government to enact a unified land development code which implements and is consistent with the local comprehensive plan and which contains all of the land development regulations for the city. 
(2)  A single set of administrative procedures for making all land use decisions promotes efficiency, predictability, and citizen participation. 
(3)  All development proposals must undergo a development review process to assure compliance with the requirements of this Code. 
(4)  Mandatory concept review allows property owners to modify proposals in response to early staff comment. 
(5)  All administrative decisions should be supported by a record with written findings to assure accountability and efficient appellate review. 
(6)  A quick, efficient and nonpolitical avenue of appeal should be available for all ministerial and administrative decisions. 
(7)  Enforcement of development orders and the provisions of this Code should be through procedures that are efficient, effective and consistent with the code enforcement procedures established by state law. 
(Code 2001, § 25.110) 
Sec. 12-6. - Purpose and intent. 
    The primary purpose of the LDC is the implementation of the comprehensive plan for the city, as adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, pt. II (F.S. § 163.2511 et seq.). The city council deems it necessary to adopt the LDC for the following purposes: 
(1)  Guiding and accomplishing coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the city. 
(2)  Protecting, promoting and improving the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare. 
(3)  Conserving the value of land, buildings and resources, and protecting landowners from adverse impacts of adjoining developments. 
(4)  Protecting the character and maintaining the stability of residential, agricultural, business, industrial, recreation and public areas. 
(5)  Controlling and regulating the growth of the city, concentrating the more intense development in capability and limiting development in areas of low capability. 
(6)  Directing and controlling, through the establishment of performance standards, the type, distribution and intensity of development. 
(7)  Being equitable, in terms of consistency, with established regulation and procedures, respecting the rights of property owners while taking into consideration the interests of all the citizens of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.115) 
Sec. 12-7. - General rules of interpretation. 
(a)  In the interpretation and application of the LDC, all standards, criteria and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the purposes and goals of the city, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other lawful regulatory powers of the city. 
(b)  Wherein this Code conflicts with or overlaps other regulations, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(c)  In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any provision of this LDC, the city manager or designee shall be responsible for interpretation. Responsibility for interpretation by the city manager or designee shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of this LDC; such responsibility shall not be construed to technical codes adopted by reference by the city. Further, such responsibility shall not be construed to substitute for any rights or responsibilities specified to any commission, board or official named in other sections or articles of this LDC. The city manager or designee shall rely upon the policies adopted or amended in the city comprehensive plan in making any such interpretation. 
(Code 2001, § 25.120) 
Sec. 12-8. - Rules regarding implementation of new standards. 
    The introduction of new development standards or changes in standards and criteria requires that rules be established regarding applicability to on-going development. To that end, the following pertain: 
(1)  Site plans, conceptual plans, building plans, and plats. 
a.  Site plans, building plans and plats in process shall be evaluated against those rules, regulations and standards in force on the date it is accepted. Such submissions shall be assumed to be accepted if the submittal is not rejected by the city as incomplete, or otherwise unacceptable, within five (5) working days of receipt. 
b.  Conceptual plans shall be reviewed against existing standards and criteria and proposed changes will be discussed with the applicant for informational purposes. City council and the development review committee will provide input and informational comments for a conceptual plan. 
c.  Final site plans-expiration and duration. 
1.  Planned development (PD) zoning final site plans are valid for up to two (2) years, during which time, permit application must be made to the building department. 
2.  All other final site plans are valid for one year. 
d.  The applicability of concurrency to on-going development is specifically dealt with in section 12-1085. Nothing within this section shall be construed to expand the exemption from concurrency requirements found in section 12-1085. 
e.  Building permits and construction plans. Building permits and construction plans shall be valid for six (6) months and may be extended once, unless further restricted by the 2014 Florida Building Code, as amended, or this Code, as determined by the building official. 
(Code 2001, § 25.125; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-9. - Abrogation. 
    This land development code is not intended to repeal, abrogate or interfere with any existing public easements duly recorded in the public records of the county. The land development code is not intended to repeal any lawful approval by official city action of any planned development, planned unit development or subdivision, or to negate any recorded agreement which the city has executed. 
(Code 2001, § 25.130; Ord. No. 712, 1-23-1990) 
Sec. 12-10. - Waivers. 
(a)  Application. Any request for a waiver from the regulations set forth in this LDC shall be made in writing and submitted to the applicable department concurrently with the preliminary plat, general site development plan, or final site plan. Such written request shall state fully the grounds for the waiver request and all facts relied upon by the applicant. The requested waiver(s) shall be reviewed and approved by the development review committee or city council, if appropriate, as part of the preliminary or final plat, general site development plan, or final site plan. 
(b)  Authority to grant waivers. 
(1)  Development review committee (DRC) may grant waivers for final site plans that meet the requirements for administrative approval. 
(2)  All other waivers from this LDC shall be reviewed and approved by city council. 
(c)  Determination. Waivers may be granted by the city council or development review committee in approving a preliminary or final plat, general site development plan, or final site plan upon determining that a hardship will result from the strict application of these site plan or platting regulations or that the purpose of these site plan or platting regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative or innovative proposal. In approving any waiver, the city council or the development review committee shall make a finding that: 
(1)  The granting of the waiver shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or general welfare or injurious to any other property or property owner. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the waiver request is based are unique to the property which is the subject of the waiver and are not applicable generally to other properties. 
(3)  Due to the particular physical surroundings, shape or topography of the property which is the subject of the waiver, a particular hardship to the owner would result (as distinguished from a mere inconvenience) if the strict letter of these site plan or platting regulations are applied. 
(4)  The waiver will not conflict with the zoning district regulations or the land use plan. 
(d)  Conditions. In granting any waiver, the city council or development review committee may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the property benefited by the waiver as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of these site plan or platting regulations. Failure to comply with any such condition or restriction imposed by the city council or development review committee shall constitute a violation of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.620; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-11. - Fees and charge for permits, inspections etc. 
    The fees and charges for development permits, building permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, gas piping, plumbing permits, sign permits, document reviews, surcharges (including radon), and inspections and for miscellaneous matters under this chapter shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 2001, §§ 25.695, 25.697, 25.697.1-25.697.5, 25.697.7-25.697.11, 25.698, 25.698.1-25.698.5, 25.698.7-25.698.11) 
Secs. 12-12-12-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 12-39. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Definitions in this article are consistent with those terms used elsewhere in this Code and the adopted comprehensive plan for the city. 
(b)  The following rules shall be observed in the application and interpretation of provisions of this LDC, except when the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  The terms "shall," "should," and "must" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(2)  Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or derivative forms. 
(3)  Words in the singular shall include the plural; words in the plural shall include the singular. 
(4)  In the event of a conflict between the text of this LDC and any illustrations, captions, figures or other graphic material, the text shall control. 
(5)  The term "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(6)  The term "person" includes a firm, partnership, trust, estate, company, association, and organization whether for profit or nonprofit, individual, co-partnership, joint venture or corporation. 
(7)  Where there are definitions specifically detailed in sections of this LDC which are in conflict with the definitions contained in this article, the more specific definition shall control. 
(8)  Words of one gender include words of all other genders. 
(Code 2001, § 25.200) 
Sec. 12-40. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this LDC shall have the meaning of common usage which gives this LDC its most reasonable application: 
    Abut: To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line. 
    Accessory sign: A permanent ground or building sign that is permitted under this Code as incidental to an existing or proposed use of land. 
    Activated sign: Any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light or lighting device that automatically changes color, flashes or alternates, or changes the appearance of the sign or any part thereof. 
    Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
    Adjacent to a protected environmentally sensitive area: Any location within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of any protected environmentally sensitive area, whether the location is on or off the development site. 
    Adversely affected person: Any person who is suffering or will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by the local government comprehensive plan, including, but not limited to, interests related to health and safety; police and fire protection services; densities or intensities of development; transportation facilities; recreational facilities; educational facilities; health care facilities; equipment or services; and environmental or natural resources. The alleged adverse effect may be shared in common with other members of the community at large, but must exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
    Advertising: Sign copy intended to directly or indirectly promote the sale or use of a product, service, commodity, entertainment, or real or personal property. 
    Aggrieved person: See Adversely affected person. 
    Airport or airport related activity or use: A use which is dependent upon proximity to the airport for effective performance, or which provides services to and improves the effectiveness of the airport, including but not limited to airport maintenance facilities and airport related administrative offices; sales of new and used aircraft and aircraft parts, fuels, lubricants, and other aircraft supplies; vehicle related parking, maintenance and storage; air freight and air cargo services; and other airport-related uses compatible with the operation of airports for public and private use. 
    Alter: To change, rearrange, enlarge, extend or reduce any structure or part thereof on the same site. 
    Alter or alteration of a stormwater management system: Work done other than that necessary to maintain the system's original design and function. 
    Alteration of a watercourse: A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Amortization: A method of eliminating nonconforming uses or structures by requiring the termination of the nonconforming use or structure after a specified period of time. 
    Animated sign: A sign upon which a character, letter or figure or a group or combination of characters, letters or figures shows movement or motion. 
    Annexation: The adding of real property to the boundaries of the city in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 171, such addition making such real property in every way a part of the municipality. 
    Appeal: For the purposes of administration of the LDC except the floodplain management ordinance, a request for a review by a superior authority of an interpretation of any provision of this LDC or a request for a variance. For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, an appeal is defined as a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of the floodplain management ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Approach main: Those water mains connected or to be connected with an existing water main of the city and extending from the main to an exterior boundary line of a tract or parcel of land to be served, either platted, replatted or to be platted as a subdivision, and in which subdivision mains are to be used for residential, commercial, manufacturing or industrial purposes, and not premises extension as herein provided. 
    Appurtenant structure: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and where the use is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or VO zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Areawide development plan: A plan of development that, at a minimum: 
(1)  Encompasses a defined planning area approved pursuant to this LDC that will include at least two (2) or more developments; 
(2)  Maps and defines the land uses proposed, including the amount of development by use and development phasing; 
(3)  Integrates a capital improvements program for transportation and other public facilities to ensure development staging contingent on availability of facilities and services; 
(4)  Incorporates land development regulation, covenants, and other restrictions adequate to protect resources and facilities of regional and state significance; and 
(5)  Specifies responsibilities and identifies the mechanisms for carrying out all commitments in the areawide development plan and for compliance with all conditions of any areawide development order. 
    Arterial road: A roadway providing service which is relatively continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long trip length, and high operating speed. 
    As-built plans (drawings): The amended final site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and capabilities of structures or facilities as they have been constructed. 
    ASCE 24: A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Ashes: Residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    Availability or available: With regard to the provision of facilities and services concurrent with the impacts of development, means that at a minimum the facilities and services will be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in article X of this LDC. 
    Awning or canopy sign: Any sign or structure made of cloth, plastic or metal with a frame which is attached to a building or similar structure. 
    Base flood: A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation: The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
    Beacon, spot or floodlight: Any light with one or more beams, capable of being changed in direction or of being revolved automatically in whole or in part. 
    Beneficial functions of a protected environmentally sensitive area: Those functions, described in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan, that justify designating an area as environmentally sensitive. 
    Bikeway, bicycle and pedestrian way: Any road, path or way which in some manner is specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, and travel by foot, and from which motor vehicles are excluded. 
    Billboard: Any sign with a flat, continuous and uninterrupted surface upon which advertising or other matter may be displayed, promoting goods, services or other things not sold or available on the site where the sign is located. 
    Block: A lot or group of lots entirely and immediately surrounded by streets or highways, rights-of-way, watercourses, subdivision boundaries, or any combination thereof and having an assigned number, letter or other name through which it may be identified. 
    Blockface: The combined frontage of property on a street between two (2) streets intersecting said street. Where irregular streets and/or angled intersections disrupt a normal block, the blockface shall be considered to be that most consistent with the immediate and adjoining block area. The community development director shall determine the area of the blockface and the board of adjustment shall hear any appeal of such determination. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
    BOA: The city's board of adjustment. 
    Board of adjustment (BOA): A board created under the authority of state statute with powers and duties further described in section 12-72. 
    Boarding house or home: A house or home, typically a single-family residence, in which lodgers rent one or more rooms for one or more nights, and sometimes for extended periods of weeks, months, and years. The common parts of the house or home are maintained, and some services, such as laundry and cleaning, may be supplied. 
    Boarding room: A room that is rented for one or more nights within a boarding house or home. 
    Boats: Small vessels propelled by oars or paddles or by sail or power. (Ord. No. 777, 5-7-1991) 
    Buffer: A specified land area together with the planting and landscaping required on the land used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances. (See Landscaped buffer, Solid buffer, Wood fence buffer ) 
    Building: A fully enclosed, weatherproof structure, permanently attached to the ground and built or used for the shelter of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building or use, accessory: A building, structure, or use of land, which is smaller in size and secondary in purpose to the principal building or use of the property. The accessory use, building, or structure must be subordinate to the principal use in size, shape, bulk, design, and use, and the design and location must meet all development standards and shall not be permitted to be larger than the principal structure. An accessory use, building, or structure shall be incidental to and not alter the primary use or character of the site. Trailers, mobile homes, and tractor trailers shall not be used as accessory structures in residential districts. 
    Building coverage: The combined and total percentage of area of a zoning lot covered or occupied by buildings and/or structures having a roof impervious to weather. 
    Building facade: Any face, side or portion thereof of a building or structure most parallel to a property line. The building facade includes the wall and window area from the ground to the roof. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Building front: The side of a building which fronts upon the public or private way on which an address has been assigned by the city. 
    Building frontage: The length of any side of a building or store which fronts upon a public street, a customer parking area or pedestrian mall and which has one or more entrances to the main part of the building or store. 
    Building height: The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining a building to the level of the highest point of the roof. 
    Building numbering system: A system by which existing buildings and projected lots, parcels and buildings are assigned addresses in a coordinated method. 
    Building permit: Written permission issued by the city, and required by this Code, for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
    Building sign: A sign displayed upon or attached to any part of the exterior of a building, including walls, windows, doors, parapets, marquees and roof slopes of forty-five (45) degrees or steeper. 
    Build-to-line: When a zoning district has a front build-to line requirement or when a principal structure is built, regardless of the distance or setback from the front property line, it is the line at which construction of the front of the building facade is to occur on a lot, running parallel to the front property line. In the context of fencing and accessory building or use regulations, it is the line at which a building has been constructed on a lot, closest to the front property line, and is not allowed to intrude into without approval of a waiver or variance. 
    Camouflaged communication tower: Communication tower designed to unobtrusively blend into the existing surroundings and be disguised so as to not have the appearance of a communication tower. Such structures shall be considered and regulated as communication towers. Camouflaged towers must appear as either a part of the structure housing the principal use or an accessory structure that is normally associated with the principal use occupying the property. Camouflaged towers developed on unimproved property must blend in with existing vegetation. (Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996) 
    Capital budget: The portion of each local government's budget which reflects capital improvements scheduled for a fiscal year. 
    Capital improvement: Physical assets constructed or purchased to provide, improve or replace a public facility and which are large scale and high in cost. The cost of a capital improvement is generally nonrecurring and may require multiyear financing. For the purpose of this LDC, physical assets which have been identified as existing or projected needs in the individual comprehensive plan elements shall be considered capital improvements. 
    Canopy sign: See Awning or canopy sign. 
    Certificate of occupancy: A document allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable codes and ordinances, and/or that a development has been completed in conformity with the site development plan under which the development was authorized. 
    Changeable copy sign: A permanent, framed surface area principally devoted to and designed for changeable text or information. 
    Chief of police: The chief of police of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Child care facility (center): A building and related grounds designed and utilized for the provisions of child care and not also used as a permanent residence or providing overnight care accommodations. The term includes a day nursery, kindergarten, day-care service, day-care agency, nursery school, learning center, or play school, but excludes the following: 
(1)  Public or private schools in compliance with the compulsory school attendance law, F.S. ch. 1003, pt. II (F.S. § 1003.21 et seq.). 
(2)  Summer camp having children in full-time residence. 
(3)  Summer day camp. 
(4)  Church school normally conducted during vacation periods. 
    City: The City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    City attorney: The legal counselor or firm for the City of Temple Terrace, Florida, as appointed by the city council. 
    City clerk: The city clerk of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    City council: The legislative body of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    City engineer: The official of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida, to whom the responsibility normally associated with this title has been delegated. 
    City manager: The city manager of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Clearing: The removal of trees and brush from the land, not including the ordinary mowing of grass. 
    Clerk: The clerk of the circuit and county courts of Hillsborough County, Florida. 
    Code inspector: The city manager or designee shall authorize administrative official(s) to initiate and pursue official code enforcement proceedings. The administrative official may appoint inspectors to assist in carrying out this responsibility. (Ord. No. 900, 9-12-1995) 
    Collector road: A roadway providing service which is of relatively moderate traffic volume, trip length, and moderate operating speed. Collector roads collect and distribute traffic between local roads or arterial roads. 
    Commercial/industrial connection: Any utility connection to a structure not used as a dwelling unit, and all utility connections to motels, hotels and roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
    Commercial uses: Activities within land areas which are predominantly connected with the sale, rental and distribution of products, or performance of service. 
    Commercial vehicle: Any self-propelled or towed vehicle used in commerce to transport passengers (other than the driver) or cargo. 
    Commercially developed parcel: A parcel of property on which there is at least one walled and roofed structure used, or designed to be used, for other than residential or agricultural purposes. 
    Communication antenna: An antenna designed to transmit or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996) 
    Communication tower: A tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height (including antenna) which supports communication (transmission or receiving) equipment. The term communication tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996) 
    Community park: A park located near major roadways, and designed to serve the needs of more than one neighborhood. 
    Comprehensive plan: The City of Temple Terrace comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to the requirements of F.S. ch. 163. 
    Computation of time: In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Concurrency: That the necessary public facilities and services to maintain the adopted level of service standards are available when the impacts of development occur. 
    Concurrency management system: The procedures and/or process the city utilizes to assure that development orders and permits are not issued unless the necessary facilities and services are available concurrent with the impacts of development. 
    Cone of influence: An area around one or more major water wells the boundary of which is determined by the government agency having specific statutory authority to make such a determination based on groundwater travel or drawdown depth. 
    Conservation area: Land maintained for conservation uses. 
    Conservation uses: Activities within the land areas designated for the purpose of conserving or protecting natural resources or environmental quality and includes areas designated for such purposes as flood control, protection of quality or quantity of groundwater or surface water, floodplain management, fisheries management, or protection of vegetative communities or wildlife habitats. 
    Construction plans: Drawings or renderings, prepared by a state-registered engineer or architect, showing how a specific structure, building or other improvement is to be constructed. 
    Contraction: The reversion of real property within municipal boundaries to an unincorporated status. 
    Copy: The linguistic or graphic content of a sign. 
    Crosswalk: A right-of-way within a block, dedicated to public use, from which motor vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to provide pedestrian access to adjacent roads, lots, or public use areas. 
    Cul-de-sac: A short street having one end open to traffic and the other end terminated with a paved turn-around. 
    Cultural resource: A site, object, structure, building or district listed on the city/county survey of cultural resources or in the historic preservation element of the city/county comprehensive plan or on the local register of historic places. 
    Currently available revenue sources: An existing source and amount of revenue presently available to the city. This term does not include the city's intent to increase the future level or amount of a revenue source. 
    Damages: Money damages paid by any person, whether voluntarily or as a result of administrative or judicial action, to this state as compensation or restitution, or as punitive damages, for causing injury to, or destruction of natural resources of the state. 
    DBH (diameter at breast height): The term "breast height" is defined to be fifty-four (54) inches above the surface of the ground at the base of the plant or tree. In the case of a tree with multiple main stems, the diameter shall be the sum of the diameters of the stems. 
    Demolition: The tearing down or razing of twenty-five (25) percent or more of a structure's external walls. 
    Density, gross: The total number of dwelling units divided by the total site area, less public right-of-way. 
    Department (CDD): The community development department of Temple Terrace, Florida. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
    Designated public parking space for persons with disabilities: Any public parking space posted and maintained with a permanent sign bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol or the caption "PARKING BY DISABLED PERMIT ONLY," or both such symbol and caption. 
    Design flood: The flood associated with the greater of the following two (2) areas: 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the city's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation: The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the city's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two (2) feet. 
    Detention: The collection and storage of surface water for subsequent gradual discharge. 
    Developer: Any person who engages in or proposes to engage in a development activity either as the owner or as the agent of the owner of property. 
    Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, temporary or long-term storage of equipment or materials, any other land disturbing activities, or the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. Development shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction, alteration of the size or structural change in the external appearance of a structure on land. 
(2)  A change in the intensity of use of land, such as: an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land; or, a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(3)  Alteration of a shore or bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, or canal. 
(4)  Demolition or removal of a structure. 
(5)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(6)  Deposit of fill on a parcel of land. 
(7)  A tree removal for which authorization is required under this LDC. 
(8)  Erection of a sign for which authorization is required under this LDC. 
(9)  Alteration of a historic property for which authorization is required under this LDC. 
(10)  Changing the use of a site so that the need for parking is increased. 
(11)  Construction, elimination or alteration of a driveway onto a public street. 
The term "development," as designated in this LDC or in a development order or permit, includes all other development customarily associated with it unless otherwise specified. When appropriate to the context, the term "development" refers to the act of developing or to the result of development. Reference to any specific operation is not intended to mean that the operation or activity, when part of other operations or activities, is not development. Reference to particular operations is not intended to limit the generality of this definition. 
    Development agreement: A local government development agreement, as defined in F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243, or other enforceable agreement between the city and a developer for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of a city approved development order, or otherwise relating to the development of land. 
    Development order: An order issued by the city council authorizing a specific use and development and further authorizing the subsequent issuance of necessary permits under the provisions of F.S. ch. 380. 
    Development permit: An official action of the city having the effect of permitting the development or redevelopment of land, including, but not limited to, any building permit, site plan approval, subdivision approval, infrastructure permit, tree removal permit, sign permit or any other permit required in this LDC. 
    Development review committee (DRC): The staff committee assigned the responsibility to review development permit applications. 
    Development right: A legal claim (authority) to convert a tract of land to a specific purpose by construction, installation or alteration of a building or other structure, or the legal claim to excavation or filling for mining. 
    Directional sign: Any sign which is used solely for the purpose of indicating direction including, but not limited to, those signs which indicate the avenues of ingress and egress and other on or off-site traffic circulation information for a particular premise. Such directional signs may include the logo of the property owner or business for which an occupational license has been granted at the location. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Director: The director of the Temple Terrace community development department. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
    Director of finance: The director of finance of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida, or designee. 
    Directory sign: A sign which gives the name, use and/or occupation of the occupant(s) of a building, shopping center, business, professional center, church, apartment or townhouse. "Directory panel" is that part of a directory sign which gives the name and/or occupation of an occupant of a building or the use of a portion of a building, shopping center, professional center, business, church, apartment or townhouse. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Discharge, discharge point: The outflow of water from a project, site aquifer, drainage basin or facility. 
    District: For purposes of the historic preservation regulations in this LDC, a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects, or areas, which are united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may be comprised of individual resources which are separated geographically but are linked by association or history. 
    Double-faced sign: A sign which has two (2) display surfaces backed against each other or against the same background, one face of which is designed to be seen from once direction and the other from the opposite direction. 
    Drainage basin: The area defined by topographic boundaries which contributes stormwater to a drainage system, surface streams, swamps or estuarine waters, including all areas artificially added to the basin. 
    Drainage detention structure: A structure which collects and temporarily stores stormwater for the purpose of treatment through physical, chemical, or biological processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater. 
    Drainage easement: Land in which the public, the city or the county has an easement devoted to, planned, proposed or required for use as a public drainage system. 
    Drainage facilities: A system of manmade structures designed to collect, convey, hold, divert or discharge stormwater, and includes stormwater sewers, canals, detention structures, and retention structures. 
    Drainage retention facilities: Structures designed to collect and prevent the release of a given volume of stormwater by complete on-site storage. 
    DRC: Development review committee of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    Drip line: An imaginary perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
    Drive-thru facilities: Any building, structure or portion thereof designed or used with a window or other opening in the wall of a principal or accessory structure through which goods or services are provided directly to customers who remain in motor vehicles thereby eliminating the need for such customers to exit the vehicle. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, drive-thru restaurants, banks, laundry or dry cleaning establishments and other uses of a similar nature; they shall also include facilities known as "take-out." 
    Driveway: An area that connects the parking aisles of a parking lot to the public right-of-way or a private street. 
    Driveway entrance: Portion of a driveway which immediately abuts the public right-of-way or a private street. 
    Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used to provide living facilities for one family. 
    Dwelling, multifamily: A dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, single-family: A dwelling containing only one dwelling unit. 
    Easement: A grant to the city or county by the owner of the land for the use of all or a portion of said land by others, including the public, for a specific purpose or purposes. 
    Educational uses: Activities and facilities of public and private primary or secondary schools, vocational and technical schools, and colleges and universities licensed by the Florida Department of Education, including the areas of buildings, campus open space, dormitories, recreational facilities or parking. 
    Electric sign: Any sign containing electric wiring. 
    Elevation: The height in feet above the mean sea level, referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Encroachment: For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, the placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Engineer of record: A professional engineer licensed in the State of Florida in responsible charge who provides supervisory direction and control authority over the preparation of construction plans. The plans submitted to the city must be signed and sealed by the engineer of record. 
    Environmentally sensitive lands: Lands with one or more of the following characteristics: steep slopes; floodplain; soils classified as having a high water table (such as hydric soils or soils subject to periodic inundation); soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion or highly acidic; soils classified as having high potential for radon emissions; soils classified as unique or prime agricultural land; land incapable of meeting percolation requirements; land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial use; estuaries; climax communities of native vegetation; aquifer recharge and discharge areas; sinkholes; barrier beaches and islands; lands which contain habitat or breeding grounds for species of endangered, threatened, or special concern status; caves; shellfish harvesting beds; land designated by state and/or federal agencies for preservation or conservation. 
    Erect a sign: To construct, reconstruct, build, relocate, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish; but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of message, or maintenance. 
    Erosion: The washing or wearing away by the action of wind or water. 
    Essential public utility services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. 
    Evacuation routes: Routes designated by county civil defense authorities or the regional evacuation plan, for the movement of persons to safety, in the event of a hurricane. 
    Event: Any planned occasion, activity, or observable occurrence on private or public property or right-of-way. Events include, but are not limited to, festivals, grand openings and elections, whether privately or publicly held. 
    Excavation: The hollowing out, removal by digging or leveling of any land, dirt, sand, clay, soil, rock, solid minerals or other soil materials. 
    Existing: The average condition immediately before development or redevelopment commences. 
    Existing use: The use of a lot, parcel or structure at the time of the enactment of this Code or any section thereof. 
    Existing building and existing structure: For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, chapter 12, article IX, division 3 of this LDC, any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 8, 1977. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, chapter 12, article IX, division 3 of this LDC, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 8, 1977. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Family: Any number of persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, provided that unless all members of the family are related to each other by blood, adoption, legal guardianship, or marriage, a family shall consist of no more than three (3) unrelated persons, except as specified by Florida Statutes to provide reasonable accommodations as licensed by the State for handicapped or disabled individuals. (Ord. No. 1089, 5-20-2003, Ord. No. 1202, 3-20-2007) 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Fence: A manmade barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to screen areas of land. 
    Fence (decorative): A continuous permanent or temporary structure designed primarily for aesthetic appeal and not intended or designed as a method of prohibiting entry to a property. 
    Filling: The deposit or burial of materials, such as land clearing debris, soil, rock or other solid minerals, onto any land. Does not include landfilling with garbage or other similar waste matter; landfilling. 
    Final survey: A survey of a completed structure containing all information and data included in the perimeter and foundation surveys. The final survey must also include measurements and tie-in data for all structures, including structures not previously mentioned such as swimming pools, decks, driveways, walkways, sheds, etc. If the property is a lot, plot, or parcel of land included in a subdivision or development for which a lot grading plan has been established, then the final survey must also include elevations at each corner of the property, elevations at the midpoint of each front, rear and side property line, slab elevation, and elevation of the centerline of any abutting roadway. 
    Flat sign: A sign erected parallel to the face of or on the outside wall of any building and supported throughout its length, by such wall, a sign that is, in any way, applied flat against a wall. 
    Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal water; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials: Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map: The official map on which the federal insurance administrator has delineated both the flood boundaries and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood hazard area: The greater of the following two (2) areas: 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the city's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): The official map of the city on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS): The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. 
    Flood protection elevation: The elevation of the base flood plus one foot. 
    Floodplain: Land which will be inundated by floods known to have occurred or reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and the accumulation or runoff of surface waters from rainfall. 
    Floodplain administrator: The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this section (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval: An official document or certificate issued by the city, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this section. 
    Floodplain management ordinance: Where this term appears in this Code of Ordinances, it shall refer to the specific provisions enumerated in chapter 12, article IX, division 3 of the LDC. 
    Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to properties and/or structures subject to flooding which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings. Floodproofing measures shall seal structures and keep them free from encroachment of floodwater below the level of the base flood. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway encroachment analysis: An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Floor area, gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two (2) buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR): A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located. 
    Florida Building Code: The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Fluorescent sign: A sign which is wholly or partially composed of background, letters, symbols or characters of fluorescent quality. 
    Force main: A pipe conducting sewage under pressure from a lift station. 
    Foundation inspection: That inspection of trenches and excavations, and forms for footings and slab, prior to slab and concrete placement. 
    Foundation survey: A perimeter survey which locates the slab, or foundation pilasters, on the lot, plot, or parcel, showing tie-in distances to the front, side and rear property lines. If other control lines have been established by the city or other governmental agencies; i.e., Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Hillsborough County Environmental Protection Commission, etc., as applicable to the property, those lines and slab tie-in distances must also be shown. If the slab is monolithic, the "foundation" survey must also show total square footage covered by the foundation, including all porches, breezeways, patios, garages, or carports, but shall not include pads for accessory structures such as air conditioners, pool pumps, etc. If the "foundation" survey pertains to a lot, plot, or parcel of land lying wholly, or in part, within the established 100-year floodplain, the survey must also show the elevation of the slab in relation to mean sea level, or in the case of pilasters, the lowest habitable floor level of the planned structure. 
    Freestanding sign: A sign which is attached to or is a part of an upright support which stands removed from any structure and the base of which is anchored in the ground. 
    Front setback: The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building, or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps. (The "front" setback must at least be equal to the "required front yard" which may be all, or part, of "front yard" as defined in this section. In case of curvilinear front property lines, setbacks are measured from the tangent connecting the arc of the side property lines.) 
    Frontage: The length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
    Functionally dependent use: For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Government sign: A sign, serving a public purpose, erected in conjunction with a city, county, state or federal building or facility. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Governmental agency: The United States or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; this state or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; any local government, or any department or commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof, any school board or other special district, authority, or governmental entity. 
    Ground sign: Any sign whose bottom edge rests upon the ground or whose foundation or supporting members have a combined horizontal dimension equal to or exceeding fifty (50) percent of the horizontal dimension of such sign. 
    Groundwater: Water beneath the surface of the ground whether or not flowing through known and definite channels. 
    Hanging identification sign: Any sign which is affixed to the underside of a covered walkway or canopy, associated with a business entrance and not primarily viewable from a street right-of-way. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Hazardous waste: Solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating irreversible illness or incapacitation reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated, or otherwise managed. 
    Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic resources: All areas, districts or sites containing properties listed on the Florida Master Site File, the National Register of Historic Places, or designated by the city as historically, architecturally, or archaeologically significant. 
    Historic structure: For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
    Hotel/motel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreation facilities. 
    Hurricane shelter: A structure designated by local officials as a place of safe refuge during a storm or hurricane. 
    Hurricane vulnerability zone: The areas delineated by the regional or local hurricane evacuation plan as requiring evacuation. The hurricane vulnerability zone shall include areas requiring evacuation in the event of a 100-year storm or Category 3 storm event. 
    Hydrograph: A graph of discharge versus time for a selected outfall point. 
    Hydrologic cycle: The movement of water through the environment on, above and below the surface of the earth. 
    Illuminated sign: Any sign having characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights, whether or not the lights are a part of the sign. 
    Impervious surface: An area covered by a material which does not permit infiltration or percolation of water into the ground. 
    Impervious surface ratio: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the total impervious surface of a site by the gross area of the site. 
    Improvement: Any manmade, immovable item which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to land. 
    In compliance: Consistent with the requirements of F.S. §§ 163.3177, 163.3178 and 163.3191, the state comprehensive plan, the appropriate regional policy plan. 
    Individual sewage disposal: The treatment of sewage in septic tanks and disposal of the effluent by absorption fields. 
    Individual water supply: A potable water supply from a well on an individual lot. 
    Industrial uses: The activities within land areas predominately connected with manufacturing, assembly, processing, or storage of products. 
    Infill development: The addition of new housing or other buildings on scattered vacant sites in a built-up area. 
    Informational sign: Any sign which is used for the purpose of indicating the location of any object, place or area, or providing explanatory or instructional information, and which does not contain any commercial advertising message or the name of the principal business or organization on site. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Infrastructure: Those manmade structures which serve the common needs of the population, such as: sewage disposal systems; potable water systems; potable water wells serving a system; solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; stormwater systems; utilities; docks; bridges and roadways. 
    Intensity: The degree to which land is occupied and/or the density of development. (There is no single measure of the intensity of land use. Rather, a land use is relatively more or less intense than another use. Generally, a particular use may be more intense due to one or more characteristics, such as traffic generated, amount of impervious surface, bulk of the structures, number of employees, density or nuisance such as pollution, noise, light, etc.) 
    Interagency hazard mitigation report: The recommendations of a team of federal, state, regional or local officials which address measures to reduce the potential for future losses and which is prepared in response to a Presidential Disaster Declaration. 
    Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Intersection: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines; or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles; or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) or more feet apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Junk: Old, dilapidated, scrap or abandoned materials that would not be considered to be economical to recycle, such as building materials, equipment, glass, appliances, furniture, parts of motor vehicles, etc. 
    Junkyard: Premises or portions thereof used for the storage or sale of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, paper, rags, metal, building materials, appliances, household furnishings, machinery, vehicles, equipment, or parts thereof. The storage for a period of two (2) or more months of two (2) or more wrecked or partly dismantled motor vehicles, parts of dismantled motor vehicles, or the sale of parts thereof, not capable of or not intended to be restored to highway operation condition shall also constitute a junkyard. For the purposes of this Code, such uses as automobile reclaiming businesses, automotive wrecking businesses, automotive salvage businesses and recycling centers shall be considered junkyards. 
    Land: The earth, water and air, above, below or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures customarily regarded as land. 
    Land development regulations: The city's zoning, subdivision, building and other regulations controlling the development of land. 
    Land use: The development that has occurred on the land, the development that is proposed by a developer on the land, or the use that is permitted or permissible on the land under an adopted comprehensive plan or element or portion thereof, land development regulations, or a land development code, as the context may indicate. 
    Landscape buffer: A strip of land five (5) feet in depth, landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other plant material and containing a hedge or other continuous landscape plantings of an evergreen variety, and so designed and planted so as to attain a prescribed height of between two (2) feet and six (6) feet with eighty (80) percent opacity within two (2) years of the date of planting. At time of initial planting, the hedge or other evergreen material shall be no less than two (2) feet in height. All landscape buffers shall contain one tree for every forty (40) linear feet of buffer, and must be continuously maintained and equipped with an adequate, functional, automatic sprinkler system. Trees shall be planted along the inside of the landscape hedge when the buffer is installed along any interior property line; i.e., buffer faces in. Landscape buffers face out when installed along any exterior side. For purposes of this definition, an "exterior side" is any side facing a public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Landscape buffer (modified): A buffer meeting all of the requirements and standards of a "landscape buffer," except that a four-foot-high chainlink fence is added on the outside (adjoining property side) of a six-foot landscape hedge. Modified landscape buffers may be used in lieu of solid buffers along rear lot lines of commercial properties abutting property zoned and used as residential. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Landscaping: The improvement of appearance or beautification of an area by the planting of trees, grass, shrubs or other plant materials, or by the alteration of the contours of the ground. 
    Leisure services department: The Temple Terrace Leisure Services Department. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC): An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the city's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Level of service: An indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be provided by a facility based on and related to the operational characteristics of the facility as established in the city's comprehensive plan. Level of service shall indicate the capacity per unit of demand for each public facility. 
    Licensing entity or entities: The following are licensing entities which are authorized to license the various state allowed "residential and related health care facilities" to serve a variety of residents that utilize such facilities: department of elderly affairs, agency for persons with disabilities, department of juvenile justice, department of children and families, or agency for health care administration, consistent with F.S. chs. 381-430. 
    Limited access facility: A roadway especially designed for through traffic, and over, from, or to which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no greater than a limited right or easement of access. 
    Local peacetime emergency plan: The plans prepared by the county civil defense or county emergency management agency addressing weather-related natural hazards and manmade disasters except nuclear power plant accidents and war. The plan covers hazard mitigation, emergency preparedness, emergency response, emergency recovery and in coastal counties, hurricane evacuation. 
    Local planning agency: The agency designated to prepare the comprehensive plan pursuant to the Florida Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Act (F.S. § 163.2511 et seq.) (Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission). 
    Local street: A roadway providing service which is of relatively low traffic volume, short average trip length or minimal through traffic movements, and high volume land access for abutting property. 
    Lot: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise allowed by law. 
    Lot area: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any rights-of-way. 
    Lot, butt: A butt-lot is a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets which do not intersect. 
    Lot, corner: A corner lot is a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersections. 
    Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lines of a lot. 
    Lot line: The legal boundary line of a lot. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the Circuit Court of Hillsborough County, or any parcel of land, whether or not part of a subdivision, that has been officially recorded by a deed in the office of the clerk, provided such lot was of a size that met the minimum dimensions for lots in the district in which it was located at the time of recording or was recorded prior to the effective date of zoning in the area where the lot is located and met the requirements of the subdivision regulations in effect at the time of the recording. 
    Lot split: Is the division or redivision of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. (Ord. No. 1076, 9-24-2002) 
    Lot width: The width of a lot is the distance between the side lines thereof if such side lines are parallel to each other; if side lines are not parallel, width shall be construed as mean width. 
    Lot, zoning: A parcel of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a principal use and meeting all the requirements of this LDC for a lot in the zoning district in which said land parcel is located. A zoning lot may be comprised of multiple tracts and/or parcels when the proposed developer provides a legal instrument/agreement, satisfactory to the city council, demonstrating unified control over all internal tracts and/or parcels and identifies a responsible party for the long-term maintenance of any and all common ownership tract(s), parcel(s) and/or facilities proposed within the zoning lot. (A zoning lot need not necessarily coincide with a "lot of record" as herein defined.) (Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005) 
    Low and moderate income families: Lower income families as defined under the Section 8 Assisted Housing Program, or families whose annual income does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the medium income for the area. The term "families" includes households. 
    Lowest floor: For the purposes of administration of the LDC except the floodplain management ordinance, the top surface of the lowest area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of a building. For slab-on-grade type of buildings or buildings with basements, the top surface of the slab or basement floor would constitute the lowest floor. For footing, foundation walls or pile type buildings with crawl spaces under the building without basements, the top surface of the finished flooring above the horizontal joist, beam or other supporting member would constitute the lowest floor. For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. 
    Major deviation: A deviation, other than a minor deviation, from the development order under which a development activity was authorized. 
    Major public facility: Any publicly owned facility of more than local significance. 
    Major trip generators or attractors: Concentrated areas of intense land use or activity that produces or attracts a significant number of local trip ends. 
    Mansard roof sign: A sign located on or affixed to a mansard roof. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Manufactured home: For the purposes of administration of the LDC except the floodplain management ordinance, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation, and connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed in use (other than for sale) on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer. 
    For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Manufactured housing: Manufactured housing has the following features or characteristics: 
(1)  Mass produced in a factory; 
(2)  Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when connected to required utilities; 
(3)  Either an independent, individual building or a module for combination with other elements to form a building on the site. 
    Market value: The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this LDC, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    Marquee: A structure projecting from and supported by a building which extends beyond the building line or property line and fully or partially covers a sidewalk, public entrance or other pedestrian way. 
    Mass transit: Passenger services provided by public, private or nonprofit entities such as the following surface transit modes: commuter rail, rail rapid transit, light rail transit, light guideway transit, express bus, and local fixed route bus. 
    MCEB: The city's municipal code enforcement board. 
    Mean high water line: The line formed by the intersection of the tidal plane of mean high tide with the shore. 
    Microbrewery: An establishment in which the principal purpose is the production of malt liquors or beer, including the fermentation, bottling and distribution of beer, and which includes accessory uses including tasting rooms that are tourist-oriented, such as tours of the microbrewery, retails sales of beer and related food products, etc. 
    Minerals: All solid minerals, including clay, gravel, phosphate, rock, lime, shells (excluding live shellfish), stone, sand, heavy minerals, and any rare earths, which are contained in the soils or waters of the state. 
    Minor deviation: A deviation that is within the limits set out below and that is necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual development and not reasonably anticipated during the initial approval process: 
(1)  Alteration of the location of any road, walkway, landscaping or structure by not more than five (5) feet. 
(2)  Reduction of the total amount of open space by not more than five (5) percent, or reduction of the yard area or open space associated with any single structure by not more than five (5) percent; provided that such reduction does not permit the required open space to be less than that required by this Code. 
    Modified landscape buffer: A buffer meeting all of the requirements and standards of a "landscape buffer," except that a four-foot-high chainlink fence is added on the outside (adjoining property side) of a six-foot landscape hedge. Modified landscape buffers may be used in lieu of solid buffers along rear lot lines of commercial properties abutting property zoned and used as residential. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Modified solid buffer: A buffer meeting all of the requirements and standards of a "solid buffer" except height. Modified solid buffers shall be four (4) feet in height, unless specifically permitted at some other height less than six (6) feet. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Modified wood fence buffer: A buffer meeting all of the requirements and standards of a "wood fence buffer" except height. Modified wood fence buffers shall be four (4) feet in height, unless specifically permitted at some other height less than six (6) feet. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Motion picture projection sign: A sign which is created by the projection or display of light and movement against a building, structure or other object. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    Motor vehicle undercarriage service center: An establishment in the business of performing automotive repairs, servicing mufflers, tailpipes, brakes and shock absorbers, performing oil, lube and filter work and related associated functions. Any establishment which solely or principally performs body or upholstery repair or work or which solely or principally stores vehicles shall be deemed to be an auto body repair shop or public garage and not a motor vehicle undercarriage service center or service station. 
    Moveable sign: Any sign, display, outline or advertisement from or upon any type or kind of material having characters, symbols, pictures, letters or figures that are not an integral part of a building or permanent structure, including, but not limited to, those signs, displays, outlines and advertisements attached by wires, hangers, brackets or other similar devices which can be removed without damaging the building or permanent structure to which they are attached. 
    M.S.L.: The abbreviation for mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For purposes of this Code, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Multifamily residential connection: A utility connection to a structure or group of structures, on one individual, defined parcel of property (zoning lot) which contains or may contain residential dwelling units for more than one family, e.g., multifamily connections for duplexes, triplexes, apartments, condominiums, mobile home parks, campsites and related uses, but not those for motels, hotels and roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
    Multiple occupancy complex: A commercial use; i.e., any use other than residential or agricultural, consisting of a parcel of property, or parcel of contiguous properties, existing as a unified or coordinated project, with a building or buildings housing more than one occupant. 
    Municipal code enforcement board (MCEB): The board created under the authority of F.S. ch. 162 to provide a mechanism to enforce the technical codes and regulations established by ordinance of the city. 
    Natural drainage features: The naturally occurring features including rate, volume and direction of flow of an area which accommodates the flow of stormwater. 
    Natural reservations: Areas designated for conservation purposes, and operated by contractual agreement with or managed by a federal, state, regional or local government or nonprofit agency such as: national parks, state parks, lands purchased under the Save our Coast, Conservation and Recreation Lands or Save Our Rivers programs, sanctuaries, preserves, monuments, archaeological sites, historic sites, wildlife management areas, national seashores, and Outstanding Florida Waters. 
    Natural resources: Land, air, water, groundwater, drinking water supplies, fish and their habitats, wildlife and their habitats, biota and other such resources belonging to, managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Natural systems: Systems which predominantly consist of or are used by those communities of plants, animals, bacteria and other flora and fauna which occur endogenously on the land, in the soil or in the water. 
    Neighborhood park: A park which serves the population of a neighborhood and is generally accessible by bicycle or pedestrian ways. 
    Neon sign: A sign composed of visually exposed neon tubes which are used to create a word or picture to advertise or inform. (Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994) 
    New construction: For the purposes of administration of the LDC except the floodplain management ordinance, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an applicable provision of this LDC. For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after July 8, 1977 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision: For the purposes of administration of the LDC except the floodplain management ordinance, a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets is completed on or after the effective date of an applicable provision of this LDC. 
    For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 8, 1977. 
    Newspaper of general circulation: A newspaper published at least on a weekly basis and printed in the language most commonly spoken in the area within which it circulates, but does not include a newspaper intended primarily for members of a particular professional or occupational group, a newspaper whose primary function is to carry legal notices, or a newspaper that is given away primarily to distribute advertising. 
    Nonconforming structure or use: A lawful use of land or structure existing at the time of the passage of an applicable provision of this LDC which does not conform to the provisions, requirements and regulations of this LDC. 
    Nonpoint source pollution: Any source of water pollution that is not a point source. 
    Nonvehicular ingress and egress easement: An easement entitling the holder of the easement to control access across the easement by motor vehicles. 
    Oath: The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Object: For purposes of the historic preservation regulations in this LDC, a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be by nature of design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Objective: A specific, measurable, intermediate end that is achievable and marks progress toward a goal. 
    Occupant (occupancy): A commercial use; i.e., any use other than residential or agricultural. 
    Office building: A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity as distinguished from residential buildings, recreational facilities, commercial, heavy industrial or retail space; however, an office building may include ancillary services for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand. 
    Office complex: A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
    Officer(s): A duly sworn police official. 
    Official traffic control device: All signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Official traffic control signal: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
    Off-street loading area: An area provided off the public right-of-way for the temporary parking of trucks being loaded or unloaded. 
    Open spaces: Undeveloped lands suitable for passive recreation or conservation uses. 
    Ordinary maintenance: Work which does not require a construction permit and that is done to repair damage or to prevent deterioration or decay of a building or structure or part thereof as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the damage, deterioration, or decay. 
    Other city officials or officers: Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only; i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Temple Terrace. 
    Out parcel: An area of no less than ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet and a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet at the property line located within a shopping center as defined in this Code that shares a common parking lot with the other buildings and establishments within said shopping center but which is separated from the principal building and establishment by a parking area of at least seventy-five (75) feet. 
    Outdoor storage: The storage of any materials, goods, merchandise, equipment or vehicles outside of a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage excludes junk and principal-use retail displays of operable commercial vehicles, non-commercial vehicles and like items, products which are moved indoors during non-business hours and products which cannot practically be moved indoors due to their size. 
    Owner: A person who, or entity which, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity (including without limitation, an authorized agent, attorney, executor, personal representative or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property in question, or a tenant, if the tenancy is chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property; or, the requisite owner of a vehicle, as determined by the division of highway safety and motor vehicles (or corresponding agency) of the several states. 
    Owner, tenant, consumer: Shall include the executors, administrators, successors and assigns of the party referred to, and the covenants and agreements contained in any contract between the water department and its consumers shall be binding and inure to the benefit of the successors, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns of the respective parties thereto. The consumer is considered the owner, as distinguished from a tenant, when the property serviced is recorded or stands of record in the consumer's name. 
    Painted sign: A sign painted upon the exterior of any building, structure, fence, wall, sidewalk, window or surface. 
    Paratransit: Transit services, including ridesharing, car or van pools, demand responsive buses, and other public transit services, which are characterized by their nonscheduled, nonfixed route nature. 
    Parcel of land: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its locations and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
    Park or parking: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers as may be permitted by law under this LDC. 
    Park personnel: Those individuals employed by the Temple Terrace Leisure Services Department. 
    Park property: All areas, buildings, locations and facilities described in the definition of Parks, parkways, recreational areas. 
    Park trailer: A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in section 320.01, F.S.] 
    Parking aisle: The area immediately adjacent to the car parking stalls which permits maneuvering of the cars entering and leaving a parking stall, and which connects the parking stalls to the driveway. 
    Parking ticket: The official form authorized by the city manager or designee and used by the chief of police or officers to notify that the owner's vehicle is parked, stopped or standing in violation of the terms of this LDC. 
    Parks, parkways, recreational areas: Parks, wayside parks, parkways, playgrounds, recreation fields, auditoriums, ranges, and buildings, lakes, streams, canals, lagoons, waterways, water areas, and beaches therein, and all public facilities conducted on grounds, buildings or structures in the city which are under control of or assigned for upkeep, maintenance or operation by the Temple Terrace Leisure Services Department. 
    Perimeter survey: A perimeter survey is a metes and bounds description of the perimeter of a lot, plot, or parcel of land; a description of the perimeter based upon section lines and distances, or other means of delineating the perimeter boundaries of a piece of land, prepared by a registered surveyor in accordance with standards established by the State of Florida. For purposes of this LDC, a perimeter survey must also show all rights-of-way, easements, and manmade structures above or below the surface of the ground existing on the property. 
    Permanent: Designed, constructed and intended for more than short-term use. 
    Person with disabilities: Any person who has been issued an exemption entitlement parking permit pursuant to F.S. § 320.0848 and who is: 
(1)  Severely physically disabled and has permanent mobility problems which substantially impairs the person's ability to ambulate; or 
(2)  Certified as legally blind. 
    Personal property: Includes every species of property except real property. 
    Pervious area: Area maintained in its natural condition, or covered by a material that permits infiltration or percolation of water into the ground. 
    Plan: Is the city's comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto; and showing, among other things, existing and proposed streets, highways, routes of railroads and transit lines; parks, playgrounds, and other open spaces; sites for public buildings and structures; districts for residence, business, recreation, and special districts for other purposes; limited development districts for purposes of conservation, water supply, sanitation, drainage, protection against floods, location of public utilities whether publicly or privately owned including, but not limited to, sewerage and water supply systems; zoning districts; and other planning features. 
    Planning commission: Is the joint Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission. 
    Plat: Is a map depicting the division or subdivision of lands into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts, or other portions thereof, however the same may be designated. Used as a verb, the word "plat" in whatever tense used, shall mean to divide or subdivide land into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts, or other portions thereof, however, the same may be designated and may include the terms "replat," "amended plat," "revised plat" or "final plat." 
    Platted land: Any land which can be referenced to a plat. 
    Playground: A recreation area with play apparatus. 
    Plot: One or more lots, blocks, or parcels of land; in any combination; under single ownership; recorded as contiguous to one another, or through one to another, on either a plat or in a unifying deed. 
    Plot plan: A plan for development of a plot, or the site plan for construction of new facilities on a single "plot." 
    Point source pollution: Any source of water pollution that constitutes a discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
    Policy: The way in which programs and activities are conducted to achieve an identified goal. 
    Political sign: Any sign displaying information pertaining to any candidate for election to municipal, county, state or federal office or pertaining to any political party, cause or issue. 
    Pollutant: Any substance, contaminant, noise, or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
    Pollution: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere, ground or water of any substances, contaminants, noise or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water, in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
    Portable, sandwich or snipe sign: Any sign, double-or-single-faced which is portable and which may be moved readily from place to place and any small sign of any material including paper, cardboard, wood and metal, which is tacked, nailed, or attached, in any way, to trees or other objects; or, any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported by trailer or on its own wheels, including such signs even though the wheels may be removed and the remaining chassis or support structure converted to an A or T frame sign and attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
    Potable water: Water which is satisfactory for drinking and culinary purposes and which meets the quality standards of F.A.C. ch. 62-550. 
    Potable water facilities: A system of structures designed to collect, treat, or distribute potable water, and includes water wells, treatment plants, reservoirs and distribution mains. 
    Premises: The term premises shall mean separate habitations, institutions or places of business. 
    Private recreation sites: Sites owned by private, commercial or nonprofit entities available to the public for purposes of recreational use. 
    Private road, driveway or way: Any street, road, avenue, drive, cul-de-sac or other thoroughfare used for vehicular traffic and any easement or right-of-way that provides access to more than one parcel or lot which has not been dedicated to the public and which is not maintained by a government agency. This term shall include, but is not limited to, roadways or driveways in mobile home parks, apartments, condominiums, commercial or industrial complexes, which have been named and signed in accordance with this Code. 
    PROF development parcel: A parcel or tract of land located within a zoning lot in the PROF zoning district, occupied, or to be occupied by a permitted principal, accessory, or a conditional use, whether such zoning lot is under single- or multiple fee-simple ownership(s). This term shall be used in instances where the proposed development concept envisions a lot or parcel, or multiple lots or parcels containing common facilities that support or are required for the permitted principal, accessory, or conditional uses on a zoning lot comprising the proposed development. A PROF development parcel includes, but is not limited to, a parcel within a proposed condominium development, as such term (condominium) is defined in, and regulated by Florida Statutes, as well as to a parcel within a development wherein individual buildings are in fee simple ownership but common facilities are owned by a property owners' association. (Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005) 
    Project: The particular structures and improvements proposed on a particular land area which are part of a common plan of development and may include the subdivision of land. 
    Projected street name and numbering system scheme: All approved site plans, including amendments thereto, which contain projected street names and addresses thereto, although no construction or development has occurred on the projected street, public or private way. 
    Projecting sign: Any sign which projects, at any angle, from the outside wall of any building or structure, excluding wall signs as defined herein. 
    Protected environmentally sensitive area: An environmentally sensitive area designated for protection in the conservation element of the city or county comprehensive plan. 
    Protected tree: Any tree listed in Table 1 of section 12-772 having a twelve (12) inch or greater D.B.H. on single-family residential platted land or at least a five (5) inch diameter at D.B.H. on commercial, office, institutional, multifamily, research corporate park lands, or unplatted residential lands. For the purpose of this Code, all palms with at least four and one-half (41/2) feet of clear trunk between the ground level and the lowest branch are declared to be protected trees. The definition of a protected tree shall not include grand trees which are defined herein as having a diameter of twenty-four (24) inches or greater at D.B.H. 
    Protective (restrictive) covenants: Private contracts entered into between the developer and purchaser(s) which constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a development for the benefit of property owners, and provide a mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values. 
    Public access: The ability of the public to physically reach, enter or use recreational sites including beaches and shores. 
    Public buildings and grounds: Structures or lands that are owned, leased, or operated by a government entity, such as civic and community centers, hospitals, libraries, police stations, fire stations, and government administration buildings. 
    Public facilities or improvements: Major capital improvements, including, but not limited to, transportation, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, educational, parks and recreational, and health systems and facilities for which a government entity is responsible for the maintenance and operation. 
    Public notice or due public notice: As used in connection with the phrase "public hearing" or "hearing to be held after due public notice," means publication in conformity with F.S. § 166.04. 
    Public parking space: Any parking space which the owner, lessee or person in control of such property provides for use by members of the public other than employees of such owner, lessee or person, including, but not limited to, parking spaces at shopping centers, stores, offices, motels, malls, restaurants and marinas. 
    Public recreation sites: Sites owned or leased on a long-term basis by a federal, state, regional or local government agency for purposes of recreational use. 
    Public service facility: The use of land, buildings, or structures by a public utility, railroad, or governmental agency, including water treatment plants or pumping stations, electrical substations, telephone exchanges, and other similar public service structures, but not including land, buildings, or structures devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials. 
    Public use facility: The use of land, buildings, or structures by a municipal or other governmental agency to provide protective, administrative, social, and recreational services directly to the general public, including police and fire stations, municipal buildings, public health clinics and any other public facility providing the above services, but not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and not including cultural facilities or public service facilities. 
    Public way: Any public road or right-of-way either paved or unpaved, which is intended for vehicular traffic and that has been dedicated to a government entity for the purpose of vehicular traffic and for use as a thoroughfare for vehicular traffic, excluding, however, service entrances or driveways. 
    Pylon sign: Any tall, single pedestal or column sign. 
    Rate: Volume per unit of time. 
    Real property: All lands, including improvements and fixtures thereon and property of any nature appurtenant thereto or used in connection therewith, and every estate, interest, and right, legal or equitable, therein, including terms of years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage, or otherwise and the indebtedness secured by such liens. 
    Rear setback: The distance between the rear property line and the rear line of a building, or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered patios and decks. (The "rear" setback must at least be equal to the "required rear yard" which may be all, or part of the "rear yard.") 
    Reasonable accommodations: Under the Fair Housing Act, a reasonable accommodation is one necessary for the disabled person to have an equal opportunity to enjoy the benefits of their housing choice by ameliorating the effects of the disability without imposing any undue burdens on the housing provider. 
    Recharge: The inflow of water into a project, site aquifer, drainage basin or facility. 
    Recreation: The pursuit of leisure time activities occurring in an outdoor setting. 
    Recreation facility: A component of a recreation site used by the public such as a trail, court, athletic field or swimming pool. 
    Recreational uses: Activities within areas where recreation occurs. 
    Recreational vehicle: A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [see in section 320.01, F.S.) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Recyclable metal recovery facilities: A facility for the recovery of various metal material or parts of items whose value is in the salvage of scrap metals for future reduction to its raw state. Such items include but are not limited to inoperable machinery, appliances, automotive vehicles, etc., excluding small household items such as aluminum cans and similar items. 
    Regional park: A park which is designated to serve two (2) or more communities. 
    Regional planning agency: The agency designated by the state land planning agency to exercise responsibilities under law in a particular region of the state (Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council). 
    Registered land surveyor: A surveyor currently registered to practice land surveying in the State of Florida. 
    Regulatory floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be unobstructed in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
    Remove: To relocate, cut down, damage, poison, or in any other manner destroy, or cause to be destroyed, a tree. 
    Repeat violation: A violation of a provision of an ordinance by a person whom the municipal code enforcement board has previously found to have violated the same provision within five (5) years prior to the current violation. 
    Residential and related health care facilities: For purposes of this Code, these facilities include the following uses numbered within this definition, as further defined by Title XXIX Public Health, F.S. chs. 381-408, and Title XXX Social Welfare, F.S. chs. 409-430, as amended. 
    The following are examples of, but not limited to, the types of facilities that fall under this general use: 
(1)  Adult congregate living facility (ACLF) or congregated living facility (CLF): See assisted living facility (ALF). 
(2)  Adult day care centers: Any building, buildings, or part of a building, whether operated for profit or not, in which is provided through its ownership or management, for part of a day, basic services to three (3) or more persons who are eighteen (18) years of age or older, who are not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage, and who require such services, in accordance with F.S. chs. 408 and 429, as amended. 
(3)  Adult family-care home (AFCH) : A full-time, family-type living arrangement, in a private home, under which a person who owns or rents the home provides room, board, and personal care, on a 24-hour basis, for no more than five (5) disabled adults or frail elders who are not relatives, in accordance with F.S. chs. 408 and 429, as amended. 
(4)  Assisted living facility (ALF): Any building or buildings, section or distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other residential facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide housing, meals, and one or more personal services for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or administrator, in accordance with F.S. chs. 408 and 429, as amended. There are three (3) levels of assisted living facilities: level 1 is between one to five (5) residents/beds, level 2 is between six (6) and fifteen (15) residents/beds, and level 3 is sixteen (16) residents/beds or more. 
(5)  Community residential home (CRH): A dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the department of elderly affairs, the agency for persons with disabilities, the department of juvenile justice, or the department of children and family services or licensed by the agency of health care administration which provides a living environment for seven (7) to fourteen (14) unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents, in accordance with F.S. ch. 419, as amended. There are two (2) levels of community residential homes: level 1 is between one to six (6) residents/beds and level 2 is between seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents/beds. See additional criteria and approval for CRH with one to six (6) residents in single-family zoning districts in sections 12-225 through 12-228, seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents in multi-family zoning districts in sections 12-229 and 12-230, and CRH within planned residential communities (PRC) in section 12-235. 
(6)  Foster care facility or home: A residential facility licensed by the state which provides a family living environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility may not be more than three (3) residents. 
(7)  Group home facility or home: A residential facility licensed by the state which provides a family living environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such a facility shall be at least four (4) but not more than fifteen (15) residents. It shall not include rooming or boarding homes, clubs, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or convents, hotels, residential treatment facilities, nursing homes, or emergency shelters. 
(8)  Intermediate care facility for the developmentally disabled (ICFDD): A facility providing room and board and personal care for persons who have developmental disabilities. 
(9)  Long-term care facility: This is another general term used by the state to describe what the city has termed "residential and related health facility" and the following are examples but are not limited to: nursing home facility or home, assisted living facility (ALF), adult family-care home (AFCH), residential child-caring agencies, intermediate care facility for the developmentally disabled (ICFDD), board and care facility, or any other similar residential adult care facility, in accordance with Title XXIX and XXX, F.S. chs. 381-430, as amended. 
(10)  Nursing home facility or home: Any institution, building, residence, private home, or other place, whether operated for profit or not, including a place operated by a county or municipality, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for a period exceeding twenty-four-hour nursing care, personal care, or custodial care for three (3) or more persons not related to the owner or manager by blood or marriage, who by reason of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age require such services, but does not include any place providing care and treatment primarily for the acutely ill. A facility offering services for fewer than three (3) persons is within the meaning of this definition if it holds itself out to the public to be an establishment which regularly provides such services, in accordance with F.S. chs. 400 and 408, as amended. 
(11)  Planned residential community (PRC): A local government-approved, planned unit development that is under unified control, is planned and developed as a whole, has a minimum gross lot area of eight (8) acres, and has amenities that are designed to serve residents with a developmental disability as defined in F.S. § 393.063, as amended, but that shall also provide housing options for other individuals. The community shall provide choices with regard to housing arrangements, support providers, and activities. The residents' freedom of movement within and outside the community may not be restricted. For the purposes of this paragraph, local government approval must be based on criteria that include, but are not limited to, compliance with appropriate land use, zoning, and building codes. The planned residential community (PRC) shall be in accordance to F.S. ch. 419, as amended. 
(12)  Residential habitation center: A facility providing room and board and personal care for residents for supervision and training with acquisition, retention, or improvement in skills related to activities of daily living, such as personal hygiene sills, homemaking skills, and social and adaptive skills necessary to enable the individual to reside in the community. 
(13)  Residential treatment facility: A facility providing residential care and treatment to individuals exhibiting symptoms of mental illness who are in need of a twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-a-week structured living environment, respite care, or long-term community placement. 
(14)  Residential treatment facility for children and adolescents: A twenty-four-hour residential program, including a therapeutic group home, which provides mental health services to emotionally disturbed children or adolescents as defined in F.S. § 394.492(5) or (6), and which is a private for-profit or not-for-profit corporation licensed by the agency which officers a variety of treatment modalities in a more restrictive setting. 
(15)  Transitional living facility: A site where specialized health care services are provided, including, but not limited to, rehabilitative services, treatment centers or facilities, community reentry training, aids for independent living, and counseling to spinal-cord-injured persons and head-injured persons consistent with the requirements of F.S. § 400.9986, as amended. This term does not include a hospital licensed under F.S. ch. 395, as amended, or any federally operated hospital or facility. 
    Residential area: An area of land lawfully used, designated in the comprehensive plan, and approved in a master plan, development order, or other final development approval for residential purposes. 
    Residential uses: Activities within land areas used predominantly for housing. 
    Restaurant: A building, or part thereof, in which food is prepared and sold for consumption by patrons seated within said building or upon a terrace, patio, or balcony attached thereto, and accessible to patrons solely from within said building. 
    Retaining wall: A wall built to resist lateral soil and subsoil pressure and erosion; a wall built to sustain the face of a natural bank of earth. 
    Retention: The collection and storage of runoff without subsequent discharge to surface waters. 
    Right-of-way: Land in which the state, a county, or a municipality owns the fee simple title or has an easement dedicated or required for a transportation or utility use. 
    Road, roadway: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway," as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Roadway functional classification: The assignment of roads into categories according to the character of service they provide in relation to the total road network. Basic functional categories include limited access facilities, arterial roads, and collector roads, which may be subcategorized into principal, major or minor levels. Those levels may be further grouped into urban and rural categories. 
    Roof: The outside top covering of a building. (Ord. No. 780, 8-6-1991) 
    Roof line: A horizontal line intersecting the highest point or points of a roof. 
    Roof sign: A sign placed above the roof line of a building and against a roof slope of less than forty-five (45) degrees (see roof, mansard). (Ord. No. 780, 8-6-1991) 
    Roof, type of: 
    Roof, flat: A roof which is not pitched and the surface of which is parallel to the ground. 
    Roof, gable: A ridged roof forming a gable at both ends of the building. 
    Roof, gambrel: A gabled roof with two (2) slopes on each side, the lower steeper than the upper. 
    Roof, hip: A roof with sloping ends and sides. 
    Roof, mansard: A roof with two (2) slopes on each of four (4) sides, the lower steeper than the upper. The lower roof has an angle greater than forty-five (45) degrees and derives part of its support from the building wall. It is attached to a low slope (upper) roof and extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters (3/4) of the length of a side building wall. For purposes of this LDC, a low slope roof shall mean any roof which has a pitch less than three (3) inches rise per twelve (12) inches horizontal; and a "gambrel" roof shall be classified as a mansard roof. 
    Roof, shed: A roof with one slope. (Ord. No. 780, 8-6-1991) 
    Rotating sign: Any sign which rotates or revolves. 
    Runoff coefficient: Ratio of the amount of rain which runs off a surface to that which falls on it; a factor from which run-off can be calculated. 
    Sanitary sewer facilities: Structures or systems designed for the collection, transmission, treatment, or disposal of sewage and includes trunk mains, interceptors, treatment plants and disposal systems. 
    Sanitary sewer interceptor: A sewerage conduit which connects directly to, and transmits sewage to, a treatment plant. 
    Sanitary sewer trunk main: A sewerage conduit which connects directly to, and transmits sewage to, an interceptor. 
    Seasonal population: Part-time inhabitants who utilize, or may be expected to utilize, public facilities or services, but are not residents. Seasonal population shall include tourists, migrant farm workers, and other short-term and long-term visitors. 
    Seat: A seating accommodation for one person; each two-foot length, or major fraction thereof, of a bench, pew, or similar seating facility shall be considered as one seat for the purposes of this Code. 
    Sediment: The mineral or organic particulate material that is in suspension or has settled in surface waters or groundwaters. 
    Sensitive area: Those functions, described in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan, that justify designating an area as environmentally sensitive. 
    Service station: An establishment conducted for the business of fueling and lubricating motor vehicles. Incidental motor vehicle services such as washing, cleaning, polishing, tire changing and repair, battery recharging and replacement and other minor mechanical, electrical, body or upholstery repair or work and the like, including, but not limited to, the sale of tires, batteries and incidental vehicle accessories, may be performed as a secondary or accessory function at a service station; provided, however, that no major mechanical, electrical, body or upholstery work or repair and no storage of vehicles shall occur in a service station. Any establishment which solely or principally performs body or upholstery repair or work, or which solely or principally stores vehicles shall be deemed to be an auto body repair shop or public storage and not a motor vehicle undercarriage service center or service station. 
    Services: The programs and employees determined necessary by local government to provide adequate operation and maintenance of public facilities and infrastructure as well as those educational, health care, social and other programs necessary to support the programs, public facilities, and infrastructure set out in the local plan or required by local, state, or federal law. 
    Setbacks: A setback is the distance between a natural or manmade feature (such as a road or a body of water) and the closest portion of a building, including any projection or overhang of the building. 
    Sewage: Wastewater. 
    Sewer: A pipe located in a public right-of-way or easement which transports sewage. The term sewer, as used herein, includes manholes, connections, specials and all other appurtenances. 
    Shopping center: A group of two (2) or more stores, service establishments or businesses which are planned to serve a community or neighborhood and which are adjacent to and utilize a common parking area or areas. Shopping centers need not be under single ownership. 
    Side setback: The distance between the side property line and the side line of a building, or any projection thereof; excluding uncovered patios and decks, air conditioners, wells, pumps, motors, water purifiers, and other utility systems or appurtenances. (The "side" setback must at least be equal to "required side yard" which may be all, or part, of the "side" yard.) 
    Sidewalk: That portion of a street between the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Sight or visibility triangle: The area on each side of an accessway at the intersection of the accessway and any public right-of-way pavement line, defined as a triangle with an apex at the point of intersection and two (2) sides thirty (30) feet long extending from the apex along the edge of the accessway and the pavement line and with a third side connecting the ends of the first two (2). 
    Sign: Includes any written or drawn object, device, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, structure or part thereof, used to advertise, identify, attract or promote the interests of any person, object, institution, product, service, event or location, when the same is placed in view of the general public and is either located out of doors or in a window as defined herein. The sign regulations contained herein shall apply to the face of the sign, its supports, braces, guys, anchors and similar related structures and devices. Types of signs and related structures and accessories include (see definitions): 
(1)  Activated sign. 
(2)  Animated sign. 
(3)  Awning or canopy sign. 
(4)  Banner. 
(5)  Beacon, spot or floodlight. 
(6)  Billboard. 
(7)  Changeable copy sign. 
(8)  Clock-temperature sign. 
(9)  Directional sign. 
(10)  Directory sign. 
(11)  Double-faced sign. 
(12)  Flat sign. 
(13)  Fluorescent sign. 
(14)  Freestanding sign. 
(15)  Ground sign. 
(16)  Illuminated sign. 
(17)  Informational sign. 
(18)  Moveable sign. 
(19)  Painted sign. 
(20)  Permanent window sign. 
(21)  Political sign. 
(22)  Portable, sandwich or snipe sign. 
(23)  Projecting sign. 
(24)  Pylon sign. 
(25)  Real estate sign. 
(26)  Roof sign. 
(27)  Rotating sign. 
(28)  Sound amplifying equipment. 
(29)  Temporary window sign. 
(30)  Wall sign. 
    Sign face: The part of a sign that is or may be used for copy. 
    Sign structure: Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
    Significant adverse effect: Any modification, alteration, or effect upon a protected environmentally sensitive area which measurably reduces the area's beneficial functions as delineated in the conservation element of the city/county comprehensive plan. 
    Silviculture: The development and/or maintenance of a forest or wooded preserve. 
    Single-family residential connection: A utility connection to a structure which is intended for occupancy by a single-family and which is situated on an individual, defined parcel of property (zoning lot), irrespective of whether the structure has common walls with an adjacent structure. 
    Site: Generally, any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land that are in one ownership, or in diverse ownership but contiguous, and which are to be developed as a single unit, subdivision, or project. For purposes of the historic preservation regulations in this Code, a site is the location of a significant event, activity, building, structure, or archeological resource where the significance of the location and any archeological remains outweigh the significance of any existing structures. 
    Site plan: The development plan for one or more lots or parcels on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot(s) or parcel(s) including all of the requirements set forth in this LDC. 
    Social club: A chartered membership organization. 
    Solid buffer: A strip of land five (5) feet in depth, landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other plant material, and containing a wall constructed with individually laid brick or combination of brick and/or other maintenance-free material. A solid buffer shall be at least six (6) feet, and not more than six and one-half (61/2) feet in height anywhere along the length of the outside face when measured from final, finished grade, unless restricted by another provision in this LDC. Certain prefabricated concrete walls are an acceptable substitute but must be approved on an individual basis. Trees shall be planted along the outside of buffer walls along rights-of-way, and inside the walls along interior property lines at a dispersal rate of one tree per forty (40) linear feet of wall, or fraction thereof. As an alternative the required trees may be clustered in landscape areas along the wall so long as each landscaped area is no smaller than one hundred (100) square feet and landscaped areas are not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Solid buffer (modified): A buffer meeting all the requirements and standards of a "solid buffer" except height. Modified solid buffers shall be four (4) feet in height, unless specifically permitted at some other height less than six (6) feet. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Solid waste facilities: Structures or systems designed for the collection, processing or disposal of solid wastes, including hazardous wastes, and includes transfer stations, processing plants, recycling plants, and disposal systems. 
    Solid waste transfer station: A facility for temporary collection of solid waste prior to transport to a processing plant or to final disposal. 
    Sound amplifying equipment: Any machine or device for the amplification of sound. 
    Special flood hazard area: An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
    Sponsoring agency: An agency or unit of government, a profit or nonprofit agency, or any other person or organization which intends to establish or operate a community residential home (CRH), consistent with F.S. chs. 381-430. 
    Stand or standing: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers, as may be permitted by law under this LDC. 
    Start of construction: The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State: The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    State land development plan: The comprehensive statewide plan or any portion thereof setting forth state land development policies. 
    State land planning agency: The department of economic opportunity. 
    Statute: The Florida Statutes. 
    Stop or stopping: When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of an officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Stormwater: The flow of water which results from a rainfall event. 
    Stormwater management system: The system, or combination of systems, designed to treat stormwater, or collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, or divert the movement of stormwater on, through and from a site. 
    Stormwater runoff: That portion of the stormwater that flows from the land surface of a site either naturally, in manmade ditches, or in a closed conduit system. 
    Street: Is a dedicated right-of-way which has been accepted by the city for maintenance and affords the principal means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designed as a street, avenue, highway, or however otherwise designated; the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Street, alley: Is a dedicated right-of-way used primarily for secondary vehicular service to property abutting a street. 
    Street, arterial: Is a road or thoroughfare which has been or may be designed or designated for the movements of large volumes of traffic between distance points of the city, which road will ordinarily have controlled or limited right of access. 
    Street, collector: Is a street designed or designated to connect a number of residential streets with arterial streets. 
    Street, dead-end: Is a street with one end permanently closed and with no provision for extension or a turn-around. 
    Street lighting: Is a lighting on poles, with either underground or overhead service, along a street for purposes of illuminating public or private ways. 
    Street, marginal access: Is a street which is parallel and adjacent to a major arterial or expressway and which provides access to abutting property. 
    Street, minor: Is a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting property and the local needs of the neighborhoods. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, installed or portable, with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes a movable structure while it is located on land which can be used for housing, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. The term "structure" also includes billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks and advertising signs. Driveways, walkways, fences, bird feeders, mailboxes, light posts and pads for recreational or decorative uses, which are not an integral or related part of a major structure, shall not be considered as structures for the purposes of this LDC; a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Structure, major: A structure which is designated as a principal use or which is among those accessory uses enumerated in this LDC. 
    Structure, nonconforming: A structure, or portion thereof, existing at the effective date of this LDC, or any amendment thereto, which was occupied, designed, erected, intended, or structurally altered for a use not permitted at its location by the provisions of this LDC or amendment for a new use, and/or which does not conform to all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is located. 
    Subdivider: Any person, partnership or corporation, or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
    Subdivision: The division or redivision of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, which includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. (Ord. No. 1076, 1-10-2003) 
    Subdivision master plan: A tentative plan showing the proposed development of a tract of land for which platting and development is to be carried out in two (2) or more stages. 
    Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Sufficiency of petition: The verification of the signatures and addresses of all signers of a petition with the voting list maintained by the county supervisor of elections and certification that the number of valid signatures represents the required percentage of the total number of qualified voters in the area affected by a proposed annexation. 
    Support documents: Any surveys, studies, inventory maps, data, inventories, listings or analysis used as bases for or in developing the city's comprehensive plan. 
    Surface water: Water above the surface of the ground whether or not flowing through definite channels, including the following: 
(1)  Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline; or 
(2)  Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, street, roadway, swale or wash in which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed or banks; or 
(3)  Any wetland. 
    Tattoo parlor: An establishment whose principal business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the service of applying a mark or design on or under the skin of a person by a process of piercing and ingraining a pigment, dye, or ink in or under the skin for a non-medical purpose. 
    Tattooing: The service of applying a mark or design on or under the skin of a person by a process of piercing and ingraining a pigment, dye, or ink in or under the skin for a non-medical purpose. 
    Temporary: Designed, constructed, and intended to be used on a short-term basis. 
    Temporary sign: The term "temporary sign" shall mean any sign that is not a permanent sign, and shall include a sign formerly or commonly known as an election sign, a political sign, a free expression sign, a real estate sign, a directional sign, a garage sale sign, a construction sign, a grand opening sign, a banner, an event sign, or any other temporary sign unless otherwise provided herein. The term "temporary sign" shall not include any substitution of message on an existing lawful sign or sign structure. 
    Townhouse: A narrow single-family dwelling which normally occupies the entire width of its lot having its open yard space to the front and rear and which is attached on one or both sides to similar dwellings, all of which are located on individually platted lots as part of a subdivided group development. 
    Traffic: Pedestrians, vehicle(s) and other conveyances, either singly or together, using any street or highway for purposes of travel. 
    Transportation disadvantaged: Those individuals who because of physical or mental disability, income status, or age are unable to transport themselves or to purchase transportation and are, therefore, dependent upon others to obtain access to health care, employment, education, shopping, social activities, or other life-sustaining activities. 
    Trip end: The origin or destination of a trip. Each trip has two (2) ends which constitute a two-direction vehicle movement at the origin or destination of the trip. 
    Trip generation: The total number of trip ends produced by a specific land use or activity. 
    Unit: Each room, combination of rooms, or prepared mobile home space that includes connection points for sewer and/or water service that are owner occupied, offered separately for rent as a rental unit or vacant. Multiunit apartments, condominiums, office buildings, shopping centers, hotels, motels, and similar multiunit structures or complexes are defined to consist of multiple units, regardless of whether or not a single water or sewer connection serves the entire complex. 
    Urban in character: An area used intensively for residential, urban recreational or conservation parklands, commercial, industrial, institutional, or governmental purposes or an area undergoing development for any of these purposes. 
    Urban purposes: Land used intensively for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental purposes, including any parcels of land retained in their natural state or kept free of development as dedicated greenbelt areas. 
    Urban services: Any services offered by a municipality, either directly or by contract, to any of its present residents. 
    Use, accessory: A use, building, or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use of property and located upon said property. 
    Use, nonconforming: The use of a structure or premises, existing at the effective date of this LDC, or any amendment thereto, for any purpose not permitted for a new use in the district in which it is located. 
    Utility: Any community service available to the general public, including, but not limited to, electricity, telephone, water supply, gas, sanitary sewers, storm drainage and street lighting. 
    Vacation: The waiving of the use of an easement, the ownership and use of a right-of-way by a public or private agency, or a platted subdivision. 
    Variance: For the purposes of administration of the LDC except the floodplain management ordinance, a grant of relief from the requirements of this LDC which permits action in a manner otherwise prohibited where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship relative to the land. 
    For the purposes of administration of the floodplain management ordinance, a grant of relief from the requirements of the floodplain management ordinance, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by the floodplain management ordinance or the Florida Building Code. 
    Vegetative communities: Ecological communities, such as coastal strands, oak hammocks and cypress swamps, which are classified based on the presence of certain soils, vegetation and animals. 
    Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power and railroads. 
    Vehicle sign: Any sign affixed to a vehicle. 
    Vehicle use area: An area used for circulation, parking, and/or display of motorized vehicles, except junk or automobile salvage yards. 
    Wall sign: Any sign affixed and parallel to a wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted; provided, however, said wall sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. For the purpose of this LDC, any sign display surface that is affixed against the sloping surface of a mansard roof so as not to project more than twelve (12) inches from the surface of the roof shall be considered a wall sign. Any sign that is affixed to the building marquee, building awning, or a building canopy shall be considered a wall sign. (Ord. No. 780, 8-6-1991) 
    Water body: Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area with a discernible shoreline which ordinarily or intermittently contains water. 
    Water department: The term "water department" as used herein, shall mean the public works department or the water works owned and operated by the city. 
    Water dependent uses: Activities which can be carried out only on, in or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for: waterborne transportation including ports or marinas; recreation; electrical generating facilities; or water supply. 
    Water recharge areas: Land or water areas through which groundwater is replenished. 
    Water-related uses: Activities which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods and services that are directly associated with water-dependent or waterway uses. 
    Water wells: Wells, excavated, drilled, dug, or driven for the supply of industrial, agricultural or potable water for general public consumption. 
    Watercourse: A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
    Wetland(s): Land that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions and/or designated by another governmental agency as such. The term includes, but is not limited to, swamp hammocks, hardwood swamps, riverine cypress, cypress ponds, bay heads and bogs, wet prairies, freshwater marshes, tidal flats, salt marshes, mangrove swamps, and marine meadows. 
    Window sign: Sign, object or display placed on either side of a window or displayed in the interior of a building and turned with its front toward the window so that it is visible from the exterior of a building. 
    Wood fence buffer: A strip of land five (5) feet in depth, landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other plant material, and containing a fence constructed of wood materials meeting the following design criteria, so as to provide an opaque screen in required locations between properties: 
(1)  The wood fence buffer shall be at least six (6) feet and not more than six and one-half (61/2) feet in height, as measured from the highest grade on the side of the solid buffer facing a public street, right-of-way, or property used and zoned for residential purposes, unless the height is restricted by another provision of this LDC. 
(2)  End posts shall be six inches by six inches (6? × 6?) and shall be buried at least two (2) feet in the ground and anchored in concrete. 
(3)  Support posts shall be at least four inches by four inches (4? × 4?), and shall be buried at least two (2) feet in the ground, located no further than every eight (8) feet apart and shall be anchored in concrete. 
(4)  Slats shall be at least six (6) inches wide, three-quarter (3/4) inch deep, and individually nailed to both sides of the cross support beams attached to the end and support posts. 
(5)  Slats shall be spaced so as to create an opaque view from either side of the fence. 
(6)  Fence material shall be pressure-treated lumber. 
(7)  Fences shall be painted or stained and sealed on both sides of said fence. 
(8)  All nails used in construction shall be galvanized. 
(9)  Trees shall be planted along the outside of buffer fences along rights-of-way, and inside the fence along interior property lines at a dispersal rate of one tree per forty (40) linear feet of fence or fraction thereof. As an alternative, the required trees may be clustered in landscaped areas along the fence so long as each landscaped area is no smaller than one hundred (100) square feet and landscaped areas are not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Wood fence buffer, modified: A buffer meeting all of the requirements and standards of a "wood fence buffer" except height. Modified wood fence buffers shall be four (4) feet in height, unless specifically permitted at some other height less than six (6) feet. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
    Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or as otherwise provided within the Code. 
    Yard, front: An open area extending across the front portion of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
    Yard, rear: An open area extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
    Yard, side: An open area on one side of a lot extending between the front and rear yards. 
    Zoning lot: A parcel of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a permitted use and meeting all the requirements of this LDC for a lot in the zoning district in which said land parcel is located. A zoning lot may be comprised of multiple tracts and/or parcels when the proposed developer provides a legal instrument/agreement, satisfactory to the city council, demonstrating unified control over all internal tracts and/or parcels and identifies a responsible party for the long-term maintenance of any and all common ownership tract(s), parcel(s) and/or facilities proposed within the zoning lot. (A zoning lot need not necessarily coincide with a "lot of record" as defined herein except for residential zoning lots.) 
(Code 2001, § 25.205; Ord. No. 777, 5-7-1991; Ord. No. 780, 8-6-1991; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 876, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 900, 9-12-1995; Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1076, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 1089, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1202, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 1368, § 4(Exh. B), 6-2-2015 ; Ord. No. 1399, §§ 2(Exh. B), 4(Exh. D), 7-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh. A), 8-16-2016 ; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 12-41-12-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-69. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article sets forth the application and review procedure required for maintaining legislative and administrative bodies responsible for establishing land development policies and regulations for obtaining a development order and certain types of permits. 
(Code 2001, § 25.300) 
Sec. 12-70. - Ex parte communications for local public officials concerning quasi-judicial matters. 
    This article provides a procedure for communications with local public officials regarding quasi-judicial matters. Any person not otherwise prohibited by statute, charter, provision or ordinance may discuss with any local public official representing the city, the merits of any matter on which action may be taken by any board or commission on which the local public official is a member. Such communication shall not raise any presumption of prejudice provided that the following process of disclosure occurs: 
(1)  The subject and substance of any ex parte communication with a local public official representing the city which relates to quasi-judicial action pending before the official, as well as the identity of the person, group or entity with whom the communication took place, is disclosed and made a part of the record before final action is taken on the matter. 
(2)  A local public official representing the city may read a written communication from any person; however, a written communication that relates to quasi-judicial action pending before such official shall be made a part of the record before final action is taken on the matter. 
(3)  Local public officials representing the city may conduct investigations, make site visits and receive expert opinions regarding quasi-judicial action pending before them, provided that such activities and the existence of such investigations, site visits, or expert opinions are made a part of the record before final action is taken on the matter. (Ord. No. 898, 8-1-1995) 
(Code 2001, § 25.301) 
Sec. 12-71. - City council. 
(a)  Powers and duties. In addition to any authority granted to the city council by state law, city code or city charter, the city council shall have the following powers and duties related to land development: 
(1)  To approve, approve with modifications, or deny development orders for developments of regional impact (DRI); 
(2)  To enter into, approve, approve with modifications, or deny development agreements, as provided by state law; 
(3)  To approve, approve with modifications, or deny final plats prior to recording; 
(4)  To vacate and annul plats, as required and allowed by F.S. ch. 177; 
(5)  To approve, approve with modifications, or deny general site development or final site plans, in conjunction with a conditional use pursuant to sections 12-259, 12-377, and 12-379 (if the criteria for section 12-377 are exceeded), and final site plans pursuant to section 12-379; 
(6)  To approve, approve with modifications, or deny development applications, such as, conditional uses, planned developments, waivers in conjunction with general site development or final site plans, preliminary or final plats, and other applicable applications and consideration of the recommendations of the planning commission staff, if applicable, with or without conditions of approval, based on the comprehensive plan and this Code; 
(7)  To approve, approve with modifications, or deny applications to amend the city comprehensive plan text or future land use map after considering the recommendations of the planning commission board, pursuant to F.S. ch. 163; 
(8)  To initiate, approve, approve with modification, or deny amendments to the city land development code, after considering the recommendations of the planning commission board; 
(9)  To initiate, approve, or deny amendments to the city zoning map, other than planned developments, after considering the recommendations of the planning commission staff; 
(10)  To provide input and comments for informational purposes to an applicant on conceptual plans, except when part of a planned development rezoning application; 
(11)  To take such other action not delegated to the planning commission staff or board or other appointed citizen board as the city council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The city council shall act upon its powers and duties under this Code with the charter and state law. 
(Code 2001, § 25.305; Ord. No. 714, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-72. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Creation and membership. 
(1)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment (board) of the city, board to consist of five (5) members appointed from among the electors of the city by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  None of the members of said board shall hold any other public office or position in the city. The term of office for each member of the board shall be for three (3) years and no member shall serve more than three (3) consecutive three-year terms. Members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed. Any member may be removed from office by the city council for justifiable cause. Any vacancy which occurs shall be filled in accordance with the appointment procedure for the unexpired term. The board members shall receive no compensation for their service except that they shall be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. 
(3)  City council may appoint up to two alternate members to serve on the board in the absence of board members. 
(4)  Any member of the board of adjustment who fails to attend two (2) out of three (3) successive meetings without cause and without prior approval of the chair of the board of adjustment may forfeit such appointment and the city council may promptly fill such vacancy. 
(b)  Officers. During the first meeting in October of each year, or in the event of no meeting, the next regularly scheduled meeting, the board shall elect from its membership, a chair and vice-chair, both of whom shall serve for one year or until they are re-elected or their successors are elected. The vice-chair shall take on all the duties and authority of the chair in the chair's absence at official meetings of the board. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director in the administration and enforcement of this LDC. 
(2)  To authorize variances from the provisions of sections specifically enumerated in article VI of this LDC, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(3)  In evaluating whether or not sufficient justification exists upon which to make a determination of hardship in the granting of a variance, the board shall make a finding that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of the provisions of this LDC to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this LDC; 
e.  No variance shall be granted for a use of land or building or structure which is not otherwise permitted by this LDC; and 
f.  Any variance granted shall be the minimum variance which makes possible the reasonable use of the land, building(s), or property. 
(4)  In permitting any variance from the terms of this LDC, the board may prescribe any conditions or safeguards deemed necessary to protect the public interest. 
(5)  The board shall fully set forth in its findings the reasons for permitting any variance from the terms of this LDC. 
(6)  To act in an advisory capacity to the city council and to make recommendations to the city council from time to time concerning the need to study, revise, or amend city codes and ordinances affecting the growth and development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner. 
(d)  General rules of procedure. 
(1)  Adoption of rules. The board shall have the authority to adopt rules of procedure after said rules have been reviewed and approved by the city attorney. 
(2)  Meetings. The board shall hold regular meetings on the fourth Thursday of each month, provided petitions have been filed for consideration by the board. At the direction of the board, meeting dates may be adjusted to avoid conflict with holidays and/or may be held at a special date and time at the call of the chair. 
(3)  Quorum constituted. All official actions of the board shall require an affirmative vote thereon by no less than three (3) members. 
(4)  Minutes. Minutes of the proceedings of the board shall be kept, showing the vote of each question and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the director of community development and shall be a public record. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009) 
(5)  Decisions to be by motion. The decisions of the board shall be by motion, which motion shall contain a statement of the basis of said decision or action. The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the board's decision. Variances approved by the board shall be recorded in the public records by the city clerk. 
(6)  Appeals. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person affected by a decision regarding the interpretation of this LDC. 
a.  Such appeals shall be filed within ten (10) days of notice of the decision appealed from, by filing with the city a notice specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The appeal shall be transmitted to the board including all information containing the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
b.  No appeal requesting the same relief in regard to the same property shall be received or heard by the board for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of any action taken by the board in the matter, except that this limitation shall not affect the right of the board to grant a rehearing for cause. 
c.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the director certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. 
d.  In each case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the director of community development, or on due cause shown. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009) 
e.  The appellant and any other public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the board and the board may request additional technical service, advice, or factual evidence as may be necessary from time to time. 
(7)  Authority to reverse, affirm, modify orders. In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this LDC, reverse, affirm, wholly or partly, or modify an order, requirement, decision or determination of the director. 
(8)  Carrying out decisions. It shall be the duty of the director to carry out the decisions of the board. 
(9)  Time limit for establishment of variance. Unless it is determined by the board that sufficient cause exists for the establishment of a time limit for action upon a variance, any variance approved under the provisions of this section shall run with the land. 
(10)  Withdrawn petitions. Any request for approval of a variance under the provisions of this section previously withdrawn by the petitioner or the petitioner's duly authorized representative shall be considered a new petition and assessed the applicable fees. 
(11)  Disapproval of application or appeal; proceeding prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the appellant to proceed with the erection or alteration of a proposed building or to proceed with the proposed use of a building or land, for which the board shall have disapproved an application or appeal. 
(12)  Requests for hearing. Before making its decision on any appeal, request for variance, or any other matter within the board's purview, the board shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to the following requirement: 
a.  Appeals and requests for a variance shall be made on forms provided therefor and all information required for such forms shall be furnished by the appellant. No application shall be accepted by the board unless it contains all pertinent information. 
b.  Ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, a sign shall be erected on the land for which the appeal or variance is requested. 
c.  Said sign shall state that a zoning appeal or variance request has been made, the application number, type of relief sought, the scheduled date, time and place the public hearing is to be held, and the telephone number to call for additional information. 
d.  Said sign shall be maintained upon the subject land until the public hearing has been held. 
e.  Appeals and applications filed in proper form shall be numbered serially, docketed and placed upon the calendar of the board. 
f.  An agenda of appeals and/or variances to be heard at each public meeting shall be posted conspicuously in a public place at least ten (10) days prior to the date of said hearing. 
g.  At least ten (10) day's notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant or petitioner, and to the owners of all property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the property with which the hearing is concerned. 
h.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided in a newspaper authorized to publish legal notices for the city and said notice shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
i.  The board may, in its discretion and upon determination of necessity, continue a public hearing and send notices of the hearing to other interested parties, organizations, or agencies. 
j.  Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time and place fixed for the hearing, and a brief statement of the error alleged by the appellant, or of the variance or other relief requested. 
k.  Hearings may be continued from time to time and if the time and place of the continued hearing is publicly announced at the time of continuance, no further notice of such continued hearing shall be required; otherwise, notice thereof shall be provided pursuant to normal procedural requirements. 
l.  Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
m.  Upon hearing all evidence and testimony relative to the requested appeal or variance, the board shall close the public hearing unless it is determined by the board that sufficient cause shall exist upon which to base a continuation. 
n.  Subsequent to the closure of the public hearing, the board shall render a decision upon the requested appeal or variance. 
(e)  Appeal from the board's decision. The board of adjustment shall be the final authority concerning all matters brought before it under the provisions of this LDC and there shall be no further appeal of its decisions to the city council. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, may seek review of the decision in the circuit court, provided by Florida law. 
(Code 2001, § 25.310; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 537, 3-19-1985; Ord. No. 608, 2-3-1987; Ord. No. 639, 12-15-1987; Ord. No. 714, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 988, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1195, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 1252, 8-04-2009; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-73. - Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Laws of Fla. ch. 97-351, the Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission was created and designated as the local planning agency (LPA) of the city. As the city's LPA, the Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission is responsible for providing the following services to the city: 
(1)  Prepare and recommend, in accordance with F.S. ch. 163, a comprehensive plan, including goals, objectives and policies, implementation techniques and methods; monitoring measures and amendments thereto. 
(2)  Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the city's comprehensive plan, including the review of land development regulations and capital improvement programs for plan consistency, and to recommend changes to the plan, including amendments and updates, and provide periodic reports evaluating and appraising plan implementation. 
(3)  Provide administrative, surveillance, and planning services to the metropolitan planning organization (MPO) to integrate the planning of an efficient and safe multimode transportation system with the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Provide administrative, surveillance, and planning services to the Hillsborough River Interlocal Planning Board to integrate the Hillsborough River Master Plan with the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Perform other planning functions or projects as requested by the city, including technical assistance, directed studies, research, analysis, neighborhood planning, and other related activities. 
(6)  Coordinate the city's planning efforts and programs with those of other county jurisdictions to facilitate the proper exchange of information, programs, and proposals, including assistance with mapping, information management, and socio-economic forecasting. 
(Code 2001, § 25.320; Ord. No. 152, 9-21-1965; Ord. No. 714, 1-23-1990) 
Sec. 12-74. - Development review committee (DRC). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a development review committee (DRC). 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Membership of the DRC shall include the following or their designated representative: 
a.  Director of community development. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009) 
b.  City engineer. 
c.  Director of public works. 
d.  Fire chief. 
e.  Police chief. 
f.  Director of leisure services. 
g.  Director of code compliance. 
h.  Building official. 
i.  Redevelopment director. 
(2)  Other city, county, state or federal agencies may be consulted by the DRC for advice or recommendations on any matter or application being considered by the DRC. The city manager may add or delete members of the DRC as may be deemed necessary and advise city council of any changes in membership of the DRC. 
(3)  The director or designee shall serve as chairman of the DRC and shall provide the proper staff support to coordinate and document the activities of the DRC for all development applications, except for preliminary and final plats and easement or right-of-way vacations, in which case the city engineer or designee shall serve as chairman of the DRC. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the DRC shall include: 
(1)  Review of all general site development, final site plans, and waivers for all applicable land development applications and provide recommendations to city council. 
(2)  Review of all preliminary and final plats. 
(3)  Review of all petitions for changes in land use designations or zoning districts. 
(4)  Review and provide information comments for conceptual plans, not associated with a planned development rezoning application. 
(5)  Approve, approve with modifications, or deny administrative general site development plans, final site plans, and waivers associated with development applications. 
(6)  Hold pre-application meetings for applicants, as necessary or required by this Code, prior to the submission of development applications. 
(7)  Perform such additional duties as the city manager or designees may, from time to time, assign. 
(d)  Meetings. The DRC shall meet as necessary at such places as determined by the DRC. Materials to be discussed shall be distributed to each member and to the applicant at least five (5) working days prior to each meeting, unless otherwise agreed upon by the DRC and applicant. Such record of the proceedings of the DRC meetings shall be kept as may be required by law. 
(Code 2001, § 25.325; Ord. No. 714, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-75. - Department of community development. 
    The department of community development coordinates the functions and activities of permitting, building, inspection, and planning. 
(Code 2001, § 25.330; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1252, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 12-76. - Administrative division. 
    The administrative division provides administrative support to all operating divisions of the department. 
(Code 2001, § 25.330.1) 
Sec. 12-77. - Planning and development division. 
    The planning and development division reviews, evaluates, processes, coordinates, and conducts research for site plans, plats, rezonings, variances, and land use plan and zoning amendments. The division exercises primary staff responsibility within the department for coordination with the planning commission regarding rezonings, plat approvals, and planned developments. The division is primarily responsible for coordinating all city planning matters and chairs the development review committee. It provides zoning reviews of applications for occupational licenses and building permits. 
(Code 2001, § 25.330.2) 
Sec. 12-78. - Regulatory division. 
    The regulatory division consists of the permitting, building code compliance, and minimum housing code programs. These are integrated functions involving private construction activities including: plan review, permitting, inspection, and enforcement of maintenance standards and all other regulations and codes. 
(Code 2001, § 25.330.3) 
Sec. 12-79. - Building section. 
    The building section reviews all building plans for technical compliance with applicable construction codes and standards; schedules and conducts all inspections required as conditions for approval, including building, electrical, plumbing, gas and mechanical inspections. This section also reviews all conditions for construction authorizations and ensures satisfaction prior to granting inspection approvals and/or releases for certificates of occupancy. The building section inspects each building space for "commercial" and "office" occupancy to ensure the premises are suitable to the occupant and consistent with code requirements and standards. 
(Code 2001, § 25.330.4) 
Sec. 12-80. - Permit section. 
    The permit section receives plan review and permitting applications and prepares all permits. The permit section receives and logs requests for inspections and their disposition. The section also collects development, inspection, and review fees and ensures that conditions requisite to the issuance of permits have been satisfied. The permit section also assists in the preparation and issuance of competency certificates to qualified contractors. 
(Code 2001, § 25.330.6; Ord. No. 984, 9-29-1998) 
Sec. 12-81. - Reasonable accommodation procedures. 
(a)  Purpose and general provisions. This section implements the policy of the city regarding requests for reasonable accommodation to its zoning and land use regulations, rules, ordinances, policies, and procedures for persons with disabilities to use and enjoy housing, as provided by the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.) ("FHA") and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12131 et seq.) ("ADA"). 
    For purposes of this section, a "disabled" individual or person is an individual who qualifies as disabled and/or handicapped under the FHA and/or ADA. Any person who is disabled (or qualifying entities) may request reasonable accommodation with respect the city's zoning and land use regulations, rules, ordinances, policies, and procedures as provided by the FHA and the ADA pursuant to the procedures set out in this section. For purposes of this section, a "qualifying entity" shall mean, a licensed service provider of the State of Florida as defined by F.S. § 397.311, as amended from time to time. All qualifying entities shall submit as part of an application for a reasonable accommodation, proof of the licensable service component the qualifying entity holds pursuant to F.S. ch. 397, as amended. 
(b)  General. The following general provisions shall be applicable: 
(1)  The city shall display a notice on the city's webpage (and shall maintain copies available for review in the city clerk's office) advising the public that disabled individuals (and qualifying entities) may request reasonable accommodation as provided herein. 
(2)  A disabled person may apply for a reasonable accommodation on his/her own behalf or may be represented at all stages of the reasonable accommodation process by a person designated in writing by the disabled person. 
(3)  The city shall provide assistance and accommodation as is required pursuant to the FHA and ADA in connection with a disabled person's request for reasonable accommodation, including without limitation, assistance with reading application questions, responding to questions, completing the necessary forms, filing an appeal, and appearing at a hearing to ensure the process is accessible. 
(c)  Reasonable accommodation request form. A request by an applicant for reasonable accommodation under this section shall be made in writing by completion of a reasonable accommodation request form and submitted to the department of community development. The reasonable accommodation request form is maintained by the department of community development and shall contain such questions and requests for information as are necessary for processing the reasonable accommodation request. The reasonable accommodation request form shall, at a minimum, require the following information: 
(1)  Name and contact information for applicant; 
(2)  Address of housing or other location at which accommodation is requested; 
(3)  Name and mailing address of subject property owner; 
(4)  Description of reasonable accommodation requested; 
(5)  Description of the specific regulation(s) and/or procedure(s) from which accommodation is sought; 
(6)  Reasons the reasonable accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with disabilities to use and enjoy the housing or other service; 
(7)  Name and contact information for applicant's authorized representative, if applicable; and 
(8)  Signature of applicant, or authorized representative. 
(d)  Medical information; confidentiality. Should the information provided by the disabled person to the city include medical information or records, including records indicating the medical condition, diagnosis or medical history of the disabled person, such individual may, at the time of submitting such medical information, request that the city, to the extent allowed by law, treat such medical information as confidential information of the disabled person. The city shall thereafter endeavor to provide written notice to the disabled person, and/or their representative, of any request received by the city for disclosure of the medical information or documentation which the disabled person has previously requested be treated as confidential by the city. The city will cooperate with the disabled person, to the extent allowed by law, in actions initiated by such individual to oppose the disclosure of such medical information or documentation, but the city shall have no obligation to initiate, prosecute, or pursue any such action, or to incur any legal or other expense (whether by retention of outside counsel or allocation of internal resources) in connection therewith, and may comply with any judicial order without prior notice to the disabled person. 
(e)  Determination process. The city manager, or designee, shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. When a reasonable accommodation request form has been completed and submitted to the department of community development, it shall be referred to the city manager, or designee, for review and consideration. 
(1)  The city manager, or designee, shall issue a written determination within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of a completed application, except as provided in paragraph (3) below, and may, in accordance with federal law: 
a.  Grant the accommodation request; 
b.  Grant a portion of the request and deny a portion of the request and/or impose conditions upon the grant of the request; or 
c.  Deny the request, in accordance with federal law. 
If the request is denied, the determination shall state the grounds therefore. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal. 
(2)  The notice of determination shall be sent to the requesting party (i.e., the disabled individual or authorized representative) by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  If reasonably necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the city manager, or designee, may, prior to the end of said forty-five-day period, request additional information from the requesting party, specifying in detail what information is required. Such additional information may include, but not be limited to, additional medical information from the requesting party. The requesting party shall have fifteen (15) days after the date of the request for additional information to provide the requested information. In the event a request for additional information is made, the forty-five-day period to issue a written determination shall no longer be applicable, and the city manager, or designee, shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days after receipt of the additional information. If the requesting party fails to provide the requested additional information within said fifteen-day period, the city manager, or designee, shall issue a written notice advising that the requesting party had failed to timely submit the additional information and therefore the request for reasonable accommodation shall be deemed abandoned and/or withdrawn and no further action by the city with regard to said reasonable accommodation request shall be required. 
(f)  Criteria for determination. In determining whether the reasonable accommodation request shall be granted or denied, the requesting party shall be required to establish that they are protected under the FHA and/or ADA by demonstrating that they are handicapped or disabled, as defined in the FHA and/or ADA. For purposes of this section, the disabled individual must demonstrate to the city: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such impairment; 
(3)  That they are regarded as having such impairment; or 
(4)  That the proposed accommodation being sought is reasonable and necessary to afford handicapped/disabled persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing. 
(g)  Required findings. A request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this section shall be approved, with or without conditions, if the city manager, or designee, finds, based upon all of the evidence presented, that all of the following findings are made: 
(1)  The property or dwelling that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be occupied by a disabled person; 
(2)  The requested accommodation is necessary to provide a disabled person with an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; 
(3)  The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
(4)  The requested modification will not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law. 
(h)  Conditions of approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the city manager, or designee, may impose conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings of this section, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Inspection of the property periodically, as specified, to verify compliance with this section and any conditions of approval. 
(2)  Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the improvements when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists, except where the city manager, or designee, finds that removal would constitute an unreasonable financial burden and/or is physically integrated with the structure and cannot feasibly be removed. If applicable, the restrictive covenant shall provide that the reasonable accommodation does not run with the land and shall terminate upon any sale, transfer, lease, or other conveyance of the property. 
(3)  Time limits and/or expiration of the approval, if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists. 
(4)  Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses. 
(5)  Measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures. 
(6)  Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(i)  Appeal of determination. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the city manager's, or designee's, determination on a reasonable accommodation request or a revocation or modification of a reasonable accommodation, the applicant may appeal the decision. All appeals shall be filed with the city clerk and contain a written statement containing sufficient detail of the grounds for the appeal. Appeals pursuant to this section shall be to the city council who shall, after public notice and a public hearing, render a written determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after an appeal has been filed. Notice of any public hearing hereunder shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing. 
(j)  Fees. There shall be no fee imposed by the city in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under this section or an appeal of a determination on such request to the city council, and the city shall have no obligation to pay a requesting party's (or an appealing party's, as applicable) attorneys' fees or costs in connection with the request, or an appeal. 
(k)  Stay of enforcement. While an application for reasonable accommodation, or appeal or a determination of same, is pending before the city, the city will not enforce the subject zoning ordinance, rules, policies, and procedures against the applicant. However, should the applicant proceed with any property purchase, building, construction, or other work associated with establishing a project or residence housing individuals covered by the FHA or the ADA while an application or appeal for reasonable accommodation is pending, the applicant understands that any of these actions are done at the applicant's own risk because the application or appeal may be denied. 
(l)  Revocation of reasonable accommodation. Any reasonable accommodation received shall be subject to revocation or modification if the holder of the reasonable accommodation or the property upon which the accommodation is granted is found in violation of any provision of the written determination granting the reasonable accommodation by a court of law or by the special magistrate hearing code enforcement cases, and the holder of the reasonable accommodation has failed to correct such violation. The city shall send a notice of hearing on a proposed revocation or modification of a reasonable accommodation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the holder of the reasonable accommodation at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. The city manager, or designee, shall have the authority to consider and act on a revocation or modification of a reasonable accommodation, after notice and hearing during which the reasonable accommodation holder shall have the opportunity to present evidence and be heard. 
( Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 12-82-12-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RELATION TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND LAND USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Relationship to comprehensive plan to exercise of land development regulatory authority, F.S. § 163.3201. 

Sec. 12-96. - Purpose. 
(a)  Each municipality in the state is required by F.S. § 163.3202(1) to "adopt or amend and enforce land development regulations that are consistent with and implement their adopted comprehensive plan." Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3194(2) and Laws of Fla. ch. 97-351, the Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission is required to review and advise city council of proposed land development regulations' compliance with state law and of their consistency with and implementation of the adopted comprehensive plan. The city has adopted a unified land development code necessary to implement the adopted comprehensive plan. F.S. § 163.3202(2) identifies those minimum "specific and detailed provisions necessary or desirable to implement the adopted comprehensive plan." To ensure that minimum criteria in Florida Statutes are met, this chapter contains the following provisions: 
Section 12-10 Variances Section 12-11 Fees Article IV Relation to comprehensive plan and land use Article V Nonconformities Article VI Variances Article VII Zoning Article VIII Platting, site plans, development permits and other approvals Article IX Design standards and development criteria Article X Level of service maintenance requirements and concurrency  
F.S. § 163.3194(3) provides the standards by which development orders or land development regulations are consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan. The specific intent of the land use plan categories is defined by the future land use element. It provides a narrative and standards to guide land uses and is based on an intensity compatibility concept, a land use hierarchy relating use intensities to their location relative to other uses. Other elements in the comprehensive plan establish the city's intent and standards for other specific topics identified in the comprehensive plan. This chapter provides the framework by which the city's comprehensive plan's goals, objectives, and policies, and the city's overall long-term vision, strategies and development concepts are to be reached and implemented. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the following land use categories, density (units per gross acre), intensity/maximum floor area ratio (FAR), and Overlay categories, as established in the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Temple Terrace, Florida, and incorporated herein, shall apply to all new development and redevelopment within the corporate boundaries of the city: 
Standard categories Density (du/ga) Intensity/Maximum FAR  R-4 Residential-4 0-4 N/A  R-9 Residential-9 0-9 0.25  R-18 Residential-18 0-18 0.35  O/I Office/Institutional 0-9 0.5  C Commercial N/A 1.0  I Industrial N/A 0.65  R/CP Research/Corporate Park N/A 1.0  P/SP Public/Semi-Public N/A 0.5  PROS Parks/Recreation Open Space N/A 0.5  NP Natural Preservation N/A; 
Caretaker residence allowed N/A; 
Recreational or educational 
facility allowed Mixed-use categories Density (du/ga) Intensity/Maximum FAR  CMU-12 Community Mixed Use-12 0-12 0.5  UMU-20 Urban Mixed Use-20 0-20 1.0  UMU-25 Urban Mixed Use-25 0-25 2.0  DMU-35 Downtown Mixed Use-35 0-35 4.5 Overlay categories Density (du/ga) Intensity/Maximum FAR  BIZ Bonus Intensity Zone Overlay 25% increase 25% increase  ESA-O Environmentally Sensitive 
Areas Overlay N/A N/A  
Note: Densities and intensities may exceed the standards identified in this table consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan provisions and its goals, objectives, and policies. 
(c)  For the purpose of this article, the comprehensive plan for the city shall apply to all new development and redevelopment within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.400; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-97. - Future land use map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of land use categories established within the city are shown on the map entitled "Future Land Use Map-City of Temple Terrace," as amended. Said map sections or portions thereof, together with all dimensions, categories, references and other data shown thereon, are hereby adopted and made part of this article to the same extent as if the information set forth in said map were fully described and incorporated herein. 
(b)  The official future land use plan map is adopted as part of the comprehensive plan for the city, passed and adopted by the city council and approved by the mayor on January 19, 2016, and as may be amended in accordance with Florida Statutes and the Laws of Florida. 
(c)  The official, adopted future land use plan map shall be located at the office of the city clerk and shall be final authority as to the current land use plan status of lands within the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.410; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-98. - Interpretation of land use plan category lines. 
    The location of land use plan categories shown on the future land use plan map shall be determined by the following rules: 
(1)  Land use plan categories are intended to follow centerlines of streets or alleys, street or railroad right-of-way or watercourses or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless said land use plan lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the future land use map. 
(2)  Where land use plan lines approximately follow city limits, said limits shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  The location of any said boundary shall be established property boundaries at the time of the plan adoption or specific map amendment. 
(4)  If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a land use plan category on the future land use map, where the location cannot be directly determined to coincide with any natural or manmade feature, or where the record clearly indicates an error was made in the location of a line on the map, the boundary shall be mutually determined by the directly affected owner(s) or agent(s) and by the staff of the department (DCD). A written determination shall be made upon a written request being filed by an affected property owner with the director. In the event an interpretation is not made within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a written request, the requesting party may elect to request a boundary interpretation from the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 25.415) 
Sec. 12-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2016 , repealed § 12-99, which pertained to land use plan category standards and derived from Code 2001, § 25.420. 
Sec. 12-100. - Zoning district code/land use plan category matrix. 
    The zoning district code/land use plan category matrix defines permissible relationships between the future land use plan categories and the city's zoning districts. 
ZONING DISTRICT/LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY MATRIX 
Category Land Use Zoning District R-10 R-9 R-7.5 R-7 R-MF R-MFA C-O E-I C-G PROF PD PD-R A-U LI PRS P/QP R-4 X X X X X X R-9 X X X X X X X X X X X R-18 X X X X X X X X O/I X X X X X X C X X X X X I X X X X R/CP X X X X P/SP X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X PROS X X X X X X X X X X X X NP X X X X X X X X X X X X CMU-12 X X X X X X X X X X UMU-20 X X X X X X X X UMU-25 X X X X X X X X DMU-35 X * X * X * X * X * X * X X * X X Overlays ESA-O ** X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X BIZ X X X X X X X X  
*Recognizes zoning classifications existing within the city's adopted CRA area at the time DMU-25 category was as approved pursuant to Ordinance No. 1145. Any future zoning reclassification of property within the DMU-35 land use category shall be to PD Planned Development to implement the downtown redevelopment plan, except as permitted by division 5, sections 12-299-12-306: Temple Terrace Downtown Overlay District, adopted by Ordinance 15-1383. 
(Code 2001, § 25.425; Ord. No. 1383, § 2(Exh. B), 12-15-2015 ; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-101. - Comprehensive plan amendments. 
    The city shall adopt by resolution an administrative procedures manual which includes procedures, fees and schedules for: 
(1)  Application for amendment(s); 
(2)  Hearing procedures; and 
(3)  Actions to be taken by the governing body and local planning agency. 
(Code 2001, § 25.430; Ord. No. 729, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 1160, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Secs. 12-102-12-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 12-112. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to outline the sources or causes of nonconforming development; to identify the types of nonconforming development; to establish standards for compliance or continuation of nonconforming development with this article; and to set forth the procedures and criteria for the granting of variances from the provisions of this LDC. The term "chapter" as used in this article shall include previously adopted regulations addressing the particular subject matter. 
(Code 2001, § 25.800) 
Sec. 12-113. - Sources of nonconforming development. 
    Nonconforming development may occur as a result of one of the following actions: 
(1)  Property which has previously been developed in accordance with applicable land uses, development standards and permitted uses of structures is rezoned and does not comply with the land uses, development standards or permitted uses of structures in the new zoning district; or 
(2)  The city modifies development standards, land uses or permitted uses of structures. 
(Code 2001, § 25.805) 
Sec. 12-114. - Existing uses and nonconformity. 
(a)  Any lawful use of land or structure existing on the effective date of the original zoning code (July 19, 1966) or any subsequent amendment thereto, which by its terms has become a nonconforming use, is hereby declared not to be a violation at the effective date of the zoning code or such amendment. Such a nonconforming use shall be subject to all of the provisions of this LDC and amendments pertaining to its continuance, change and discontinuance; and further provided, that any use of land or structure which was nonconforming under the provisions of any zoning code repealed and which continues to be nonconforming under the provisions of this LDC shall not be continued for a time period longer than would have been permitted under the zoning code repealed. 
(b)  Commercial activities legally in operation as of December 19, 1995, and which are identified as being subject to conditional use approval, shall be recognized as approved conditional uses and further approvals by the city council are not required. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.1; Ord. No. 906, 12-19-1995) 
Sec. 12-115. - Nonconforming uses of land or lots. 
    Where at the effective date of adoption (July 19, 1966) or amendment of this LDC, a lawful use of land exists as a permissible zoning use and is made no longer permissible under the terms of this LDC as enacted or amended, such use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming principal permitted use shall be enlarged, expanded, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC. 
(2)  No such nonconforming principal permitted use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such principal permitted use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming principal permitted use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than ninety (90) days, any subsequent principal permitted use of land shall conform to the regulations specified by this LDC for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  A nonconforming principal permitted use shall not be continued if, by reason of unsafe condition, odors, noxious fumes, smoke, noise, or otherwise, it shall become a public nuisance to residents in residential or other districts. 
(5)  The nonconforming principal permitted use of land shall be discontinued and cease within three (3) years from the date such becomes nonconforming, in each of the following cases: 
a.  Where no buildings are employed on the premises in connection with such principal permitted use. 
b.  Where the only buildings employed are incidental or accessory to such principal permitted use or have a current appraised market value of less than $2,000.00. 
c.  Where such nonconforming use is maintained in connection with a building conforming as to use, provided that this requirement of elimination shall not apply to off-street parking accessory to a building conforming as to use. 
(6)  The nonconforming principal permitted use of land which is accessory or incidental to the nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the nonconforming principal permitted use of the building or structure is discontinued. 
(7)  A nonconforming principal permitted use of land which has in connection therewith incidental or accessory buildings or structures having a value in excess of $2,000.00, shall be deemed to have taken on the characteristics of and to have become a nonconforming structure and shall be subject to the provisions of this article relating to nonconforming structures. (Ord. No. 876, 8-2-1994) 
(8)  Single-family dwelling uses rendered nonconforming through a rezoning from a residential district to a commercial zoning district shall be permitted to continue if destroyed (unless destroyed intentionally by the owner) notwithstanding the provisions of this section. Such nonconforming single-family dwelling uses shall be subject to all other provisions of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.2; Ord. No. 876, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 906, 12-19-1995) 
Sec. 12-116. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where at the effective date of adoption (July 19, 1966) or amendment of this LDC, a lawful structure exists that could not be built under the terms of the current provisions of this LDC by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged, expanded or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its market valuation at the time of the damage, or at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(4)  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. Mobile and/or manufactured homes not located in mobile/manufactured home parks in an R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential or E-I Educational/Institutional zoning district which were legally established at their existing location either immediately prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which section 12-192 is derived or annexation into the city, may remain in place as lawful structures subject to the provisions of this section and section 12-115. 
(5)  Telecommunication facilities. Existing telecommunication facilities which were duly approved by Hillsborough County at their existing location prior to annexation into the city, may remain in place and continued to be operated as lawful structures subject to the provisions of this section and the following provisions: 
a.  Existing telecommunications facilities which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be rebuilt, repaired and restored at the same location to the same use, and physical dimensions as existed on the date of annexation subject to obtaining a building permit, but without otherwise complying with section 12-862 of this LDC. 
b.  Existing telecommunication facilities may continue to be operated for the purposes that existed on the date of annexation, but may not be expanded or replaced without complying with the provisions of section 12-862 of this LDC, except as further provided in this section. 
c.  The owner or operator of any existing telecommunications facility may replace, repair, rebuild and/or expand such telecommunications facility to accommodate colocated antennas or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological or communications standards by obtaining a building permit, and without having to conform to the provisions of section 12-862 of this LDC, or to otherwise request local zoning approvals, so long as such facilities are not increased to a height greater than the height approved by FAA. 
d.  Any replacement, repair, reconstruction or enlargement of a telecommunications facility shall comply with all city building codes. 
e.  Any increase in tower height is subject to FAA approval and site plan approval by city council. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.3; Ord. No. 877, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 1399, § 3(Exh. C), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-117. - Nonconforming use of structures. 
    Where at the effective date of adoption (July 19, 1966) or amendment of this LDC, a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and premises, or a combination thereof, exists that could not be allowed in the zoning district under the terms of the current provisions of this LDC, the lawful use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this LDC or an amendment thereto in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, expanded, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except to change the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this LDC, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months, or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  In any residential district, any nonconforming use of a conforming building, which is permissible only in a commercial office, commercial general, or similar district, shall be discontinued within seven (7) years of the effective date of July 19, 1966, or amendments to this LDC which causes a nonconformity. 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, upon removal or destruction of the structure, the nonconforming use shall be discontinued. 
(7)  A nonconforming use of premises or structures shall not be continued if by reason of unsafe conditions, odors, noxious fumes, smoke, traffic, congestion, noise, unsightly appearance, or otherwise, it becomes a public nuisance to residents in residential districts. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.4) 
Sec. 12-118. - Other nonconforming repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repairs or replacement on nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure for that year, provided that the cubical content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this LDC shall not be increased. 
(b)  Nothing in this LDC shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any city official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.5) 
Sec. 12-119. - Illegal use. 
    The casual, temporary or illegal use of land or a building shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create any rights in the continuance of such a use. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.6) 
Sec. 12-120. - Reduction or change in lot size. 
    No lot, yard, setback, clearance, parking area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make said area or dimension less than the minimum required by this LDC; and if already less than the minimum required thereby for a new building, structure, or use, said area or dimension shall not be further reduced. No part of a required yard, setback, clearance, parking area, or other space provided about, or for any building, structure or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this LDC shall be included as part of the yard, setback, clearance, parking area or other space required under this LDC for another building structure, or use, unless specifically authorized herein. No lot shall be reduced in size so as to produce an additional land parcel which is not in conformity with the provisions of this LDC unless said land parcel is combined with other land to produce a conforming lot or unless said land parcel is dedicated and accepted for public use. 
(Code 2001, § 25.810.7; Ord. No. 796, 12-3-1991) 
Sec. 12-121. - Nonconforming lots, infill development. 
(a)  Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this LDC, a single residentially-zoned lot of record existing as of July 19, 1966, not meeting the applicable minimum area and/or width requirements of this LDC, may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling and customary accessory uses under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where a residential building is currently located provided the building was constructed in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time the structure was built. 
(2)  Where an existing vacant lot of record which is being proposed to be developed was not in the same ownership of any abutting vacant lot of record prior to July 19, 1966. 
(b)  Development or redevelopment of nonconforming lots of record pursuant to this section shall comply with all land development regulations including applicable setbacks, height requirements, etc. 
(c)  Said nonconforming lot(s) of record shall be within single-family zoning districts. 
(Code 2001, § 25.815; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 735, 5-1-1990) 
Sec. 12-122. - Adult bookstores, adult theaters and special cabarets. 
    Adult bookstores, adult theaters, or special cabarets which were established at their existing locations in unincorporated Hillsborough County prior to the effective date of annexation of property into the municipal limits of the city, may continue to operate for a period of one year from the effective date of annexation. Thereafter, unless such adult bookstore, adult theater, or special cabaret conforms to the requirements of this LDC, it shall not be allowed to continue to operate. 
(Code 2001, § 25.820) 
Sec. 12-123. - Nonconforming buffers. 
(a)  Buffer walls constructed of block, stucco or poured cement walls, or combinations thereof, which were in existence and conforming as of July 21, 1987, may continue in existence so long as said buffers conform to the city's construction design criteria and are maintained in accordance with acceptable maintenance standards as outlined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Buffer fences constructed of chainlink, wood or other like materials, which were in existence and conforming as of June 2, 1987, shall be modified by June 2, 1989, to conform to the provisions of this LDC, or the current minimum construction design criteria for wood fence buffers and subject to the maintenance standards, as outlined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Acceptable maintenance standards: 
(1)  Buffers shall remain structurally sound at all times as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  At all times, buffers shall remain in aesthetically good condition and shall be kept free from graffiti, undergrowth, weeds and other unsightly matter. 
(3)  Perimeter buffers constructed in residential zoning districts such as buffers surrounding apartment complexes, condominiums, and subdivisions, shall remain uniform in design and color. 
(d)  Landscaped buffers which were in existence and conforming as of June 2, 1987, shall be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this LDC related to landscape buffers no later than June 2, 1989. 
(e)  No buffer may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(f)  If any nonconforming buffer is destroyed to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its value, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.1) 
Sec. 12-124. - Nonconforming signs. 
    A nonconforming sign, defined as any sign within the city/county legally permitted before December 3, 1985, or any sign existing within any area annexed to the city after the effective date of this LDC which does not conform to the requirements of this LDC, is declared to be a nonconforming sign. However, signs that are within ten (10) percent of the height and size limitations of this LDC and in all other respects conform to the requirements of this LDC shall be deemed to be in conformity with this LDC. 
(1)  Amortization of nonconforming signs. 
a.  A nonconforming sign upon permanent mountings may be continued in use until December 3, 1990, or ten (10) years from the issuance of the sign permit therefor, whichever date is later; provided, however, that the maintenance and safety requirements of this LDC shall be met. 
b.  A nonconforming sign shall be required to be in conformance with all provisions of this LDC within thirty (30) days after a change in any of the following: name, site or nature of the business. 
c.  Upon expiration of the amortization period for any nonconforming sign, the city manager or designee shall give notice to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, to remove the sign within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of said notice. Said notice shall be by certified mail to the owner of the property as reflected on the current county tax roll. 
d.  A nonconforming sign which constitutes a hazard or danger to persons or property shall be removed immediately, without notice, by the city manager or designee. 
e.  No additions, repairs and/or alterations to a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except as may be required and approved by the city manager or designee to meet safety requirements. 
f.  A nonconforming sign may not be: 
1.  Structurally altered to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements. 
2.  Altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
3.  Expanded. 
4.  Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of the reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the city manager or designee. 
5.  Continued in use when the structure housing the occupancy is demolished or requires renovations, the cost of which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure. 
6.  Continued in use after the structure housing the occupancy has been vacant for six (6) months or longer. 
(2)  Nonconforming signs along federal highways. If it is determined that nonconforming signs along a federal interstate or primary aid highway may not be removed pursuant to the above provisions, the city council shall develop a plan for their expeditious removal in accordance with state and federal law. (Ord. No. 566, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 735, 5-1-1990) 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.2; Ord. No. 566, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 735, 5-1-1990) 
State Law reference- Removal of signs, F.S. § 70.20. 
Sec. 12-125. - Nonconforming buffering and landscaping. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for bringing existing properties into compliance with the buffering and landscaping standards and regulations of this LDC. Current standards and regulations: 
(1)  Shall be applicable to all new construction. 
(2)  Shall be applicable, to the maximum extent possible, to all existing facilities which are altered, enlarged or remodeled to a degree requiring site plan approval, realizing that the physical constraints of the property may render total compliance impossible. Where standards and regulations cannot be satisfied due to physical constraints, they may be waived as part of the site plan review and approval process. 
(3)  Shall be implemented and incorporated into existing properties/sites to the maximum extent possible prior to January 1, 1994. 
(b)  Properties/sites whose buffering and landscaping remain nonconforming as of January 1, 1994, shall be referred to the municipal code enforcement board unless a waiver of standards and/or regulations has been approved by the city council pursuant to site plan approval, an administrative waiver due to site limitations approved by the community development director, or a waiver/variance granted by the city council. Decisions of the community development director may be appealed to the city manager or designee. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(c)  Where buffering or landscaping features of a property were not in conformance with standards and/or regulations in force on February 1, 1991, those properties must be brought into compliance with either the aforementioned standards and regulations, or applicable parts of current standards and regulations no later than July 1, 1992. 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.3; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 735, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-126. - Nonconforming off-street vehicle use and parking areas. 
(a)  Compliance upon replacement or resurfacing. In addition to the maintenance activities required for off-street vehicle use and parking areas under this LDC, an area existing prior to February 1, 1990, must be brought into full compliance as it relates to the dimensional requirements of this LDC when twenty-five (25) percent or more of the area is replaced or resurfaced. 
(b)  Compliance upon expansion. When the square footage of a vehicle use and parking area is increased or enlarged, compliance with this LDC is required as follows: 
(1)  Expansion by ten (10) percent or less. When a vehicle use and parking area is expanded by ten (10) percent or less, only the expansion area must be brought into compliance with the dimensional provisions of this LDC. 
(2)  Expansion by more than ten (10) percent. When a vehicle use and parking area is expanded by more than ten (10) percent because the seating capacity or other factor controlling the number of spaces is increased, the entire vehicle use area shall be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this LDC. 
(c)  Repeated expansions. Repeated expansions, or resurfacing (black top seal or additional asphalt) or replacement of paving of a vehicle use area over a period of time shall be combined in determining whether the above threshold has been reached. 
(d)  Increased intensity of use. When a replacement or new use of a structure results in an increase in parking requirements thereby increasing the nonconformity, the additional parking requirements must be provided for or the new or replacement use will be denied. 
(e)  Vehicle use areas with excess capacity. Any vehicle use and parking in existence on February 1, 1990, with area in excess of the minimum necessary and which must be brought into conformity due to the conditions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and/or which has more than the minimum number of parking spaces required by this LDC, shall be required to bring the vehicle use and parking area into full compliance with the provisions of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.4) 
Sec. 12-127. - Stormwater management. 
    A development existing prior to February 1, 1990, which does not comply with the stormwater management requirements of this LDC, must be brought into full compliance with the stormwater requirements of this LDC when the use of the development is intensified resulting in an increase in stormwater runoff or added concentration of pollutants in the runoff. 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.5) 
Sec. 12-128. - Nonconforming fences and walls on residential property. 
(a)  As a result of amendments to section 12-861, the following nonconforming uses are established: 
(1)  Standard lots. 
a.  Except on "deep lots" (a lot where the front yard is seventy-five (75) feet or more in depth), or on corner lots, a chainlink fence located along a front property line, or across the front yard, or along the side property lines of the front yard, which was in existence on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992), provided that no part of the fence along the property line or across the front yard is more than four (4) feet in height and provided further that the chainlink fence is landscaped by self-supporting plant material or ivy, vines, or similar materials in such a manner so as to attain screening of the fence with eighty (80) percent opacity within two (2) years of planting. Landscaping must be in place prior to December 1, 1992, and reach the maximum height of the fence at maturity prior to July 1, 1994. All chainlink fences located along front property lines or across the front yard exceeding four (4) feet in height shall be removed, modified, or replaced with a chainlink fence four (4) feet or less prior to December 1, 1992. Landscaping as above is required. 
b.  Chainlink fences along the side property line of the front yard of a standard lot which were in existence on or prior to the date of adoption of this section (May 5, 1992) are not subject to the above four-foot height restrictions; however, landscaping is required as in subsection (a)(1)a of this section. 
c.  Other types of fences and walls located along front property lines, or across the front yard, or along the side property lines of front yards in standard lots which were in existence on or prior to the date of adoption of this section (May 5, 1992) are not subject to the above four-foot height restrictions and landscaping is not required. 
(2)  Corner lots. 
a.  A chainlink fence which is visible from a street, and is located in a rear or side yard of a corner lot, and which fence, or section of fence, is between the house and the street, or is forward of the front of an adjacent residence; which was in existence on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992), provided said fence or section of fence shall be landscaped by self-supporting plant material or ivy, vines, or similar materials in such a manner so as to attain screening of the fence with eighty (80) percent opacity within two (2) years of planting. Height restrictions do not apply to these sections of fence; however, landscaping must be in place prior to December 1, 1992, and reach the maximum height of the fence at maturity prior to July 1, 1994. 
b.  A chainlink fence located along the front property line or across the front yard, or along the side property lines of the front yard of a corner lot, and where those sections of the fence are between the house and the street, or are forward of the front of an adjacent residence, which were in existence on or before the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992), provided said fence or section of fence shall be landscaped by self-supporting material or ivy, vines, or similar materials in such a manner so as to attain screening of the fence with eighty (80) percent opacity within two (2) years of planting. Height restrictions do not apply to these sections of fence; however, landscaping must be in place prior to December 1, 1992, and reach the maximum height of the fence at maturity prior to July 1, 1994. 
c.  Where other types of fences or walls in existence on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992) are sited on corner lots as per subsection (a)(2)a or b of this section, neither height restrictions nor landscaping requirements apply. 
(3)  Deep lots. 
a.  A chainlink fence located along the front property line or across the front yard of a deep lot which was in existence on or before the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992), provided the fence is not more than six (6) feet in height and provided further that the chainlink fence is landscaped by self-supporting plant material or ivy, vines, or similar materials in such a manner so as to attain screening of the fence with eighty (80) percent opacity within two (2) years of planting. 
Landscaping must be in place prior to December 1, 1992, and reach the maximum height of the fence at maturity prior to July 1, 1994. All chainlink fences located along front property lines, or across the front yard of a deep lot, exceeding six (6) feet in height shall be removed, modified, or replaced with a similar fence six (6) feet or less prior to December 31, 1992. Landscaping as above is required. 
b.  Chainlink fences located along the side property line of the front yard of a deep lot which were in existence on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992) are not subject to the six-foot height restriction, nor is landscaping required; except, that portion of the fence along the side property line of the front yard which is forward of the front of an adjacent house shall be landscaped as in subsection (3)a. of this section. 
c.  Other types of fences and walls located along the front property lines, or across the front yard of a deep lot, or along the side property lines of front yards of a deep lot which were in existence on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived (May 5, 1992), are not subject to height restrictions, and landscaping is not required. 
(b)  Replacement of nonconforming fences and walls shall only be made concurrent with bringing the nonconformity into compliance with current standards. 
(c)  No "nonconforming" fence or wall may be enlarged, extended, or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity. 
(d)  If any nonconforming fence or wall is destroyed to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its value, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.6; Ord. No. 786, 9-3-1991; Ord. No. 812, 5-5-1992) 
Sec. 12-129. - Nonconforming fencing and landscaping of public and private utility structures and facilities. 
(a)  Where wet or dry retention and detention ponds existed prior to January 1, 1992, and those ponds have side slopes steeper than four-to-one (4:1) and are fenced, said fencing shall be deemed to be adequate, provided the fence is nonclimbable (including chainlink), landscaped on all exterior sides, and is at least four (4) feet high. The existing pond need not have a ten-foot-wide maintenance area, and the existing fence need not be constructed of chainlink. If existing fences and/or landscaping are nonconforming, said fences and/or landscaping shall be installed to conform to this Code no later than January 1, 1994. If existing ponds having vertical walls do not now have adequate means of ingress and egress, they shall be so modified prior to January 1, 1994. 
(b)  Where other public or private utility structures or facilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer lift stations, water supply or irrigation wells, pumps or meters, telephone switching facilities and electric generation or transmission facilities, exist prior to January 1, 1992, and those structures or facilities require fencing and/or landscaping in accordance with current standards, and fencing and/or landscaping does exist, said fencing and/or landscaping shall be deemed "in compliance," unless for reasons of health or safety the city engineer rules them "not in compliance." Utility structures and facilities ruled "not in compliance" shall be brought into compliance with current standards within one year after being notified, in writing, by the city engineer. 
(c)  Decisions of the city engineer may be appealed to the city manager or designee provided the appeal is submitted within thirty (30) days of notification of "not in compliance." 
(Code 2001, § 25.825.7; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
Secs. 12-130-12-156. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 12-157. - Variances. 
    Provisions for variances related to certain development regulations contained in this LDC are further detailed in this article. 
(Code 2001, § 25.830) 
Sec. 12-158. - Zoning standards. 
(a)  The board of adjustment may grant variances, in accordance with the procedures outlined in article III of this LDC, from the following sections of this LDC, that are applicable to residential, multi-family residential, nonresidential, and agricultural uses and properties: 
(1)  Floodplain protection. 
a.  The flood control board shall be the board of adjustment and shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of the floodplain protection section of this LDC and appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the flood damage control administrator in the enforcement or administration of this LDC. 
b.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the flood control board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the appropriate court of appropriate jurisdiction by petition for writ of certiorari. 
c.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
d.  In passing upon applications for variance, the flood control board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in this article, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept into other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
e.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of floodplain protection, the flood control board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
f.  Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if an increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
g.  Conditions for the granting of variances: 
1.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to afford relief. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon (a) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in an unusual and unnecessary hardship relative to the land, and (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that when a structure is permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation being lower than eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation, the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest flood elevation. 
4.  The flood damage control administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration on an annual basis. 
(2)  Historic properties. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements related to nonconformity, special variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on, or classified as contributing to a district listed on, the National Register of Historic Places, the local register of historic places, or the State Inventory of Historic Places. The special variance shall be the minimum necessary to protect the historic character and design of the structure. No special variance shall be granted if the proposed construction, rehabilitation, or restoration will cause the structure to lose its historical designation. 
(3)  Design standards and development criteria. 
Section 12-506 Schedule of area, height, bulk and placement regulations Section 12-507 Building standards exclusive to specific zoning districts Section 12-508 Accessory uses, buildings or structures Section 12-509 Yard encroachments Section 12-510 Exclusion from height limits Section 12-666 Environmentally sensitive lands Article IX, division 7, sections 12-731 to 12-761 Wellfield protection Section 12-861 Fences, walls and hedges on residential property Section 12-862 Radio, TV antennae; satellite dishes; communication towers Section 12-899 Swimming pool setbacks and ground (lot) coverage Section 12-1010 Design criteria for overwater structures  
(Ord. No. 779, 7-16-1991) 
(4)  Signs (article IX, division 15, sections 12-979 to 12-1006). 
(5)  Landscaping and buffers (article IX, division 17, sections 12-1042 to 12-1082). 
(b)  Where portions of lots or parcels have been or shall be taken by governmental agencies, leaving nonconforming areas, the board of adjustment shall be allowed to grant such variances as may be necessary to accommodate reasonable use of the said remaining property. 
(Code 2001, § 25.830.1; Ord. No. 779, 7-16-1991; Ord. No. 796, 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-159. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 18, 2017, repealed § 12-159, which pertained to signs and buffers and derived from Code 2001, § 25.830.2; Ord. No. 609, 2-17-1987; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 732, 5-1-1990; and Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006. 
Secs. 12-160-12-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ZONING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating the use of land and water, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(a). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-187. - Purpose. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following classifications of zoning districts are hereby established for use within the city: 
R-10 Single Family Residential R-9 Single Family Residential R-7.5 Single Family Residential R-7 Single Family Residential R-MF Multi-Family Residential R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential PD-R Planned Development Residential E-I Educational/Institutional C-O Commercial Office C-G Commercial General PD Planned Development PROF Planned Research Office Facilities LI Light Industrial A-U Agricultural Urban PRS Preservation P/QP Public Quasi-Public  
(Code 2001, § 25.500; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 431, 2-16-1982; Ord. No. 438, 5-3-1982; Ord. No. 462, 1-4-1983; Ord. No. 541, 3-29-1985; Ord. No. 655, 5-17-1988; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 751, 9-4-1990; Ord. No. 754, 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 825, 1-19-1993; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1399, § 2(Exh. B), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-188. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of zoning districts established within the city shall be shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida," as amended, and as said map may be amended subsequent to the adoption thereof. Said map sections or portions thereof, together with all notations, dimensions, designations, references and other data shown thereon, are hereby adopted and made part of this article to the same extent as if the information set forth in said map were fully described and incorporated herein. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested to by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in section 12-188 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida." 
(c)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official certified zoning map, which shall be located at the office of the community development director, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings, and structures within the city. 
(d)  The official zoning map shall be updated annually, at a minimum, by the community development department. 
(Code 2001, § 25.505; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-189. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
    The location of any zoning district boundaries shown on the zoning map shall be determined by the following rules: 
(1)  Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow centerlines of streets or alleys, street or railway right-of-way or watercourses or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless said zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the zoning map; 
(2)  Where zoning district boundaries approximately follow platted lot lines on the zoning map, said limits shall be construed to be said boundaries; 
(3)  Where zoning district boundaries approximately follow city limits, said limits shall be construed to be said boundaries; 
(4)  On unsubdivided property, or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of any said boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown upon the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the scale shown upon said map; 
(5)  If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary, the city council shall determine and fix the location of said boundary line following a public hearing. Notice of said public hearing shall be published at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of said hearing in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the municipality and shall contain the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. (Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 536, 3-19-1985; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990) 
(Code 2001, § 25.510; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 536, 3-19-1985; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990) 
Sec. 12-190. - Uses permitted. 
    Only those uses specifically listed as being permitted within a zoning district shall be permitted in said zoning district, and only in accordance with any stipulated provisions. Unless otherwise stated herein, it is the intent of this LDC that any use or class of use not specifically listed as permitted shall be expressly prohibited. 
(Code 2001, § 25.515; Ord. No. 796, 12-3-1991) 
Sec. 12-191. - Only one principal building, structure, or use upon any zoning lot. 
    Each building, structure, or use erected or established shall be located upon a single-family residential zoning lot as herein defined and, except as herein may be provided, there shall be no more than one principal building, structure, or use upon any single-family residential zoning lot. 
(Code 2001, § 25.520; Ord. No. 796, 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 876, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 12-192. - Manufactured homes/mobile homes. 
    No manufactured homes, including mobile homes, shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the city, except in an approved mobile/manufactured home park in a R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential or E-I Educational/Institutional zoning district. 
(Code 2001, § 25.525; Ord. No. 877, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 12-193. - Rezoning. 
(a)  General conditions. This article, including the zoning map, may be amended by the city council on its own motion, on petition or on recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall submit its report within thirty (30) days after receiving an amendment proposal from the city council for review; otherwise said amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by said planning commission. Before enacting an amendment to these regulations, the city council shall give public notice and hold hearings thereon as set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990) 
(b)  Application for amendment. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Applications for amendment may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of this article or proposals for amendment of the zoning map; for the purposes of this article, map amendments and text amendments shall be collectively referred to as zoning reclassifications. Applications for zoning reclassifications may be made only by a property owner, contract purchaser or person financially interested in the property to be reclassified, or by a governmental agency. Applications shall be filed in triplicate with the community development director; provided, however, that the city council may, on its own motion, commence the procedure for a zoning reclassification without filing a formal application. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
b.  All nongovernmental zoning reclassification shall be accompanied by a filing fee of in the amount established by the city's schedule of fees and charges for development permits. No filing fee shall be refunded unless the application is withdrawn prior to the time it is ordered to be advertised. In no event shall more than four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the filing fee be refunded. 
(2)  Signature of applicant and owner required. All applications for zoning reclassifications shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant and owner and shall state the applicant's and owner's name and address. 
(3)  Application for text amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
(4)  Application for map amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
a.  The street address of the land proposed to be reclassified or if no street address exists, the location with respect to the nearest public roads in common use; 
b.  A boundary survey or sketch with the legal description, by metes and bounds, bearings and distances or by reference to the lot, block and appropriate plat references, and acreage of the subject site that is signed and sealed by a surveyor; 
c.  The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such land; 
d.  The name(s) and addresses(es) of all owners of the land to be reclassified; 
e.  The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or any part of the land; 
f.  The zoning of the property(ies) immediately adjacent to the site proposed to be rezoned, including surrounding jurisdictions; and 
g.  Documents that clearly identify all individual and/or corporate property owner(s), registered agent(s), authorized agent(s), etc., that may act on behalf of the property owner for the requested rezoning classification. 
(5)  Posting of property. 
a.  At least one sign shall be erected by staff on the property on each road the property has access to and multiple signs posted, on lots with greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet of road frontage or in excess of one acre, along the road, at least ten (10) days prior to each public hearing, unless the first notice letter included all public hearing dates. A picture shall be taken of the sign posted on the site and an affidavit indicating that the city posted a sign on the property on a certain date that meets this requirement and both shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. The minimum size of such sign shall be twelve (12) by eighteen (18) inches. The sign shall state the application number, present zoning classification, proposed zoning classification, property address, scheduled date, time and place of the public hearing, and the telephone number to call for further information. 
b.  If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one block, as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of the county, a sign shall be erected on each such block. 
c.  The sign shall remain posted on the property until after the second public hearing and then be removed unless a petition for a reconsideration shall have been submitted, in which event such sign shall remain until after the city council disposes of the petition for reconsideration. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or tamper with such sign. 
(6)  Review by planning commission. Within five (5) days after acceptance of any such application, the director or designee shall transmit a copy of the rezoning application to the planning commission staff, DRC, city clerk, city attorney, and other agencies or organizations deemed necessary by the director. Once the director or designee determines the application is sufficient, the director shall inform the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail, that the application has been deemed sufficient and sent to the DRC and planning commission for review. An ordinance for consideration by the city council shall be generated and reviewed by the director or his designee and the city attorney for approval. (Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 444, 6-8-1982; Ord. No. 492, 10-18-1983; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 1002, 9-9-1999; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(c)  Hearing procedure. 
(1)  A date, time and place for a public hearing on the application shall be established. 
(2)  Applicant notice. A minimum of ten (10) days' notice shall be provided to the applicant in writing, by email or U.S. mail, prior to each public hearing, or the first public hearing if multiple public hearing dates are included in the first notice to the applicant, regarding the requested rezoning, subject property, and public hearing date, time, and location. An affidavit indicating that the city sent such notice on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. 
(3)  Notice to surrounding property owners. A minimum of ten (10) days' notice shall be provided to the surrounding property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the rezoning request for map amendments prior to each public hearing, or the first public hearing if multiple public hearing dates are included in the first notice to the property owners. The notice shall include a summary of the requested rezoning, applicant, property owner, map identifying the subject site, and public hearing date, time, and location. The properties within one hundred (100) feet of the subject site shall be generated from the Hillsborough County Property Appraiser's Office website. An affidavit indicating that the city sent such notice on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. 
(4)  The cost of the legal advertisements required shall be borne by the applicant and paid in accordance with procedures established by the city manager or designee. 
(5)  Zoning reclassification applications for text and map amendments shall require two (2) public hearings and notices of said public hearings to be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the municipality. It is the legislative intent that, whenever possible, the advertisement appears in a newspaper that is published at least five (5) days a week unless the only newspaper in the community is published less than five (5) days a week. Said notice for zoning map amendments shall appear at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the first public hearing and at least five (5) days prior to the second public hearing, and for zoning text amendments shall appear at least ten (10) days prior to the date of each public hearing, and each newspaper advertisement for zoning map or text amendments shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing, together with a summary of the proposed amendment. An affidavit indicating that the city advertised such notices in the newspaper on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. 
(6)  If a comprehensive plan amendment is required, it shall be processed in accordance to state statutes. A zoning reclassification application can be processed concurrently with the comprehensive plan amendment, however, the zoning change shall not be effective until the comprehensive plan amendment is finalized in accordance to state statutes. The cost of legal advertisements required shall be borne by the applicant and paid in accordance with procedures established by the city manager or designee. 
(7)  No fee is required for applications for amendments to the comprehensive plan amendments or zoning amendments, including text or map, submitted by a governmental agency. 
(8)  Conduct of hearing. Any interested person shall have the right to submit oral or written testimony at the public hearing. All testimony and exhibits admitted at the hearing, including the application shall promptly be incorporated by the city clerk in the application file and shall be considered a part of the record on the application. The master plan for the area, with any subsequent amendments for the area within which lies the land proposed to be reclassified, shall be considered a part of the record on the application. Evidence which is immaterial, irrelevant or unduly repetitious may be excluded. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time to a date established by public announcement at the hearing. (Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 492, 10-18-1983; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990) 
(9)  The applicant shall be responsible for any fees charged by the planning commission. 
(d)  Action by the governing body. 
(1)  All applications for amendment of map or text shall be decided on the basis of evidence of record. 
(2)  An application for a map or text amendment shall be either approved, modified, or denied on the merits, or dismissed, or allowed to be withdrawn. 
(3)  The city council may dismiss any application if it finds that: 
a.  The application does not conform to any procedural requirement of this article; 
b.  The application was filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after a previous filing for a similar purpose as herein provided; or 
c.  The application is frivolous or filed for the purpose of harassment. 
(4)  An applicant may withdraw its application for a map amendment (rezoning), provided the request for withdrawal is made prior to a vote by city council to approve, modify or deny said application. No application for the reclassification of all or any part of the land which is the subject of the application shall be allowed for one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of such withdrawal unless, by resolution, the city council specifies that the one-hundred-eighty-day limitation shall not apply. 
(5)  If an application is not dismissed or allowed to be withdrawn as herein provided, it shall either be approved, modified, or denied on the merits, in which case no application for reclassification of all or any part of the land which is the subject of the application shall be accepted for filing within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of such approval or denial on the merits. 
(6)  No application for a map amendment shall be approved conditionally for the erection on the land of a structure at a particular location, or within a particular time, or by a particular person, or of a particular type, or on any condition. 
(7)  No application for a map amendment shall be approved for a greater area than that applied for, but the application may be approved for a smaller area if the reclassification of such smaller area is supported by the evidence of record and such smaller area is accurately delineated in the record. 
(8)  City council shall have the following options regarding an application: 
a.  Approval of application. The decision of the city council to approve an application for a map or text amendment shall be rendered at the final public hearing and final reading. 
b.  Denial of application. Upon denial of an application for a zoning map or text amendment, city council shall adopt a resolution stating the reasons for denial no sooner than twenty-one (21) days after the public hearing to allow for reconsideration, but within sixty (60) days after the public hearing is held thereon and shall be determined by a majority vote of city council. 
(9)  All decisions of the governing body shall be made in open sessions and the ordinance or resolution embodying the decision approving, modifying, denying or dismissing any application for the map or text amendment shall not be valid unless it is incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which such action was taken. 
(10)  Such ordinance or resolution embodying the decision of the city council, approving, modifying, denying or dismissing any application for map or text amendment, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and a copy sent to the applicant. 
(11)  The decision of the city council on any application for a map or text amendment shall be final except that a petition requesting reconsideration of the city council's decision on any application may be filed with the director by the original applicant or by any person who appeared at the public hearing held by the city council on the original application, if accompanied by a receipt from the city showing payment of a filing fee in the amount established by the city, except in the case of a petition by a governmental agency when no such fee is required, and by affidavit, of the person requesting the reconsideration, that a copy of the petition has been served in person or by mail on all persons or their attorneys who appeared at the said hearing, naming them, as shown by the minutes of the said hearing. 
(12)  If a reconsideration petition is filed within twenty (20) days after the denial of the application, city council shall have up to thirty (30) days, after it considers the reconsideration petition to adopt a resolution stating the reason(s) for denial of the zoning map or text amendment application if the decision to deny the application is upheld. 
(13)  No petition requesting reconsideration of the city council's decision on any application for a map or text amendment may be filed later than twenty (20) calendar days following the decision except with the concurrence of the city council. 
(14)  The petition shall briefly state the alleged errors in the decision and the supporting arguments. 
(15)  Following its review of the petition for reconsideration, the city council may reaffirm or rescind its prior decision and the subject application thereafter may be approved, denied or dismissed by the city council, with or without further hearings. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from reconsidering any decision on its own motion. 
(Code 2001, § 25.550; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 223, 1-6-1970; Ord. No. 444, 6-8-1982; Ord. No. 492, 10-18-1983; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 905, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 977, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 1002, 9-9-1999; Ord. No. 1090, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1178, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 1183, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-194. - Comprehensive plan amendment. 
    Comprehensive plan map and text amendments shall follow the review procedures as described in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment Procedures Manual: For Unincorporated Hillsborough County and the Cities of Tampa, Plant City, and Temple Terrace adopted by the planning commission, county, and cities within Hillsborough County and in accordance to state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 12-195-12-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 12-225. - R-10 Single Family Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the R-10 district. The purpose of the R-10 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas within the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate for the development and maintenance of low density residential neighborhoods with ample open space and outdoor living areas; to designate those uses and services deemed appropriate and proper for location and development within said zoning district; and to establish such development standards and provisions as are appropriate to ensure a proper and desirable low density residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a R-10 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family. 
(2)  Building or use owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses, or utility structures or stations owned or operated by the city, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of utility service. 
(3)  Residential and related health care facility, except the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Assisted living facility (ALF) with greater than five (5) residents. 
b.  Adult day care center. 
c.  Community residential homes (CRH) with greater than six (6) residents. 
d.  Transitional living facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Land and buildings within an R-10 Single Family Residential zoning district may be used for the following purposes upon review and approval of the city council and in accordance with sections 12-241, 12-259, 12-377, and 12-379 (if the criteria for section 12-377 are exceeded): 
(1)  Church, synagogue, other place of worship or church school. 
(2)  College or university. 
(3)  Golf course (regulation size) and related buildings, structures, recreation uses, and service uses. 
(4)  Publicly owned or operated building or use, except buildings or uses owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other public recreation uses. 
(5)  Public utility structure or station, except any such structure or station owned or operated by the city, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, and pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of approved utility services. 
(6)  School (private or parochial) offering a curriculum substantially equivalent to that of a public school with comparable grades and meeting the requirements of the state department of education. 
(7)  Recreational use for youths and for adults, operated and maintained by a not-for-profit organization and open to the general public; provided, however, that recreational uses, owned, operated or maintained by the city shall not require special approval. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.1; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-226. - R-9 Single Family Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the R-9 district. The purpose of the R-9 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas within the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate for the development and maintenance of a low density residential neighborhood with ample open space and outdoor living areas; to designate those uses and services deemed appropriate and proper for location and development within said zoning districts; to establish such development standards and provisions as are appropriate to ensure a proper and desirable low density residential environment; and to allow for development of areas which, because of their drainage problems, must be developed with lots of less than one hundred (100) feet at the property line. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a R-9 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family. 
(2)  Building or use owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses, or utility structures or stations owned or operated by the city, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of utility service. 
(3)  Residential and related health care facility, except the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Assisted living facility (ALF) with greater than five (5) residents. 
b.  Adult day care center. 
c.  Community residential homes (CRH) with greater than six (6) residents. 
d.  Transitional living facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. In addition to those uses requiring conditional use approval in the R-10 zoning district, pursuant to section 12-225(c), golf driving ranges and nonregulation size golf courses are also permissible by conditional use approval in the R-9 zoning district in accordance with sections 12-241, 12-259, 12-377, and 12-379 (if the criteria for section 12-377 are exceeded). 
    Golf driving range. Each proposed golf driving range shall meet, in addition to applicable development standards found elsewhere in the land development code, the following specific requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum parcel width at front property line: Four hundred (400) feet. 
(3)  Maximum light trespass on adjacent residential properties: Twenty-hundredths (0.20) candle power at the property line. 
(4)  Maximum height of luminaries: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(5)  Minimum parking standards: One and one-half (11/2) spaces per driving lane. 
(6)  Minimum distance from abutting single-family residentially zoned properties or closest public thoroughfare right-of-way (on the sides): Three hundred (300) feet. 
(7)  Fence or net height along range perimeter: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(8)  Operating hours: limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(9)  Buffering requirements of section 12-1050(b) shall apply. 
(10)  No loudspeakers or other sound amplifying devices shall be permitted. (Ord. No. 854, 12-7-1993) 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.2; Ord. No. 854, 12-7-1993; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-227. - R-7.5 Single Family Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the R-7.5 district. The purpose of the R-7.5 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas within the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate for the development and maintenance of medium density residential neighborhoods with ample open space and outdoor living areas, to designate those uses and services deemed appropriate and proper for location and development within said zoning district, and to establish such development standards and provisions as are appropriate to ensure a proper and desirable medium density residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a R-7.5 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family. 
(2)  Building or use owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses; or utility structures or stations owned or operated by the city, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of utility service. 
(3)  Residential and related health care facility, except the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Assisted living facility (ALF) with greater than five (5) residents. 
b.  Adult day care center. 
c.  Community residential homes (CRH) with greater than six (6) residents. 
d.  Transitional living facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. In addition to those uses requiring conditional use approval in the R-10 and R-9 zoning districts, pursuant to sections 12-225(c) and 12-226(c), land and buildings within an R-7.5 zoning district may be used for the following purposed upon review and approval of the city council in accordance with sections 12-241, 12-259, 12-377, and 12-379 (if the criteria for section 12-377 are exceeded): 
    Child care facility (center). Each proposed child care facility (center) shall submit, together with its application for special approval of use, a site plan including the following information: 
(1)  General location of principal structures and uses, including play areas, open spaces, paved areas and driveways, sidewalks, buffers and protective walls and fences; 
(2)  Description of the location of fencing, identification signs and special landscaping; 
(3)  Maximum number of children and age range; 
(4)  Boundary lines of property, including dimensions; and 
(5)  Evidence of compliance with applicable state regulations. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.3; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-228. - R-7 Single Family Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the R-7 district. The purpose of the R-7 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas within the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate for the development and maintenance of medium density residential neighborhoods with ample open space and outdoor living areas, to designate those uses and services deemed appropriate and proper for location and development within said zoning district; and to establish such development standards and provisions as are appropriate to ensure a proper and desirable medium density residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a R-7 Single Family Residential zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family. 
(2)  Building or use owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses; or utility structures or stations owned or operated by the city, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of utility service. 
(3)  Residential and related health care facility, except the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Assisted living facility (ALF) with greater than five (5) residents. 
b.  Adult day care center. 
c.  Community residential homes (CRH) with greater than six (6) residents. 
d.  Transitional living facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Land and buildings within a R-7 zoning district may be used for those uses requiring conditional use approval in the R-10, R-9, and R-7.5 zoning districts, pursuant to sections 12-225(c), 12-226(c), and 12-227(c) upon review and approval of the city council and in accordance with sections 12-241, 12-259, 12-377, and 12-379 (if the criteria for section 12-377 are exceeded). 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.4; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-229. - R-MF Multi-Family Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the R-MF district. The purpose of the R-MF Multi-Family Residential zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas with the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate for the development and maintenance of medium density residential neighborhoods properly served by adequate community facilities and commercial service areas; to designate those uses and services deemed appropriate and proper for location and development within said zoning district; and to establish such development standards and provisions as are appropriate to ensure a proper and desirable medium density residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a R-MF Multi-Family Residential zoning district shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Multifamily dwelling. 
(2)  Publicly owned or operated building or use, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses. 
(3)  Public utility structure or station, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of utility service. 
(4)  College or university. 
(5)  Church, synagogue, other place of worship, or church school. 
(6)  Nursery school or kindergarten. 
(7)  School (private or parochial), offering a curriculum substantially equivalent to that of a public school with comparable grades and meeting the requirements of the state department of education. 
(8)  Townhouses. 
(9)  Recreational use for youths and for adults, operated and maintained by a not-for-profit organization and open to the general public. 
(10)  All residential and related health care facility, except for the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Community residential home (CRH) =15 residents) 
b.  Transitional living facility. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed after review and approval by city council: 
(1)  Community residential home (CRH) (=15 residents) and transitional living facility may be allowed as conditional uses in the R-MF zoning district, but no other such residential and related health care facilities are allowed as a conditional use in the R-MF zoning district, consistent with state law. See section 12-259 for additional requirements. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.5; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-230. - R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the R-MFA district. The purpose of the R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas within the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate for the development and maintenance of multifamily residential housing properly served by adequate community facilities, recreational amenities and commercial service areas and to provide additional flexibility in the development of said areas beyond that which is currently available in the R-MF Multi-Family Residential zoning district; to designate those uses and services deemed appropriate and proper for location and development within said zoning district; and to establish such development standards and provisions as are appropriate to ensure a proper and desirable multifamily residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential zoning district shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Hotel or motel. 
(2)  Hotel/restaurant complex or motel/restaurant complex, subject to the following limitations and restrictions: 
Such complexes, whether under single ownership or with separate ownership of the hotel or motel and the restaurant components, may be developed only pursuant to a single, unified general site development plan; provided, however, no restaurant may be approved as part of a hotel/restaurant complex or as part of a motel/restaurant complex unless said restaurant has a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of service area, and is equipped to provide full table service of meals to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) persons at tables at one time. 
(3)  Mobile or manufactured home park. (Ord. No. 877, 8-2-1994) 
(4)  All residential and related health care facility, except for the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Community residential home (CRH) (=15 residents) 
b.  Transitional living facility. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be allowed after review and approval by city council: 
(1)  Community residential home (CRH) (=15 residents) and transitional living facility may be allowed as conditional uses in the R-MFA zoning district, but no other such residential and related health care facilities are allowed as a conditional use in the R-MFA zoning district, consistent with state law. See section 12-259 for additional requirements. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.6; Ord. No. 877, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-231. - PD-R Planned Development Residential zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the PD-R district. The purpose of the PD-R, Planned Development Residential zoning district is to permit the following, at the discretion of city council: 
(1)  Single-family residential dwellings in appropriate infill areas of the city. No more than three (3) abutting single-family residential dwellings may be requested by an applicant pursuant to the district's regulations. The characteristics of the adjacent lots, including across the street from the site, shall be considered in creating new infill residential lots in the area. For infill residential lots that do not require a plat or replat, a site plan, including the boundaries, easements, existing and proposed principal and accessory structure setbacks, etc., on the property involved and a boundary survey or sketch, shall be considered and satisfy the requirements for a final site plan for the PD-R rezoning application. 
(2)  All residential and related health care facilities, except the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Assisted living facility (ALF) with greater than five (5) residents. 
b.  Community residential homes (CRH) with greater than six (6) residents. 
c.  Transitional living facilities. 
d.  Other such facilities that are not permitted in the adjacent zoning districts next to the site proposed to be changed to PD-R zoning district consist with state law. 
(b)  Approval of the PD-R zoning district. City council shall consider any request for a PD-R zoning in accordance with the provisions provided in section 12-193. The drawings described herein, representations made by the applicant during the public hearing when the zoning is considered, and any conditions imposed on the development by city council, shall become part of the zoning and shall run with the land. Development of the subject property shall be in strict compliance with the approval of the PD-R zoning. (Ord. No. 754, 9-17-1990, Scrivener's Error correction 11-22-2006) 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.7; Ord. No. 754, 9-17-1990, Scrivener's Error correction 11-22-2006; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-232. - E-I Educational Institutional zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the E-I district. The purpose of the E-I, Educational Institutional zoning district shall be to locate and designate areas within the city that are uniquely suited for the grouping and development of public and quasi-public educational and institutional uses to serve the residents of the city and surrounding areas; to designate such uses as appropriate for development within said zoning district; and to set forth such development standards and provisions as proper and necessary to ensure the proper development and functioning of uses within said zoning district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within an E-I, Educational Institutional zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Schools, including: 
a.  Public and private elementary, junior high, and high schools, including general education and vocational/technical schools, and related auxiliary and support facilities and uses, including, but not limited to, power plants, gymnasiums and other outdoor sports and recreational facilities. 
b.  Higher educational institutions, including junior colleges, colleges and universities, and related and support auxiliary facilities and uses, including, but not limited to, libraries, gymnasiums and other outdoor sports and recreational facilities, maintenance facilities, food and eating facilities, dormitories and other living quarters, including manufactured homes and/or mobile homes, and laundries. (Ord. No. 877, 8-2-1994) 
(2)  Hospitals (but not animal hospitals), health services designed primarily for in-patient care, and related auxiliary and support facilities and uses, including, but not limited to, power plants, offices, recreational facilities, and personal care and separate detached clinics. 
(3)  All residential and related health care facilities, including health services designed primarily for in-patient care, and related auxiliary and support facilities and uses, including, but not limited to, power plants, offices, recreational facilities, and personal care, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.8; Ord. No. 825, 1-19-1993; Ord. No. 877, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-233. - C-O Commercial Office zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the C-O district. The purpose of the C-O Commercial Office zoning district shall be to locate and designate areas within the city which are suited for the development of uses of an institutional or professional nature to serve the residents of the city and surrounding areas; to designate such uses as appropriate for development within said zoning district; and to set forth such development standards and provisions as proper and necessary to ensure the proper development and functioning of uses within said zoning district. 
(b)  Permitted use. Land and buildings within a C-O Commercial Office zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Church, synagogue, other place of worship or church school. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Funeral home or undertaking establishment. 
(4)  Medical or dental clinic. 
(5)  Office, for administrative, business or professional use. 
(6)  Portrait studio. 
(7)  Publicly owned or operated building or use; including, but not limited to, schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other public recreational uses. 
(8)  Public utility structures or stations, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, and pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of approved utility service. 
(9)  School (private or parochial), either offering a curriculum substantially equivalent to that of a public school with comparable grades and meeting the requirements of the state department of education or an educational facility or school offering a similar curriculum designed to remediate or supplement educational instruction. 
(10)  Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses may also be permitted within the C-O Commercial Office zoning district, subject to the specific criteria for said uses outlined in subsection (d) of this section and section 12-259 of this Code. Commercial activities legally in operation on the effective date of this article, December 19, 1995, and which are identified as being subject to conditional use approvals, shall be recognized as approved conditional uses and further approvals by the city council are not required. 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishment. 
(2)  Conversion of a residential structure to a nonresidential permitted use. 
(3)  Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, beauty salons, nail salons and tanning salons. 
(4)  Pharmacy. 
(5)  Residential use in conjunction with a nonresidential permitted use. 
(6)  Veterinarian clinic. (Ord. No. 972, 2-3-1998) 
(7)  All residential and related health care facilities, except planned residential community (PRC) and transitional living facility, may be allowed as conditional uses in the C-O zoning district, but no other such residential and related health care facilities are allowed as a conditional use in the C-O zoning district, consistent with state law. See section 12-259 for additional requirements. 
(d)  Specific criteria for conditional uses in the C-O Commercial Office zoning district. 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishment: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
c.  The subject residence, accessory dwelling units and other accessory structures must comply with the regulations of the land development code for a single-family dwelling unit in the city's R-9 residential zoning district. 
d.  Parking in excess of that required for a single-family dwelling shall not be located forward of the front building line and may not be required to be paved. 
e.  Bed and breakfast establishments shall be allowed no more than five (5) lodging units. 
f.  Signage shall be used for identity purposes only. Signage shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) square feet, and non-illuminated. 
g.  Activities which are customary and incidental to the function of the bed and breakfast may be permitted. 
h.  Must be owner occupied and operated and maintain an affiliation with a bed and breakfast industry registry. 
i.  Shall meet applicable state and local regulations. 
j.  Such uses shall only be provided in principal structures containing not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
k.  Not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross square footage of the principal structure shall be utilized for the bed and breakfast use. For the purposes of calculating the area of the structure devoted to the bed and breakfast use, only the floor area of the bedroom and bathroom areas utilized by the bed and breakfast guests shall be considered in such calculations. 
(2)  Conversion of a residential structure to a nonresidential permitted use, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
c.  Compliance with all local, state, and federal regulations relevant to building and fire codes. 
d.  Additional parking requirements generated by conversion to nonresidential uses may be provided with mulch parking areas rather than concrete or other impervious surface where practical from an engineering design standpoint. 
e.  A solid or wood fence buffer is required when the commercial conversion is adjacent to residentially zoned and/or used lands. 
f.  A maximum of two (2) commercial uses may occupy a residential structure converted to commercial usage. 
(3)  Personal services such as barbershops, beauty salons, nail salons and tanning salons, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
(4)  Pharmacy, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
(5)  Residential use in conjunction with a nonresidential permitted use, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
c.  Occupancy of residential use shall be limited to owner/operator of associated nonresidential use. 
d.  Multifamily residential uses are prohibited. 
(6)  Veterinarian clinic, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
c.  All activities shall be carried out within soundproof, air conditioned buildings with no outdoor cages, runs or other outdoor facilities. 
d.  There shall be no overnight boarding of animals unless said boarding is necessary in connection with treatment, recovery or for other medical reasons. 
e.  Said use shall conform fully to those performance standards listed elsewhere in the Code related to noise and odors. (Ord. No. 972, 2-3-1998) 
(7)  Funeral home with accessory crematory (for incineration of human remains only, and only in association with services provided by a funeral home). 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council is required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
c.  The crematory shall be limited to one incinerator unit. 
d.  All cremation activities shall be carried out within the principal structure and may not take place inside any accessory building. 
e.  Hours of operation of the crematory shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
f.  The crematory incinerator stack shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any lot line adjoining residentially zoned property, and shall include a minimum five-foot-wide buffer area along the entire adjoining lot line to include, at a minimum: 
1.  Six-foot masonry wall finished on all sides to match the principal structure; and 
2.  Evergreen trees a minimum of ten (10) feet in height, planted not more than twenty (20) feet apart, with additional evergreen shrubs, plants, and ground cover to form an eighty (80) percent opaque screen at the time of planting. 
g.  The crematory shall be fueled by natural gas if connection is available within five hundred (500) feet of the incinerator site. If such natural gas connection is not available, any fuel storage tank shall be screened with an opaque fence or wall or installed underground. 
h.  Crematory operation shall meet all required minimum standards and permitting requirements of local, state, and federal agencies. 
i.  Said use shall conform fully to those performance standards listed in section 10-4, Public Nuisances, and elsewhere in this Code related to smoke, noise and odors. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.9; Ord. No. 972, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 1183, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-234. - C-G Commercial General zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the C-G district. The purpose of the C-G Commercial General zoning district shall be to locate and designate areas within the city which are suited for the development and operation of general commercial service areas to serve the residents of the city and surrounding areas; to designate such uses as appropriate for development within said zoning district; and to set forth such development standards and provisions as proper and necessary to ensure the proper development and functioning of uses within said zoning district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a C-G Commercial General zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses, excluding single-family dwellings, permitted under section 12-233, C-O Commercial Office zoning regulations. 
(2)  Antique store. 
(3)  Apparel and shoe store. 
(4)  Appliance stores, including repair, carried on entirely within the building. 
(5)  Art supply store. 
(6)  Automotive supply store. 
(7)  Bakery. 
(8)  Bank or financial institution. (Ord. No. 1104, 12-2-2003) 
(9)  Barber/beauty salon. 
(10)  Bicycle sales. 
(11)  Book/stationery store, new and used. 
(12)  Camera/photography store. 
(13)  Candy store. 
(14)  Car rental agencies. (Ord. No. 1079, 10-15-2002) 
(15)  Clothing store. 
(16)  Clubs or lodges. 
(17)  Convenience store. 
(18)  Department and discount stores. 
(19)  Drugstore. 
(20)  Dry cleaners. 
(21)  Exterminator. 
(22)  Fitness center. 
(23)  Florist shop. 
(24)  Food catering service. 
(25)  Food product store. 
(26)  Furniture/home furnishing. 
(27)  Gift shop. 
(28)  Golf courses excluding driving ranges and/or lighting for night use. (Ord. No. 980, 9-15-1998) 
(29)  Hardware store. 
(30)  Hobby/toy/craft store. 
(31)  Home improvement store. 
(32)  Hotel/motel. 
(33)  Interior cleaning service. 
(34)  Jewelry store, including repairs. 
(35)  Lawn/garden/pool supply store. 
(36)  Mail order pickup facilities. 
(37)  Musical instrument/supply store. 
(38)  Newsstand. 
(39)  Novelty and souvenir shop. 
(40)  Office equipment and supply store. 
(41)  Optician/optical supplies. 
(42)  Pet grooming and/or supply, not including sale of animals. 
(43)  Pet store. 
(44)  Pharmacy. 
(45)  Quick copy and duplicating service. 
(46)  Radio and TV sales. 
(47)  Repair shops, other than automotive, provided work is carried out wholly within an enclosed building. 
(48)  Restaurants, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Restaurant(s) may not comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of a retail/office center which contains fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more of gross leasable space. 
b.  Outdoor seating shall constitute no more than twenty (20) percent of the total enclosed seating capacity of the restaurant; shall be located immediately adjacent to the place of business where service is provided, and shall be subject to submission and approval of a site design/layout plan which may address such items including, but not limited to, buffering, accessibility, and maintenance. 
c.  On-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages shall meet all requirements and stipulations contained in chapter 4, Alcoholic Beverages. 
(49)  Schools-art, business, dancing, music, dramatic, physical culture, gymnastic, secretarial, martial arts, and other similar type of schools. 
(50)  Shoe store or shoe repair shop. 
(51)  Sporting goods store. 
(52)  Supermarket. 
(53)  Theater (indoor). 
(54)  Tobacco shop. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses may also be permitted within the C-G Commercial General zoning district, subject to the specific criteria for said uses outlined in subsection (d) of this section and section 12-259 of this Code. Commercial activities legally in operation on the date of adoption of this article, December 19, 1995, and which are identified as being subject to conditional use approvals, shall be recognized as approved conditional uses and further approvals by the city council are not required. 
(1)  Automobile sales, service and leasing. 
(2)  Automobile washing service, manual or mechanical, coin-operated or self-service facilities. 
(3)  Bowling alley, billiard hall, or other similar recreation use or place of amusement, assembly or entertainment carried on wholly within an enclosed building. 
(4)  Buildings with a maximum height in excess of fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Dry cleaning/laundry establishment, other than pick-up only. 
(6)  Furniture refinishing, reupholstery. 
(7)  Gas station, without automotive repair but including convenience sales. 
(8)  High turnover retail automotive services. 
(9)  Landscape nursery. 
(10)  Liquor store. 
(11)  Lounge. 
(12)  Restaurants which comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of a retail/office center of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more or which propose outdoor seating which shall constitute more than twenty (20) percent of the total enclosed seating capacity of the restaurant(s). 
(13)  Retail uses other than those delineated above which are determined by the community development director to be similar in nature and/or consistent with the general purpose and intent of the established permitted uses. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(14)  Service station, with or without convenience sales. 
(15)  Veterinarian clinic. 
(16)  Communication towers. (Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996) 
(17)  Golf course driving ranges and/or golf course lighting for night use. (Ord. No. 980, 9-15-1998) 
(18)  Blood donor center, which is a business primarily engaging in the activity of receiving or taking whole blood, plasma or any component thereof from human donors for consideration. (Ord. No. 1080, 11-5-2002) 
(19)  All residential and related health care facilities, except a planned residential community (PRC), may be allowed as conditional uses in the C-G zoning district, but no other such residential and related health care facilities are allowed as a conditional use in the C-G zoning district, consistent with state law. See section 12-259 for additional requirements. 
(20)  Tattoo parlor. 
(d)  Specific criteria for conditional uses in the C-G Commercial General zoning district. 
(1)  Automobile sales, service and leasing, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Minimum lot area of three (3) acres. 
d.  A landscape strip ten (10) feet in width containing a hedge three (3) feet in height, ground cover, and one tree per forty (40) linear feet, shall be maintained along rights-of-way. 
e.  All automotive repair activities shall be performed within a completely enclosed building. 
f.  All outdoor storage areas for vehicles being repaired shall be shielded by a solid buffer in accordance with the definition thereof contained in this LDC. 
g.  All customer and employee parking and vehicle display areas shall be delineated on the site plan. Pavement signage or small signs on vertical posts stating "customer parking" or "employee parking" shall be constructed for each customer and employee parking space and shall be maintained by the owner or lessee. Vehicle display areas are not required to stripe individual parking spaces to allow flexibility in display. Vehicle display shall not encroach at any time into any customer or employee parking area, drive aisles, green space area, or visibility triangle. 
h.  All outdoor lighting shall be in conformance with those performance standards related to lighting and glare referenced in section 12-923(8) directional in nature and shall not negatively impact adjoining properties and/or roadways. 
(2)  Automobile washing service, manual or mechanical, excluding coin-operated or self service facilities, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Service shall be confined to the washing, cleaning, waxing and polishing of the exterior surface of passenger vehicles; and to the incidental cleaning and vacuuming of the interior passenger section. 
d.  Except for incidental manual drying or polishing, service shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed structure specifically designed for the use and providing for the through movement of vehicles being serviced. Entrances and exits to and from the structure and all interior service areas shall be screened from view from public streets or adjacent private property to the greatest extent possible by means of permanent walls or decorative panels. 
e.  The sale of gasoline, operation of oil change/lube service, fluid replacement, and/or wiper replacement as incidental uses shall be permitted, provided that any said sale or operation shall be conducted only in conjunction with the principal washing service and not independently of said service; and further provided that any gasoline pump facilities shall be so located as to be accessible only to vehicles within the entrance driveway to the service structure and that any oil change/lube service, fluid replacement and/or wiper replacement shall be located wholly within an enclosed structure specifically designed for such use. All other types of sales and repairs are expressly prohibited. 
f.  Adequate interior seating space shall be provided for customers while service is being performed. 
g.  Driveways shall be provided and arranged so as to facilitate the orderly movement of automobiles upon the site and into and from the service structure, and shall have a minimum storage capacity of four (4) vehicles for each interior service lane. 
h.  All open areas upon the site, not required and/or specifically designed for driveways or parking, shall be suitably landscaped. (Ord. No. 989, 11-17-1998) 
(3)  Bowling alley, billiard hall, or other similar recreation use or place of amusement, assembly or entertainment carried on wholly within an enclosed building, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  No building or portion of a building (i.e., unit in multi-unit center) utilized for said use shall be closer than two hundred (200) feet from any single residentially zoned or used property. 
d.  Serving of alcoholic beverages at such facilities shall be permitted solely in accordance with the provisions and restrictions of chapter 4, Alcoholic Beverages. 
e.  Hours of operation for such use shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 12:30 a.m. 
(4)  Buildings with a maximum height in excess of fifty (50) feet, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Must be located within a designated central business district, or on property designated with a mixed use land use categories and overlay mixed use categories. 
d.  Must have a minimum setback from any single-family residentially zoned or used property equal to the height of structure. 
(5)  Dry cleaning/laundry establishment, other than pick up only, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Said establishment shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
d.  The city shall be satisfied that the ventilation shall exist to assure the dispersion and removal of fumes. 
e.  The city shall be satisfied that adequate provisions have been made for the removal of hazardous chemicals and fluids. 
f.  A rooftop fume stack shall be required to assure dispersion of fumes and vapors away from adjoining facilities. Steam vent pipes protruding from building walls shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above the building's first floor elevation. 
g.  Any vent pipe shall be directed upward and shall include a suitable muffler system to eliminate noise emissions from any such pipe. 
h.  Steam pipes located in the roof shall be clearly marked as dangerous. 
i.  No such establishment shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any single-family residentially zoned or developed property. 
j.  Such establishment shall serve no more than two (2) satellite facilities. 
(6)  Furniture refinishing, reupholstery, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  All activities must be performed within an enclosed building. 
d.  Fabrication or assembly of new products is prohibited. 
e.  Compliance with all local, state and federal laws relevant to the storage of hazardous materials. 
(7)  Gas station, without automotive repair but including convenience sales, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Clearance required. 
1.  Gasoline pumps shall be located a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from any street right-of-way line and a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from any property line. 
2.  No service station building or gasoline pump shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of property within a residential zoning district. 
d.  Where a side or rear property line abuts a C-O Commercial Office zoning district, or property used and zoned for residential purposes, a solid buffer shall be provided along the entire length of the property line, except that no solid buffer shall be provided along a street right-of-way, except as may otherwise be required in this LDC. Such solid buffer shall be continuous and unbroken, except in the areas of driveways, walkways, and a solid buffer adjacent to an alley may have a three (3) foot opening which shall be closed by a solid gate when the opening is not being used for access. 
e.  Display of merchandise. Display and storage of merchandise and accessory products including tires, batteries, oil, and similar products, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building; provided that customary accessory service products stored and/or displayed immediately adjacent to the building wall or upon gasoline pump islands during business hours shall be permitted. 
f.  All provisions of section 12-959, Standards for drive-up facilities. 
g.  Parking requirements for convenience sales element of this use shall be those listed for "retail" uses in section 12-957(5)o. 
(8)  High turnover retail automotive services, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  No service center building shall be located within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of property with a residential zoning district. 
d.  Where a side or rear property line abuts a C-O Commercial Office zoning district, or property used and zoned for residential purposes, a solid buffer shall be provided along the entire length of the property line, except that no solid buffer shall be provided along a street right-of-way, except as may otherwise be required in this LDC. Such solid buffer shall be continuous and unbroken, except that in the areas of driveways, walkways, and a solid buffer adjacent to an alley may have a three (3) foot opening which shall be closed by a solid gate when the opening is not being used for access. 
e.  Display and storage of merchandise and accessory products shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
f.  The service center shall comply with all provisions of section 12-959, Standards for drive-up facilities. 
(9)  Landscape nursery, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  A minimum lot size of one acre shall be required for this use. 
d.  "Greenhouse" structures erected in connection with this use shall have a minimum separation distance of fifteen (15) feet, and there shall be a minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. 
e.  Any mechanical equipment (tractors, sprayers, etc.) utilized in connection with this use shall be stored only in side or rear yards and shall be screened from view of public rights-of-way by a solid or landscape buffer. 
(10)  Liquor store, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  All requirements and stipulations contained in chapter 4, Alcoholic Beverages. 
d.  Drive-thru facilities are prohibited. 
(11)  Lounge, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General Site Development Plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional Uses. 
c.  All requirements and stipulations contained in chapter 4, Alcoholic Beverages. 
(12)  Restaurants which comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of a retail/office center of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more or which propose outdoor seating which shall constitute more than twenty (20) percent of the total enclosed seating capacity of the restaurant(s). 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  All requirements and stipulations contained in chapter 4, Alcoholic Beverages. 
(13)  Retail uses other than those listed above which are determined by the community development director to be similar in nature and/or consistent with the general purpose and intent of the established permitted uses. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by the city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Determination by city council that said use would result in no greater negative impacts on surrounding properties than would uses specifically listed as permitted. 
d.  Determination by city council that said use is not more similar to a use permitted in a more intense district. 
(14)  Service station, with or without convenience sales. 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Clearance required: 
1.  Gasoline pumps shall be located a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from any street right-of-way line and a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from any property line. 
2.  No service station building or gasoline pump shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of property within a residential zoning district. 
d.  Where a side or rear property line abuts a C-O Commercial Office zoning district or property used and zoned for residential purposes, a solid buffer shall be provided along the entire length of the property line, except that no solid buffer shall be provided along a street right-of-way, except as may otherwise be required in this LDC. Such solid buffer shall be continuous and unbroken, except in the areas of driveways, walkways, and a solid buffer adjacent to an alley may have a three-foot opening which shall be closed by a solid gate when the opening is not being used for access. 
e.  All storage of vehicles awaiting needed parts shall be within the building or shall be completely screened from off site view in a rear or side yard. 
f.  All outdoor lighting shall be in conformance with those performance standards related to lighting and glare referenced in section 12-923(8), directional in nature and shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties. 
g.  Major automotive repairs, including, but not limited to, engine or transmission dismantling, painting, body, fender, and upholstery work shall not be permitted. 
h.  Display of merchandise. Display of storage of merchandise and accessory products including tires, batteries, oil and similar products, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building; provided that customary accessory service products stored and/or displayed immediately adjacent to the building wall or upon gasoline pump islands during business hours shall be permitted. 
i.  All provisions of section 12-959, Standards for drive-up facilities. 
(15)  Veterinarian clinic, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  All activities shall be carried out within soundproof, air conditioned buildings with no outdoor cages, runs or other outdoor facilities unless determined by city council that such facilities are located and screened so as not to affect the use, enjoyment or value of surrounding residentially zoned or used properties. 
d.  There shall be no overnight boarding of animals unless said boarding is necessary in connection with treatment, recovery or for other medical reasons. 
e.  Said use shall conform fully to those performance standards listed elsewhere in this Code related to noise and odors. (Ord. No. 905, 12-19-1995) 
(16)  Communication towers. 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Compliance with the provisions of section 12-862, Radio, TV antennae; satellite dishes; communication towers. (Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996) 
(17)  Golf course driving ranges and/or golf course lighting for night use. 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by the city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  A detailed lighting plan prepared by a qualified lighting professional shall be submitted which addresses the size, type, number, intensity and spillover effect of lighting fixtures needed to accomplish lighting objectives. 
d.  All lighting shall be directional in nature and shall not shine directly onto adjacent properties nor create glare when viewed from off-premises. (Ord. No. 980, 9-15-1998) 
(18)  Blood donor center. 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  The blood donor center shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other blood donor center. 
d.  The blood donor center may not accept donations before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.10; Ord. No. 905, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 980, 9-15-1998; Ord. No. 989, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 1079, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 1080, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 1104, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-235. - PD Planned Development zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The purpose of the PD, Planned Development zoning district is to provide an alternative method of land development not available within the framework of the other zoning districts of the city. This classification may be assigned to land which is to be developed as a whole or in a single development, or programmed series of development operations, utilizing innovative design techniques not possible through the structure of other zoning districts of the city, for the purpose of achieving one or more of the following development objectives: 
(1)  To preserve or be otherwise sensitive to significant environmental or topographical features which exist on the site. 
(2)  To accommodate a single or a mixture of uses on one or more parcels of land with single or multiple ownerships, zoned, approved, operated and developed as a single unit and made internally and externally compatible through use limitations, sign control, cross easements for access and utilities, coordinated building orientation, design, aesthetics and buffering, with principal and accessory structures substantially related to the character of the development and the context of the neighborhood of which they are a part. 
(3)  To accommodate a comprehensively planned and phased redevelopment or infill project involving a single or multiple ownerships to create interrelated mixed uses, circulation patterns (both vehicular and pedestrian), building orientation, parking areas, architectural motif, signs, open space, amenity areas and like features, which positively contribute to the area being redeveloped and the city. 
(4)  To allow for a conceptual level of approval for PD districts while maintaining design flexibility for projects which may either be large with lengthy build out schedules or is the first development in an area without public utilities and services. The project is approved in two (2) steps: a rezoning to PD with a conceptual site plan as approved by city council; and a subsequent detailed final site plan to be approved by city council. 
(5)  A rezoning application for a planned development (PD) zoning district shall be submitted consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(6)  To capture internally as many trips as possible within the boundaries of a single development by combining mixed residential, commercial, research, and office uses, and by reducing trip lengths thereby encouraging nonmotorized travel. The intent of this provision is to reduce the impact of planned developments on vehicular traffic congestion. Planned developments shall be designed according to comprehensive plans which provide for interrelated uses, circulation patterns (both vehicular and pedestrian), streets, utilities, lots, building orientation, parking areas, architectural motif, signs, open space, amenity areas and like features with a program to provide for the maintenance and operation of all such areas. Planned developments must also provide improvements and facilities for the common use of all or some of the occupants of the development and a provision for the maintenance and operation of all necessary services which the city does not agree, in writing, to provide, maintain or operate. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The type or types of land uses permitted must be consistent in all respects with the comprehensive plan, and the City Code; and such uses, including adaptive reuse, shall be found to be so located and arranged to ensure complete compatibility among themselves, with adjacent existing or future land uses, public facilities, services, and utilities. 
(c)  Density/intensity. The density/intensity for a PD project shall not exceed that which is permitted by the land use category in which the parcel is located as per the adopted land use plan. 
(d)  Dimensional regulations. Building setbacks and height shall be designed using those prescribed in division 2, specific zoning districts as a guideline. Flexibility in setbacks for nonresidential projects will be allowed provided there is adequate space for site improvements and fire access; that there is no adverse impact on surrounding properties and there is adequate distance between structures and public or private streets for residential projects. Flexibility in building height will be allowed provided that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; and provide increased setbacks to compensate for added building height. 
(e)  Additional application requirements. 
(1)  A conceptual plan without complete preliminary plan or construction plan details, but includes items, such as, but not limited to, the overall layout of the proposed development, maximum density (residential units per acre), maximum intensity (floor area ratio). Maximum building height(s), building setbacks, building elevations, general location of stormwater management facilities, typical lot size and dimensions, ingress and egress points, internal streets and design, open space/recreational/preservation areas, landscape and buffer areas, etc. 
(2)  A detailed textual statement explaining how the development will fit in the area, connect with surrounding properties, address multi-modal transportation within and adjacent to the site, identify all proposed uses, provide a list of requested waivers, and address other items within the planned development, including all restrictions, covenants, limitations, hours of operation, rules, regulations, and such other data and information as the city shall require. Upon approval by the city council, this textual statement shall become a part of or be incorporated into the conditions of approval for the planned development and final site plan or conceptual plan. 
(3)  A final site plan, which is based on the conceptual plan and planned development zoning application approved by city council, shall be required to be submitted for review in accordance to sections 12-241, 12-377, 12-379, and other applicable sections of this Code after the rezoning application has been approved by city council. If a final site plan is not submitted within two (2) years of the approval of the planned development zoning, then a new rezoning application and final site plan application shall be required to be approved by city council. 
(4)  If the city council determines that the plan is abandoned, or if construction is terminated after completion of any stage, or if construction is abandoned or discontinued for a period of two (2) years, or if there is evidence that further development is not contemplated, the city council may rescind or modify the ordinance establishing the planned development. 
(5)  Modification of conceptual plan, final site plan, or planned development zoning district after approved by city council. After final approval of the planned development, if any change, including waivers, conditions of approval, conceptual plan, final site plan, changes of uses, etc., is requested by the applicant, the city shall evaluate whether the proposed change(s) exceeds the criteria of section 12-380 of this Code, and if so, then a new rezoning application and final site plan or conceptual plan, shall be required to be submitted for review and approval by city council. 
(f)  Public hearing and zoning action. 
(1)  Upon review of the final site plan or conceptual plan and proposed planned development rezoning application by the development review committee (DRC) and planning commission staff, a public hearing shall be held to obtain input on the application, in accordance with the applicable state statutes and city ordinances. (Ord. No. 1138, 4-19-2005) 
(2)  Following receipt of the recommendations of the DRC, city manager or designee, and the planning commission, and upon consideration of public input obtained at the public hearing, and review of the planned development, city council shall either deny the application pursuant to section 12-193(d) or approve the zoning application with or without modifications, hearing. The development standards and conditions of approval for the site shall be approved as part the planned development zoning district, based on the conceptual plan or final site plan and textual statement or conditions of approval. Additional conditions of approval may be further specified for the PD rezoning at the time of approval of the detailed final site plan application to be approved by city council within two (2) years of the rezoning approval. 
(g)  This section does not preclude an applicant from submitting a detailed planned development zoning and detailed final site plan applications concurrently to obtain approval from city council, provided both applications meet the requirements of this Code, unless waivers are granted by city council. 
(h)  Modifications of ordinances and codes. The requirements of this LDC, including, but not limited to, off-street parking, landscaping, lot coverage, building heights, setbacks, buffers and walls, of the zoning district most closely resembling the proposed use shall apply to the planned development. The city council may waive or modify said requirements on finding that such modifications are not required in the interest of the planned development and that the modification is not inconsistent with the interest of the city and with the uniqueness of the planned development. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.11; Ord. No. 795, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1039, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1138, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 1159, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-236. - PROF Planned Research Office Facilities zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. 
(1)  The provisions of this section apply to the PROF district. The purpose of the PROF Planned Research Office Facilities zoning district is to provide the maximum of land and design development opportunities for planned research office facilities in harmony with reasonable area, building coverage, height, setback and service requirements and to provide a means of mixing such appropriate land uses as may not otherwise be permitted for planned research office facilities in any of the other established zoning districts. The PROF zoning district will be applied only upon specific petition therefor by persons proposing a unique type of planned development for planned research office facilities in keeping with the purpose of the district stated herein. 
(2)  Within the PROF zoning district, it is intended that uses shall be arranged so that vehicular traffic and other commercial or industrial influences shall not disturb the privacy, tranquility and integrity of adjoining residential areas. Uses within the district shall be designed and constructed for maximum pedestrian accessibility and research facilities and related uses shall be located together as appropriate. It is further intended that the PROF zoning district shall be located within a park-like setting that is aesthetically pleasing and is not obnoxious or offensive and that the district shall create a minimal impact on the surrounding area and the environment. Facilities within a PROF zoning district shall provide maximum protection to preclude odor, liquids, fumes, smoke, gas, dust, litter, noise, vibration and similar objectionable hazards. Beyond that, the PROF zoning district shall be designed and located in accordance with established planning and zoning practices; shall be readily accessible to major transportation facilities and other municipal services; and shall include only those uses that are both internally and externally compatible with the site. 
(b)  Zoning district area requirements. A PROF zoning district shall consist of: 
(1)  Not less than twenty (20) contiguous acres under single, unified ownership and control; or 
(2)  Contiguous acres adjacent to and added to an existing PROF zoning district. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a PROF zoning district shall be used only for the following principal uses: 
(1)  Administrative, business, professional office building or complex, which may include accessory uses for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand. 
(2)  Bank, savings and loan association, credit institution or stock brokerage; provided, however, that said use shall be permitted only if it is accessory and incidental to the primary planned research office facilities and further provided that any such use shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities, with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. 
(3)  Building or use owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses, or utility structures or stations owned or operated by the city, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires and pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of utility services. 
(4)  Child care facilities or physical fitness centers designed for the primary use of office center employees; provided, however, that said use shall be permitted only as accessory and incidental to the primary planned research office facilities, and further provided that any such use shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities, with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. 
(5)  Drugstore; provided, however, that said use shall be permitted only as accessory and incidental to the primary planned research office facilities and further provided that any such use shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities, with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. 
(6)  Hotel/motel that may include accessory uses such as restaurant, coffee shop, meeting rooms and recreational facilities; provided, however, that any such hotel/motel shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. 
(7)  Light industrial manufacturing, assembling and servicing, including electronics, telecommunications, computer equipment, instruments and like and related uses and pharmaceutical and other health-related products. 
(8)  Medical/dental research facilities and laboratories, medical/dental/surgical clinics, medical/dental/surgical offices, and medical educational uses are permitted. All such facilities shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. (Ord. No. 1020, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 1178, 6-20-2006) 
(9)  Public utility structure or station, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, and pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of approved utility services. 
(10)  Research and service center; provided, however, that research and service facilities shall be devoted almost exclusively to research and development activities which are not offensive or obnoxious and which are conducted wholly within enclosed buildings and provide no outdoor storage of materials, equipment or products. Research and service center facilities may contain offices, warehouses, and some light fabrication, provided that the principal and primary function is research and development. 
(11)  Restaurant, cafeteria or other eating establishment engaged in the retail sale of prepared food and drink for consumption on the premises; provided, however, that said use shall be permitted only accessory and incidental to the primary planned research office facilities and further provided that any such use shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities, with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. 
(12)  Retail, commercial shop(s), such as travel agencies, card and gift shops, insurance agencies, office supply stores, clothing stores, dry cleaners, copy centers, book stores and postal facilities, either individually or harmoniously designed in a group of clustered structures providing for unitary design under single control; provided, however, that said use shall be permitted only as accessory and incidental to the primary planned research office facilities and further provided that any such use shall be oriented internally to the major development of the planned research office facilities, with no direct access to major arterials external to the project. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.12; Ord. No. 1020, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 1178, 6-20-2006) 
Sec. 12-237. - LI Light Industrial zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the LI district. The purpose of the Light Industrial zoning district is to promote a mix of industrial uses which provides employment opportunities and a sound and diverse industrial base while recognizing existing industrial uses which have been annexed into the City or designated as such on the city's land use plan map. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Light industries, with related office and showrooms, which include manufacturing, processing, assembly, fabrication, packaging, storage and distribution activities. 
(2)  Printing, blueprint, engraving, and related reproductive processes. 
(3)  Professional/administrative offices including contractors' offices. 
(4)  Public service facility including land, buildings, or structures used by a public utility such as, water treatment plants, pumping stations or electrical substations. 
(5)  Public use facility including land, buildings, or structures used by a municipal or other governmental agency such as police and fire stations. 
(6)  Radio and TV antennae, satellite dishes and communication towers, including radio and TV studios, offices and broadcasting towers subject to the provisions of section 12-862. 
(7)  Research laboratories, blood/plasma/tissue banks and donation centers. 
(8)  Vocational/trade/business schools. 
(9)  Warehouses and wholesale distribution centers, including related showrooms, offices and outdoor display or merchandise. 
(10)  Transportation and trucking terminal and associated uses such as garbage haulers. 
(11)  Sales, auctions, service, repair, painting and storage of domestic and commercial vehicles (including truck, bus, RV and boat), and heavy equipment. 
(12)  Mini-warehouses and self-storage facilities. 
(13)  Outdoor storage and contractors/salvage yard. 
(14)  Business/office/industrial parks and services. 
(15)  Funeral home with crematory. 
(16)  Commercial recreation (indoor and outdoor recreation such as miniature golf, golf driving ranges and similar uses). 
(17)  Furniture refinishing, upholstery and repairs. 
(18)  Lumber yards. 
(19)  Airport or airport related activities and uses. 
(20)  Recyclable metal recovery facilities. 
(21)  Sign painting activities. 
(22)  Dry cleaners and industrial laundries. 
(23)  Microbrewery, distillery and wine production. 
(24)  Tattoo parlor. 
(c)  Related, supporting uses. Land and buildings within an LI Light Industrial zoning district may include the following related, supporting uses. In addition, existing activities legally in operation as of the date of this code amendment may be recognized as a related, supporting use subject to the community development director's determination. 
(1)  Child care facilities. 
(2)  Restaurants, with or without drive-in facilities. 
(3)  Banks and credit unions including ATM's. 
(4)  Gas stations, with or without a car wash. 
(5)  Liquor store. 
(6)  Bar/lounge. 
(7)  Lawn and landscaping businesses and services. 
(8)  Institutions: Religious, educational or charity. 
(9)  Social club. 
(10)  Retail sales and personal services. 
(11)  Repair shops other than permitted uses. 
(12)  On premise security/watchman dwelling unit. 
(d)  Specific requirements. Each proposed use must demonstrate compliance with the following specific requirements in addition to other standard development requirements of division 3, site plans. 
(1)  A site plan and other drawings as are necessary to show the complete site development proposed including the type, location and size of all proposed structures, outdoor storage areas, signs, off-street parking and loading facilities, location and arrangement of access drives; and proposed landscaping and buffering shall be submitted for review. 
(2)  To the greatest extent possible, the site plan should be designed to incorporate the following: 
a.  Driveway and driveway throats shall remain free of internal obstacles and should be constructed so that all entering and exiting movements can be accomplished with minimum disruption to traffic flow on the intersecting roadway; 
b.  Off-street loading spaces shall be located so that a semi-trailer truck (WB 50 class) shall be able to gain access to and use such spaces by means of one continuous parking maneuver; 
c.  Parking and loading spaces shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings or interior of the block; 
d.  Outdoor storage or display, parking, and loading spaces shall be designed so as not to impede traffic circulation or hinder the use of walkways, private streets or operations on adjacent parcels; 
e.  Outdoor storage or outside display shall not extend into landscape areas, buffers or parking spaces and must be placed on-site so that they are not visible from an adjacent street. 
f.  Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) strategies shall be considered in the design of the site. 
g.  Outdoor lighting shall be located so as to illuminate the site for the safety of employees, the public, and operations on site. 
(3)  Any industrial zoned use with a side or rear lot line abutting residentially zoned or used property shall: 
a.  Provide a buffer area per article IX, division 17 requirements with landscaping in front of the wall or fence facing residentially zoned land or uses; 
b.  Limit the height of outdoor storage items within twenty (20) feet of the property line to the height of the perimeter fence or wall; 
c.  Loading spaces shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the property line when it abuts a residential use or zoning district; 
d.  Arrange all lighting or illumination so as not to shine directly upon or cause glare upon adjacent residentially zoned or used property. The source of the light, such as the bulb or filament, of outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be directly visible from property outside the zoning lot on which it is located. Additionally, the maximum illumination permitted at the zoning lot line shall be two-tenths (0.20) foot-candles. 
(4)  If the use is within two hundred (200) feet of any jurisdictional wetland area, as defined in herein, the following restrictions apply: 
a.  No storage of underground fuel tanks is permitted. 
b.  Outdoor storage of raw materials or chemicals shall not be permitted within any flood zone, as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, unless the outdoor storage area complies with building elevations set forth in the applicable federal, state, and local building and flood regulations. 
(5)  Any outdoor storage or outside display of supplies or equipment containing chemicals, gases, or raw materials shall be placed on a gravel, asphalt or concrete surface. 
(6)  All outdoor storage and outside display shall be screened from the view of adjacent streets and adjacent properties. The screening shall consist of the following: 
a.  A strip of land five (5) feet in depth, landscaped with ground cover, shrubs (a minimum of three (3) feet tall), mulch, trees, and a fence or opaque wall. 
b.  Trees shall be planted along the outside of the fence or wall along rights-of-way, at a dispersal rate of one tree per thirty-three (33) linear feet or fraction thereof. 
c.  The following alternatives may be considered and recommended by the DRC when appropriate: 
1.  A vine at an interval of ten (10) feet on center may be planted along the fence (including chain link) or wall as an alternative to ground cover and shrubs; 
2.  Use of existing vegetation, natural features, or berm with landscaping at the top; or other aesthetic and appropriate alternatives may be used as alternatives if the DRC determines that they provide sufficient screening. 
3.  Need and/or use of alternative screening between like uses. 
(7)  Perimeter landscaping along an adjacent street or any other zoning district besides LI shall be a minimum three-foot-high landscape buffer per section 12-1049(a)(1). 
(8)  Fences or walls used for security or screening purposes shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
a.  Any fence or wall located along a public right-of-way shall be placed at least five (5) feet from the property line to allow for future sidewalks and required landscaping outside the fence or wall. 
b.  Barbed wire up to three (3) strands of barbed wire on security chain link fences may be used provided that the bottom strand of the wire shall be at least six (6) feet above ground level. 
c.  Slats, fabric or other materials woven or attached (except vines) to chain link fences shall not be permitted. 
(9)  Development of LI permitted uses on heavily treed, vacant land shall be designed, to the greatest extent possible, to meet the tree canopy coverage and tree requirements of article IX zoning, division 8, tree removal and trimming. 
(10)  Redevelopment of related, supportive uses shall comply with all requirements of article IX zoning, division 8, tree removal and trimming. 
(11)  Redevelopment of previously developed properties containing an existing impervious surface ratio (ISR) exceeding three-quarters (0.75) and/or an existing, minimal tree coverage shall be required to meet the city's minimum tree canopy coverage and tree replacement requirements of article IX zoning, division 8, tree removal and trimming, as follows: 
a.  Design the site with consideration to preserving existing trees, grand trees, and heavily treed areas to the greatest extent possible. 
b.  Obtain permits to trim or remove trees and perform site clearing on-site or off-site 
c.  Install tree barricades for preserved trees on-site, adjacent properties, or public or private right-of-ways prior to clearing of the property. 
d.  Maintain existing and new trees during construction and replace relocated or damaged trees that die within two (2) years of completing construction on site, and maintain all trees on the property after completing development on site. 
(12)  Sidewalks. If sidewalks are provided, a direct, lighted and well-marked pedestrian route shall connect sidewalks exterior to the project and the interior parking area with the entrance to the principal structure. 
(e)  Performance standards for manufacturing, processing and assembly operations. Manufacturing, processing and assembly operations shall observe the following performance standards. Since zoning compliance does not substitute for requirements of other agencies, all required environmental permits shall be obtained and provided as necessary. 
(1)  Light. Direct illumination resulting from the operation shall not fall upon any land not directly under the control of the property user. 
(2)  Sound. Sound levels shall not exceed the following decibel (dBA) standards. Compliance with this section shall be made at the nearest boundary of the LI district to the use being evaluated. 
a.  Receiving use: Residential. Sound levels shall not exceed the following standards if the receiving use is residential: 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.: Sixty (60) dBA 
Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: Fifty-five (55) dBA 
b.  Receiving Use: Commercial. Sound levels shall not exceed the following standards if the receiving use is commercial: 
At all times: Sixty-five (65) dBA 
c.  Receiving use: Industrial. Sound levels shall not exceed the following standards if the receiving use is industrial 
At all times: Seventy (70) dBA 
(3)  Vibration. No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of a reasonable individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground or structure borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from the above standard. 
(4)  Odor/airborne discharges. Odor/Airborne discharges shall be minimized so as to not cause or contribute to an objectionable odor off the operator's property. For the purpose of this Code, objectionable odor shall be defined as "Any odor present in the outdoor atmosphere which by itself or in combination with other odors, is or may be harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, which unreasonably interferes with the comfortable use and enjoyment of life or property, or which creates a nuisance" per Chapter 62-210.200, Definitions F.A.C. 
(5)  Dust discharges. Dust discharges from the operator's property shall be minimized by taking reasonable precautions to include but not limited to: paving and maintenance of roads, parking areas and yards; periodic application of water or chemicals to unpaved roadways and open stock piles; landscaping of yards; use of hoods, fans, filters, and other similar equipment to capture the dust; and use of wet abrasive blasting equipment (when possible) where abrasive blasting is necessary. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.13; Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1239, 12-2-2008; Ord. No. 1399, § 2(Exh. B), 7-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-238. - A-U Agricultural Urban zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. 
(1)  The provisions of this section apply to the A-U district. The purpose of the A-U Agricultural Urban zoning district shall be to recognize existing agricultural uses as legally conforming uses, property rights established under Florida law, including, but not limited to, those set forth in F.S. § 823.14 (Florida Right to Farm Act), and allow the continuation of agricultural and other compatible land uses. 
(2)  Agricultural uses are those related to the production, keeping, or maintenance, whether for sale or personal use, of plants and animals for food, forage, fiber, or ornamental purposes. Agricultural uses are characterized as predominantly outdoor activities, with structures covering a very small portion of the land. However, some specific production activities may require relatively large amounts of land coverage, such as dairy operations and greenhouses. Trip generation is very low; the number of employees per acre is very small. The uses within this category may include both domestic and exotic species, except as specifically prohibited by other regulations. 
(3)  Rezoning of lands not currently in agricultural use to A-U Agricultural Urban shall be discouraged. This zoning district is intended to be a "holding district" for lands that are ultimately intended for urban development. In order to avoid premature or improper development, land should remain in this zone until public facilities and services are or will be adequate to serve urban uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within an A-U Agricultural Urban zoning district will be used for the following or substantially similar purposes: 
(1)  Agriculture, silviculture, aquaculture; horticulture, crop production and general farming, including pasturage, forestry, livestock, milking parlors and dairies, agricultural manufacturing, beekeeping; citrus groves, stables, barns, pens, corrals, and veterinarian clinics with indoor kennels; plant nurseries, greenhouses, truck gardening, processing of agricultural products, fish hatcheries or fish pools, sheds, silos, agricultural stands for the sale of agricultural products produced on the property and such accessory facilities as may be necessary to the foregoing uses. 
(2)  Single-family dwelling (including existing mobile homes). 
(3)  Residential support uses including recreational uses such as parks, trails and boardwalks, playgrounds, athletic fields, golf courses and country clubs, and golf driving ranges. 
(4)  Public or private utility facilities, and public uses and buildings. 
(5)  Residential and related health care facilities, except the following such facilities listed below, consistent with state law. See section 12-241 for additional requirements. 
a.  Assisted living facility (ALF) with greater than five (5) residents. 
b.  Community residential homes (CRH) with greater than six (6) residents. 
c.  Transitional living facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Land and buildings within an A-U Agricultural Urban zoning district may be used for the following purposes upon review and approval of the city council and in accordance with section 12-259: 
(1)  Radio and TV antennae, satellite dishes and communication towers, including radio and TV studios, offices and broadcasting towers, subject to the provisions of section 12-862, Radio, TV antennae; satellite dishes; communication towers. 
(2)  Plant nursery. 
(3)  Commercial greenhouse. 
(4)  Cemetery, including mausoleum, subject to the following standards: 
a.  A minimum lot size for the entire cemetery site shall be five (5) acres. 
b.  There shall be adequate space within the site for the parking and maneuvering of funeral corteges. 
c.  No interment shall take place within thirty (30) feet of any adjoining lot line under separate ownership from that of the cemetery operator. 
d.  All structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any boundary line of the cemetery property. 
e.  All structures over twenty-five (25) feet in height must be set back from any boundary line of the cemetery a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet plus two (2) feet for each one foot of height over twenty-five (25) feet to a maximum setback of fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Private school, subject to the following standards: 
a.  With the exception of elementary schools, the site shall have direct access to a roadway shown on the current MPO long range transportation cost affordable plan at the time of conditional use application. 
b.  The location, arrangement and lighting of play fields and playgrounds shall be such as to avoid interference with the use of adjacent residential property, and lighting shall not shine directly onto an adjacent residential property. 
(6)  Child care facility, subject to general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses, and section 12-377, General site development plans. 
(7)  Churches, synagogues and other places of worship, subject to the following standards: 
a.  The sanctuary or main place of worship (excluding all classrooms, administrative offices, and fellowship halls) may exceed fifty (50) feet in height provided that the structure is set back an additional two (2) feet for every one foot of structure height over thirty (30) feet at all boundaries (added to yards or buffer areas required elsewhere). 
b.  If the church or synagogue has a seating capacity of more than three hundred (300) persons, the site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street, as shown on the MPO long range transportation cost affordable plan. 
(8)  Veterinarian clinic with indoor kennel, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  All activities shall be carried out within soundproof, air conditioned buildings with no outdoor cages, runs or other outdoor facilities. 
d.  There shall be no overnight boarding of animals unless said boarding is necessary in connection with treatment, recovery or for other medical reasons. 
e.  Said use shall conform fully to those performance standards listed elsewhere in this Code related to noise and odors. (Ord. No. 972, 2-3-1998) 
f.  Accessory uses. Retail sales and grooming services may be allowed as accessory uses so long as they do not include more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of the principal use. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.14; Ord. No. 972, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 1239, 12-2-2008; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-239. - PRS-Preservation zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. 
(1)  The provisions of this section applies to the PRS district. The purpose of the PRS-Preservation zoning district shall be to designate and establish areas within the city which are deemed to be uniquely appropriate to manage only for the conservation, protection and enhancement of natural and historical resources and for resource-based public outdoor recreation. These regulations are intended to encourage preservation of lands designated as environmental preservation areas, in a natural or near natural state. Activities associated with this district are intended to be low impact, low trip generating, including little coverage of land with paved areas, and are predominantly or primarily utilized for daytime activities. 
(2)  The city recognizes that there exists in the city certain lands and areas of unique environmental and ecological significance which are important for their biological productivity and economic, aesthetic and safety values. These areas include, but are not limited to, wetlands and lands directly adjacent to the Hillsborough River watershed, or other lands designated as preservation areas. Lands eligible for this category shall include the following; open space, environmentally significant wetlands, uplands, lands adjacent to water bodies and wells, and floodplains; private recreational or open space lands which have development rights conveyed to the public; the purpose of which is to restrict the development of lands upon which a more intensive development would cause adverse environmental impact; and to provide natural buffering between incompatible land uses. Permitted uses which typify these goals may include, but are not limited to, the preservation of lands, wildlife sanctuaries, arboretums, passive outdoor education, forest management, passive recreation, or similar uses which do not unreasonably alter or degrade the natural state of the land. 
(b)  Permitted use. Land and buildings within PRS-Preservation zoning district shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Walking and hiking, including trails, bridle paths, pedestrian boardwalks, and elevated walkways. 
(2)  Primitive camping such as campsites and picnic tables without electric or water facilities. 
(3)  Water access, including canoe launches. 
(4)  Education, including signs and kiosks. 
(5)  Observation, including towers and open air gathering structures. 
(6)  Passive recreation including fishing and biking, including accessories such as benches, water fountains and bicycle racks. 
(7)  Parking facilities. 
(c)  Special requirements. 
(1)  No buildings, structures, improvements or signs shall adversely impact the natural resources of the lands in this designated land use district. 
(2)  Construction best practices shall be utilized to minimize the destruction or removal of native vegetation and/or trees. 
(3)  Minor utility structures such as water, sewer and electric service not including electric substations, waste treatment facilities, water treatment plants, communication towers may be utilized to service park facilities; however, any disturbance of soil must be preceded by an archaeological survey and comply with conditions set forth by the department of state division of historical resources. 
(4)  Uses other than those delineated above which are determined by the director of community development to be similar in nature and/or consistent with the general purpose and intent of the established permitted uses may be approved subject to the conditions per article IX, division 5, Environmentally Sensitive Lands Protection. 
(5)  If archaeological and historic sites are located in this zoning district, the collection of artifacts shall comply with F.S. ch. 267 and shall be prohibited until written authorization has been obtained from the department of state, division of historical resources. 
(6)  Regular maintenance of properties in the PRS Preservation zoning district may require the removal of invasive plant species and feral animals or non-native wildlife as deemed necessary. Similarly it may be deemed necessary to create firebreaks and issue prescribed burns for the health and maintenance of ecosystems. Property owners other than the city shall maintain preservation districts in a viable natural condition and shall abide by the above maintenance standards. 
(7)  Any land acquired by the city or conveyed to the city for environmental preservation or conservation purposes, which carries parking or environmental conditions more restrictive than required by this section, shall be further limited by those conditions. 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.15; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-240. - P/QP Public Quasi-Public zoning regulations. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section applies to the P/QP district. The purpose of the P/QP Public Quasi-Public zoning district shall be to locate and designate areas within the city which are suited for the development and operation of a broad range of significant public service facilities, government facilities and institutions throughout the city. These uses can have operational characteristics which may be as intense as commercial but have varying peak periods of activity. This district is designed to expand the number of permitted uses that include a wide range of services, facilities, and institutions while at the same time imposing certain restrictions on such additional uses so as to make them more compatible with the properties and uses found in adjacent zoning districts. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Land and buildings within a P/QP Public Quasi-Public zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Publicly owned or operated building or use, or public utility structure or station. 
(2)  Buildings or uses owned or operated by the city, including schools, libraries, museums, art galleries, community buildings, parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools or other recreational uses. 
(3)  Utility structure or station, including transmission lines, poles, guy wires, and pipelines as are necessary for the installation and maintenance of approved utility services. 
(4)  All uses permitted under section 12-232(b)(2) and(3), E-I Educational Institution Zoning Regulations. 
(c)  Conditional uses The following uses may also be permitted within the P/QP Public Quasi-Public zoning district, subject to the criteria specified in this section: 
(1)  Radio and TV antennae, satellite dishes and communication towers, including radio and TV studios, offices and broadcasting towers subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Compliance with the provisions of section 12-862, Radio, TV antennae; satellite dishes; communication towers. 
(2)  Buildings and structures with a maximum height in excess of fifty (50) feet, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Pursuant to section 12-377, General site development plans, site plan review and approval by city council may be required. 
b.  Compliance with the general criteria listed for approval of conditional uses contained in section 12-259, Conditional uses. 
c.  Must have a minimum setback from any single-family residentially zoned or used property equal to the height of structure. 
(d)  Special requirements. Each proposed use must demonstrate compliance with the requirements specified in section 12-237(e). 
(Code 2001, § 25.530.16; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-241. - Specific standards for permitted uses. 
    The following specific criteria are intended to provide additional detail and requirements for permitted uses in the zoning districts (listed in alphabetical order): 
(a)  Residential and related health care facilities. The following standards apply to all such facilities listed under this general use and as shown in the table below, consistent with state law: 
Type 
(# of Residents)/ 
Zoning Districts 2 Assisted 
Living 
Facility 
(1-5) Assisted 
Living 
Facility 
(>5) Adult 
Family 
Care 
Home 
(1-5) Adult 
Day 
Care 
Center Com- 
munity 
Residential 
Home 
(1-6) Com- 
munity 
Residential 
Home 
(7-14) Com- 
munity 
Residential 
Home 
(=15) Foster 
Home 
(1-3) Group 
Home 
(4-15) Long 
Term 
Care 
Facility 5 Nursing 
Home Transi- 
tional 
Living 
Facility R-10 P P P 3 P P 1 P 1 P 1 R-9 P P P 3 P P 1 P 1 P 1 R-7.5 P P P 3 P P 1 P 1 P 1 R-7 P P P 3 P P 1 P 1 P 1 R-MF P P P P P 3 P P P P P R-MFA P P P P P 3 P P P P P PD-R P P P 1 P 3 P P 1 P 1 P 1 E-I P P P P P 3 P P P P P P P PD 4 P P P P P 3 P P P P P P P A-U P P P 1 P 3 P P 1 P 1 P 1 P 1  
NOTES: 
P = Permitted Use 
Blank/Gray Box = Not Permitted 
Prohibited in the following zoning districts: LI, PROF, PRS, and P/QP 
1  Limited to a maximum of five (5) residents. 
2  The total number of beds permitted in long-term care facilities shall be determined by the number of housing units, which would be permitted on site and multiplying the units by the average persons per household for Temple Terrace in the most recent U.S. Census per F.S. ch. 400. The number of units permitted on site is determined by the underlying plan category of the subject site. 
3  A community residential home (CRH) (one to six (6) residents) must be one thousand (1,000) feet from another CRH (one to six (6) residents) and must be one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from any other facility noted in this table per F.S. § 419.001(2). 
4  A planned residential community (PRC) is only allowed within the Planned Development (PD) zoning district. 
5  A long term care facility is a general term for the following uses: assisted living facility, adult family care home, nursing home facility or home, residential child-caring agencies, board and care facility, or any other similar adult care facility as defined by Title XXIX Public Health, F.S. chs. 381-408, and Title XX Social Welfare, F.S. chs. 409-430. This may include other uses that may not be specifically identified in this table. 
The residential and health related facilities shall be prohibited in the following zoning districts: Light Industrial (LI), Planned Research and Office Facilities (PROF), Preservation (PRS), and Public/Semi-Public (P/SP). 
Density calculations for such facilities shall be as follows: the total number of beds permitted in such facilities shall be determined by the number of housing units, which would be permitted on site and multiplying the units by the average persons per household for Temple Terrace in the most recent U.S. Census, and the number of units permitted on site is determined by the underlying plan category of the subject site; and the density calculations do not apply to those facilities operating within single family residences within single-family residential zoning districts. 
Such facilities shall have adequate access, utilities and services and the character of the facility and building(s) shall be compatible with the surrounding development in terms of use, scale and design. 
The following criteria shall apply in addition to the identification of permitted and conditional uses in the above table: 
(1)  Community residential homes (CRH). 
a.  A CRH with one to six (6) residents must be one thousand (1,000) feet from another CRH with one to six (6) residents and must be one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from any other facility for all zoning districts as noted in the preceding table and in F.S. § 419.001(2), as amended. 
b.  The sponsoring agency shall provide notice to the city manager or designee at the time a CRH is occupied in the city. 
c.  When a site for a community residential home with one to fourteen (14) residents has been selected by a sponsoring agency in an area zoned planned development, allows multi-family residential uses in the zoning district, or allows multi-family uses on the adopted future land use map, the sponsoring agency shall provide notice via letter to the city manager and submit applications to be reviewed based on the requirements below in accordance with F.S. ch. 419, as amended: 
1.  The location complies with the zoning district requirements. 
2.  The application shall include the following information at a minimum: 
i.  Address of the proposed facility. 
ii.  Residential licensing category. 
iii.  Number of residents. 
iv.  Community support requirements of the facility. 
v.  Statement from the licensing entity indicating the licensing status of the proposed CRH and specifying how the home meets applicable licensing criteria for the safe care and supervision of the clients in the home. 
vi.  A copy of the most recently published data compiled from the licensing entities that identifies all CRH within the city limits. 
vii.  A general development site plan or final site plan consistent with the requirements of sections 12-377, 12-379, and 12-193. 
3.  City council is required to approve or deny such application within sixty (60) days of receipt, else the application shall be considered to be approved. 
4.  Denial of community residential home applications must be based on the following criteria: 
i.  Does not otherwise conform to existing zoning regulations applicable to other multi-family uses in the area. 
ii.  Does not meet applicable licensing criteria established and determined by the licensing entity, including requirements that the home be located to assure the safe care and supervision of all clients in the home. 
iii.  Would result in such a concentration of community residential homes in the area in proximity to the site selected, or would result in a combination of such homes with other residences in the community, such that the nature and character of the area would be substantially altered. A home that is located within a radius of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of another existing community residential home in a multi-family zone shall be an overconcentration of such homes that substantially alters the nature and character of the area. A home that is located within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of an area of single-family zoning substantially alters the nature and character of the area. 
(2)  Planned residential communities (PRC) shall be consistent with F.S. ch. 419, as amended, including the following criteria: 
a.  May contain two (2) or more community residential homes that are contiguous to one another. 
b.  May not be located within a ten-mile radius of any other planned residential community (PRC). 
c.  Sponsoring agency shall notify the city manager or designee of the existence of community residential homes (CRH) at the time each home is occupied. 
d.  Applications for a rezoning to planned development (PD) and general development or final site plan shall be submitted consistent with the requirements of sections 12-377, 12-379, and 12-193. 
(b)  Tattoo parlor. 
(1)  A general site development or final site plan shall be approved by city council subject consistent with section 12-377 or 12-379, respectively, in accordance with this Code. 
(2)  A tattoo parlor shall not be located within a specified distance of specific uses as follows, unless granted a waiver by city council: 
a.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any other tattoo parlor or protected facility or no more than one tattoo parlor per block, whichever is more restrictive; and 
b.  The separation distances shall include properties within the city limits of Temple Terrace, City of Tampa, and Unincorporated Hillsborough County, such that if a proposed tattoo parlor in the city is less than five hundred (500) feet from an existing tattoo parlor or would result in more than one tattoo parlor within a block in the City of Tampa or Unincorporated Hillsborough County, then a final site plan application with waiver request(s), consistent with section 12-379, shall need to be approved by city council prior to allowing the proposed tattoo parlor site in the city. 
c.  Distances required under this subsection shall be measured from property line to property line, along the shortest distance between property lines, without regard to the route of normal travel. 
(3)  The tattoo parlor business and artists shall be required to comply with all applicable state laws, rules, and licenses. 
(4)  Other accessory related products may be sold as part of the tattoo parlor use or site. 
(5)  Other uses allowed by the zoning district may occur with or within the tattoo parlor. 
( Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 12-242-12-258. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONDITIONAL USES AND TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 12-259. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Purpose. The conditional use procedure is provided to allow for uses which are not listed as "permitted," in a given zoning district, but which may be appropriate in said district provided certain standards are met. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Conditional use approvals may be authorized by the city council in accordance with the district use schedules and site specific review requirements contained in section 12-377, General site development plans. 
(2)  Where a proposed conditional use would not require a site plan submittal under the criteria established in section 12-377, the applicant for said conditional use approval shall, at a minimum, submit the following review material (thirteen (13) copies of each): 
a.  Name, address and phone number of owner and operator of proposed use and, where the owner(s) is not involved in the development, proof of authorization by the owner for the petitioner to proceed. 
b.  Survey or plot plan showing all existing manmade features and, where located in a shopping center, the specific location of the proposed business/use within the shopping center. 
c.  Map or aerial photograph (to scale) showing existing uses of land within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed use. 
d.  Narrative description of the proposed use (i.e., hours of operation, number of tables, entertainment facilities, etc.). 
e.  Location and nature of any existing or proposed buffers (natural or manmade) between the proposed use and surrounding uses. 
f.  Floor plan of the proposed use. 
g.  Such other information as the city council or city staff may require to effectuate the intent and purposes of this LDC. 
(3)  Public hearings shall be held by the city council after mailing a notice to all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the site, and posting of the subject property. The public hearing process for conditional uses shall be the same as that stipulated in section 12-193 for rezoning. 
(4)  The city council may establish when a conditional use is to begin, to be discontinued, or both. 
(c)  Criteria. In addition to the specific standards set forth hereinafter with regard to particular conditional uses, all such uses shall satisfy the following general standards: 
(1)  The use shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(3)  The use shall not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the district, and shall be consistent with the character of the immediate neighborhood. 
(4)  Adequate measures shall be taken for ingress, egress and parking in a manner consistent with traffic operations and safety. 
(5)  The use shall not have a substantial adverse effect on any known archaeological, historical, or cultural resource located on or off the site. 
(6)  The design shall minimize adverse effects of the use on adjacent property, including visual impacts. 
(7)  Adequate provisions shall be made for buffers, landscaping, public open space, and other improvements necessitated by the use. 
(8)  The use shall meet the lot and building requirements of the district in which it is located unless a variance is granted by the city council or board of adjustment. A special use shall meet all requirements established for the special use and no variance shall be granted from these requirements. However, no variance shall be granted from special conditions established during the conditional use approval process. 
(9)  The use shall comply at all times with the approved site plan, and any conditions imposed for establishment and operation of the use. 
(d)  Conditions of approval. Additional conditions for establishment and operation of the conditional use may be imposed, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Hours of operation of the use. 
(2)  Restraints to minimize environmental effects such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and odor. 
(3)  Special yard or other open space, lot area, or dimension requirements. 
(4)  Height, size or location limitations on buildings or other structures. 
(5)  Increase of the required amount of street dedication, roadway width, or improvements within the street right-of-way. 
(6)  Regulation of the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing, or other improvement of a parking or truck loading area, and control of traffic generation or circulation. 
(7)  Regulation of the number, size, location, height, or lighting of signs. 
(8)  Regulation of the location, intensity, and shielding of outdoor lighting. 
(9)  Berming, screening, landscaping, or other measures to protect adjacent or nearby property, including standards for installation and maintenance. 
(10)  Regulation of the size, height, location, or materials for a fence or wall. 
(11)  Regulations to protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat, or other significant natural resources. 
(12)  Consideration of the size, style, history, and appearance of a structure to ensure architectural compatibility with other structures in the district. 
(e)  Effect of approval. 
(1)  Establishment of a conditional use must be in conformance with an approved site plan or, where a site plan is not required, with specific approval conditions stipulated by city council. 
(2)  Approval of the conditional use is subject to the site plan submitted. 
(3)  If the conditional use is not established within six (6) months from the date of approval, then the approval shall be null and void, except that city council may grant one six-month extension to said approval. (Ord. No. 905, 12-19-1995) 
(f)  Specific standards for conditional uses. The following list identifies standards for specific uses allowed as conditional uses in zoning districts (listed in alphabetical order). All conditional uses shall comply with the requirements in sections 12-241, 12-377, and 12-379 (if the criteria for section 12-377 are exceeded). 
(1)  Residential and related health care facilities. The following such facilities listed in the table below shall be the only residential and related health care facilities that are allowed as conditional uses in the R-MF, R-MFA, C-O, and C-G zoning districts, but no other such residential and related health care facilities are allowed as a conditional use in the R-MF, R-MFA, C-O, and C-G zoning district, consistent with state law. No residential and related health care facilities shall be allowed as a conditional use in any other zoning district as those listed in the table below, consistent with state law. 
Zoning District Type/Facility Requiring a Conditional Use R-MF and R-MFA Community residential home (CRH) (=15 residents) and transitional living facility C-O All residential and related health care facilities, except planned residential community (PRC) and transitional living facility C-G All residential and related health care facilities, except a planned residential community (PRC)  
(2)  Tattoo parlor. The applicant for a tattoo parlor shall comply with all requirements of section 12-241. 
(Code 2001, § 25.535; Ord. No. 905, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 1420 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-260. - Temporary uses. 
    Temporary uses, buildings and structures in connection with land development, sales or construction projects may be established, erected, or placed within any zoning district for occupancy other than as dwelling or lodging units. Any such use, building, or structure shall require a permit from the community development department; such permit is to specify location, type of construction, maintenance requirements, buffering requirements, time period of operation or utilization of any such use, building, or structure and such other requirements as the director may deem necessary. No permit shall be for a period of more than six (6) months, subject to renewal upon approval of the director. Failure to obtain a permit or violation of any condition or requirement specified as part of an issued permit shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 25.540; Ord. No. 409, 9-2-1980; Ord. No. 419, 3-3-1981; Ord. No. 715, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Secs. 12-261-12-281. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DOWNTOWN COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT PLAN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 12-282. - Title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Overlay Zoning District." 
(Code 2001, § 29.900) 
Sec. 12-283. - Definitions of terms. 
    Unless specifically defined below or as defined in article II of this LDC, words or phrases used in this division shall have the meaning of common usage which gives this division its most reasonable application: 
    Architectural high style is a more refined and formal architectural design style based on its historical origins that is predicated upon formal and specific rules within a particular style and is characterized by a higher level of composition and design details. Illustrations of the design elements of the Temple Terrace Mediterranean Revival high styles are contained in Exhibits III-A-III-B following this division. 
    Architectural vernacular style is a style that developed "naturally" in response to local climate, social, and economic factors over time. This architecture creates a more informal character and may be symmetrical or, more typically, asymmetrical in its composition, but exhibits less refined details than the High Style. Illustrations of the design elements of the Temple Terrace Mediterranean Revival vernacular style are contained in Exhibits III-A-III-B following this division. 
    Blank building wall means any building wall where transparent glazing is equal to twenty-five (25) percent or less of the wall area. 
    Build-to-line means a line parallel to the property line, along which a building or structure shall be built as specified by the classification of the adjacent street. 
    Building frontage means and is comprised of the front and street side yard setback areas and the building facade. The building frontage includes the dimensional depth of the building front yard setback, the portion of the building facade along the front yard and the architectural elements that make up the facade such as architectural style details, colonnades, shop fronts, stoops and entrances or balconies. 
    Compatibility is measured by how the design of a building or project relates to the design elements of the surrounding natural/physical and manmade environments. Compatibility measures include, but are not limited to, building scale, mass and form; building relationship to the street; transitions in building height and; the use of building materials and harmonious reoccurrence of significant facade design features such as window patterns/rhythms, cornice lines and roof lines. 
    Design elements means the features of a building which includes architectural style, roof and facade details (cornices, arches, building materials), the rhythm (pattern and spacing) and proportion of windows, porches, doors, and vertical and horizontal features (columns, lintels). 
    Fenestration means the arrangement of windows, doors and other exterior openings on a building. 
    Focal design elements means design features such as towers, cupolas, dormers, parapets or other unique roof features that create a visual emphasis particularly at street corners to the vertical elements of a building. 
    Mediterranean Revival Style is defined and illustrated in Exhibits III-B.1 and III-B.2 following this division 
    Retail means any building that is used or designed and constructed for the display and sale of products purchased on a frequent basis. Products sold may include, but not be limited to, household goods, groceries, furniture, appliances, sale of food and/or beverages (consumption on-site and/or take-out), home entertainment equipment, specialty retail, retail banking, art, jewelry, florists, apparel and footwear, books and stationary, appliances, and camera and art supplies. 
    Spanish Renaissance Revival Style is defined and illustrated in Exhibits III-A.1 and III-A.2 following this division. 
    Substantial expansion of existing development as used in this LDC shall be defined as any expansion or redevelopment of an existing site and structure that exceeds fifty (50) percent of its current valuation (land and improvements) as identified by the county property appraiser at the time a development application is submitted to the city. Further, substantial expansion shall also mean any cumulative expansion or redevelopment of an existing site and structure that exceeds fifty (50) percent of its current valuation over a consecutive two-year period. 
    Unified development is defined as a group of buildings that are either under single ownership or are reviewed by site plan or PUD as a single project. 
(Code 2001, § 29.930; Ord. No. 1340, § 1, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-284. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Implement the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan (Adopted May 15, 2001), and the Downtown Temple Terrace Revitalization Master Plan (January 31, 2005), which establish the basis for the city's vision of the downtown. 
(2)  Implement the Downtown Mixed Use District (DMU-35) comprehensive plan future land use category and mobility fee exemption area. 
(3)  Recognize the dependency of commercial buildings and development on having high visibility from the public street. Therefore, the design of building(s) and sites determines much of the image and attractiveness of the streetscapes and character of a community. Massive and/or generic developments that do not contribute to, or integrate with, the community in a positive manner can be detrimental to a community's image, and sense of place. The goal is to create and maintain a positive ambiance, pedestrian-oriented scale of development, and strong community image and identity by providing for architectural and site design standards that will enhance the visual appearance of commercial development within the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area, as well as the city as a whole, while still providing for design flexibility. These standards are intended to enhance the quality of life in the city. 
(4)  Establish design guidelines and development standards for the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area that: 
a.  Ensure that the design and development of the public realm and private property are coordinated and tailored to provide high quality development. 
b.  Ensure that buildings that face the public realm have architectural designs with detailed facade features to create a pedestrian-scale streetscape and orient parking and service functions to the rear of buildings and interior of blocks. 
c.  Create a mixture of uses to include shops, workplaces, residences and civic buildings. 
d.  Ensure a design and scale transition of uses and building scale from the downtown core to the adjacent established residential neighborhoods. 
(5)  Establish a process for the review of all development within the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area to evaluate compliance with the provisions of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 29.905; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-285. - Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area. 
    The area referred to as the "Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area" consists of approximately two hundred twenty-five and thirty-one hundreds (225.31) acres that is bounded on the south by the Hillsborough River; on the west by the city limits (less the residential property fronting on Rainbow Drive, Shirley Drive, Grandview Drive, Ridgeway Drive, Riverhills Drive and Beverly Drive south of Grove Hill Road; on the north by the properties fronting on Temple Heights Road to Beverly Drive and the property south of 98th Avenue/Linda Avenue (extended); and on the east by Ridgedale Road, Sunnyside Road, Shadow Lane and Springdale Place. A map and legal description of the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area is found in Exhibit I following this division. 
(Code 2001, § 29.910) 
Sec. 12-286. - Development review process. 
(a)  With the exception of city-owned lands described in division 5 of this article, Downtown Overlay District, all rezoning requests for property located within the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area shall be in the form of Planned Development (PD) District rezoning petitions, reviewed and processed pursuant to section 12-235 and other applicable provisions of this LDC. 
(b)  All development plans and/or permits shall be reviewed by the city's Development Review Committee (DRC) for compliance with the guidelines and standards in this LDC. The DRC review shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures established in sections 12-74 and 12-377 and all other provisions not in conflict with this LDC. The DRC may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of any development plans and/or permits reviewed pursuant to this LDC. 
(c)  The DRC may recommend to the city council the granting of waivers, for good cause shown, from the strict application of the design guidelines and standards of this LDC. In reviewing waiver requests from this LDC, the DRC shall consider the overall intent, purpose and objectives of the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan, Downtown Temple Terrace Revitalization Master Plan, Downtown Mixed Use-35 future land use category and provisions of this LDC in formulating recommendations. 
(d)  Final approval, approval with conditions or denial of all development plans and/or permits may be granted by city council pursuant to the provisions of this LDC. 
(e)  In the event that there are any conflicts and/or inconsistencies between this division and the rest of this LDC, the provisions of this article shall prevail. If there is any dispute about which provisions shall prevail, such dispute shall be decided by the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 29.915; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-287. - DRC appeal process. 
    Decisions of the development review committee (DRC) may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 29.920) 
Sec. 12-288. - Development design guidelines and standards. 
(a)  All rezoning petitions, new developments and/or substantial expansion of existing developments on property located within the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area shall be consistent with the design guidelines and standards contained in this article. A single-family dwelling unit existing at the time of the adoption of this division is exempt from the requirements of this LDC, with the exception of section 12-290(d). Master plans or site plans approved by the city council prior to the adoption of this LDC are exempt, unless there is a modification that requires site plan review or the approval expires prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Waivers to any design guidelines and standards shall only be approved by the city council. A waiver may be granted, provided the waiver is consistent with the intent and purpose of this LDC and the city council finds that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of the provisions of this LDC to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this LDC; and 
(5)  Any waiver granted shall be the minimum waiver which makes possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or property. 
(c)  Waivers may be granted to this LDC for religious and educational institutions existing within the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area at the time of the adoption of this LDC notwithstanding the above criteria. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925) 
Sec. 12-289. - Block perimeter standards. 
(a)  There is a relationship between block size and pedestrian friendly design and orientation. The smaller the block size, the greater its pedestrian orientation in terms of short walking distances and building facade designs that are pedestrian in scale. A block perimeter is defined as a land area bounded by three (3) or more streets, but does not include alleys. 
(b)  Block perimeter standards for new unified development that encompasses a block area ensure that new developments will be connected to adjacent development along streets, and where appropriate along alleyways to enhance service and parking functions. Block perimeter standards are a function of the degree of pedestrian orientation desired for a particular street frontage. The block plan as shown in Exhibit II following this division illustrates the intent of the block perimeter standards. However, individual parcel developments may require modifications to this plan to fit specific development block size requirements. The streets within the Downtown Community Redevelopment Area are classified in a pedestrian oriented hierarchy of most to least importance. The classifications are Retail Pedestrian, Primary and Secondary Streets (Exhibit V following this division). The following block perimeter standards apply to these street classifications: 
(1)  Retail pedestrian street. The maximum block perimeter shall be one thousand six hundred (1,600) linear feet or two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) linear feet if all parking is structured and located internal to the block. 
(2)  Primary and secondary streets. The maximum block perimeter shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet or one thousand eight hundred (1,800) linear feet if all parking is structured and located internal to the block. 
(c)  Where new development creates new street networks, such new streets shall be aligned with the adjacent existing street network. At least two (2) of the new streets shall be classified as the highest street classification of the adjacent streets. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.1) 
Sec. 12-290. - Architectural styles guidelines. 
(a)  New development and/or substantial expansion of existing development shall incorporate, at minimum, architectural design elements consistent with one of the following architectural styles: Spanish Renaissance Revival or Mediterranean Revival as defined and illustrated in Exhibits III-A.1-III-B.1 following this division. Development shall include all of the following major design elements as illustrated in Exhibits III-A.1-III-B.1: 
(1)  Massing. 
(2)  Building facade materials and color. 
(3)  Roof form, details and materials. 
(4)  Window treatments. 
(5)  Building entrance features/details. 
(b)  A development project with multiple buildings shall have a consistent architectural style and use of materials throughout the project. 
(c)  New development and/or substantial expansion of existing development shall include facade elements that provide shade along the street frontage such as awnings, canopies, arcades or colonnades and provide an additional design element related to the above-referenced architectural styles, such as iron gates, tile fountains, cast terra cotta, wood work, stenciled ornaments, balconies or similar design features as part of a building facade, building frontage and/or zoning lot front yard. 
(d)  The architectural style of additions that do not meet the definition of substantial expansion to an existing building shall be compatible with the existing building in design elements including, but not limited to, style, form, height, materials, color, and details (Exhibit IV following this division). An addition shall be located in a manner that maintains the integrity or prominence of the principal building. Where feasible, efforts shall be made to incorporate design concepts and elements consistent with the Spanish Renaissance Revival, Mediterranean Revival, or St. Augustine Spanish Colonial architectural styles on the principal building and addition. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.2; Ord. No. 1340, § 1, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-291. - Building frontage and build-to-line standard. 
(a)  Building frontage and build-to-line standards are based on the hierarchical classification of streets as retail pedestrian street, primary street or secondary street, as shown on Exhibit V following this division. 
(b)  The design standards described below and illustrated in Exhibits VI, VII and VIII following this division shall apply to all development along retail pedestrian streets: 
(1)  Building masses and facades along the street shall be articulated with windows, store fronts and entryways oriented to the sidewalk and the street. Variations in exterior building wall plane in depth or articulation (such as use of columns) is encouraged to avoid a monolithic appearance. 
(2)  Buildings that are part of a unified development shall line along the street to create a continuous building frontage along each street. At least ninety (90) percent of the total street frontage shall have a continuous building frontage. 
(3)  A building that is on a single parcel and not defined a part of a unified development is encouraged to create a continuous building frontage with the adjacent parcels by having zero (0) side yard setbacks (Exhibit VIII following this division). However, such building may have side yard setbacks of not greater than five (5) feet from the property line, except as provided for in section 12-294. 
(4)  The distinction between ground floor level and upper floor levels shall be clearly articulated. 
(5)  The ground level facade shall have architectural fenestration that creates a pedestrian-scale streetscape. The minimum ground floor ceiling height shall be eighteen (18) feet. The minimum building frontage height shall be two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet. The ground level facade shall have a minimum seventy (70) percent of its total area in transparent glazing up to a height of sixteen (16) feet. The maximum percentage of glazed area that may be blocked by interior fixtures or signage along any street front is thirty (30) percent. 
(6)  All retail development shall be at the ground floor level. One hundred (100) percent of the ground floor building frontage shall be designed for and occupied with retail uses. 
(7)  Building frontage design elements shall include the use of awnings, arcades or colonnades, or similar features to provide pedestrian comfort zones. Arcades or colonnades may be located at the property line. 
(8)  Blank building walls are prohibited on the street frontage and where side or rear walls of buildings are visible from the street. Where side and rear walls are not visible from the street blank walls are discouraged. 
(9)  Buildings shall meet the build-to-line, which supersedes any zoning district front or street side yard setback requirement. The build-to-line shall be ten (10) feet from the property line adjacent to right-of-way. 
(10)  The pavement finish (for example, patterns, materials, texture, color) in the setback area between the building and the property line shall be consistent with and/or match the existing and/or planned pavement treatment of the adjacent public space and/or sidewalk. 
(11)  New development shall maintain a compatible relationship with the surrounding development relative to architectural styles, facade design elements, build-to-lines, building mass, scale and height. 
(c)  The design standards described below and illustrated in Exhibits VI, VII, VIII and IX following this division shall apply to all primary and secondary streets: 
(1)  Building masses and edges along the street shall be articulated with windows, store or office fronts, green yards/porches (residential) and entryways oriented to the sidewalk and the street. Variations in exterior building wall plane in depth or articulation (such as use of columns) is encouraged. 
(2)  Buildings that are part of a unified development shall line along the street to create a continuous building frontage along each street. At least seventy (70) percent of the total street frontage shall have a continuous building frontage. 
(3)  A building that is on a single parcel and not defined as part of a unified development is encouraged to create a continuous building frontage with the adjacent parcels by having zero (0) side yard setbacks (Exhibit VIII following this division). However, such building may have side yard setbacks of not greater than five (5) feet from the property line, except as provided for in section 12-294. 
(4)  The distinction between ground floor level and upper floor levels shall be clearly articulated. 
(5)  Blank building walls are prohibited on the street frontage and where side or rear walls of buildings are visible from the street. Where side and rear walls are not visible from the street blank walls are discouraged 
(6)  Buildings shall meet the build-to-line, which supersedes any zoning district front or street side yard setback requirement. The build-to-line shall be ten (10) feet from the property line. Religious and educational institutions existing within the Temple Terrace Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Area at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived are exempt from this standard. 
(7)  Buildings shall be designed for retail, office, residential, recreational or cultural uses at the ground floor. The ground level facade shall have architectural fenestration that creates a pedestrian-scale streetscape. Where the ground level has retail and/or office uses, the facade shall have a minimum fifty (50) percent of its total area in transparent glazing up to a height of fourteen (14) feet. The minimum ground floor ceiling height shall be fourteen (14) feet. The minimum building frontage height shall be two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet. The maximum percentage of glazed area that may be blocked by interior fixtures or signage along any street front is thirty (30) percent. 
(8)  Residential projects with multiple or row type buildings shall provide separations and/or changes in building plane (facade and roof) to avoid the long barracks like quality imparted by flat long continuous walls and roofs (Exhibit IX following this division). 
(9)  Commercial development shall provide pavement finish (for example, patterns, materials, texture, color) in the setback area between the building and the property line consistent with and/or match the existing and/or planned pavement treatment of the adjacent public space and/or sidewalk. 
(10)  New development shall maintain a compatible relationship with the surrounding development relative to architectural styles, facade design elements, build-to-lines, building mass, scale and height. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.3) 
Sec. 12-292. - Building height standards. 
(a)  No buildings shall exceed six (6) stories or eighty (80) feet in height, whichever is more restrictive. 
(b)  Buildings that are five (5) or six (6) stories in height shall be only permitted within one hundred (100) feet from where Retail Pedestrian Streets intersect or where a Retail Pedestrian Street and Primary Street intersect (Exhibit V following this division). Waivers may be granted to this provision for unified developments. 
(c)  Where adjacent buildings are of different heights, design techniques that architecturally align facade elements and details through the use of such alignment features as balconies, windows, store fronts, or horizontal string courses shall be employed. The purpose of establishing architectural alignment between adjacent buildings is to establish a compatible and harmonious design relationship with adjacent and nearby buildings, and further, to establish and/or maintain a pedestrian-scale streetscape, as illustrated in Exhibit X following this division. 
(d)  The maximum height of buildings adjacent to a single-family residential district shall be limited to two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is more restrictive. 
(e)  The maximum height of buildings across the street from a single-family residential district shall be limited to two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is more restrictive. 
(f)  Buildings of five (5) and six (6) stories in height shall utilize tapering and step back design techniques that reduce building bulk as building height increases (Exhibit X following this division). 
(g)  Exceptions to the height limits are appurtenances, trellised roof decks and other similar structures covering not more than twenty-five (25) percent of a building's roof to which the structure is attached. These structures may exceed the maximum permitted height limits by up to ten (10) feet. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.4) 
Sec. 12-293. - Accessory structures and site features. 
    Accessory structures and site features shall meet the following design guidelines: 
(1)  Accessory structures and equipment shall be located in the rear yard or at the rear of the commercial building, and in the rear or side yard or at the rear of the residential building. Accessory structures such as sheds shall be the same architectural style, materials and color as the principal structure. Equipment such as heating and air-conditioning machinery, transformers and generators shall be screened with a wall, fence or landscaping in such a manner that the equipment is not visible to the public view. 
(2)  Any required fencing or walls shall be decorative and compatible with the architectural style of the principal building and match the principal building in materials and color. Decorative masonry wall finishes and/or wrought iron are appropriate design materials for Spanish Renaissance Revival and Mediterranean Revival architectural style buildings. Wood, wood stockade and chain link fences are not appropriate fencing materials, and therefore, are not permitted. 
(3)  Fence or wall planes shall provide for visual variations in the fence/wall plane. Therefore, wall/fence planes shall not extend more than fifty (50) feet without a significant variation in the fence/wall plane through the use of columns or patterned breaks in the fence/wall plane, and use of landscaping. 
(4)  Dumpsters shall be enclosed with an opaque wall or opaque fencing that matches the materials and colors of the principal structure. 
(5)  Site features such as stormwater ponds shall be located to the rear of the site where possible. Stormwater ponds are not permitted in the front yard, build-to-line area or along any street front. Ponds may be located in the side yard provided the perimeter of the pond has a minimum five-foot-wide landscaped buffer (trees and continuous hedge). Any required fencing or wall shall be a maximum of four (4) feet in height, located behind the landscaping and shall meet the fence/wall design requirements of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.5; Ord. No. 1340, § 1, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-294. - Parking areas, loading areas and parking requirements. 
(a)  Parking lots, parking garages and loading areas shall meet the following locational criteria and design guidelines (Exhibit XI following this division): 
(1)  Parking lots, parking garages and loading areas shall be located to the rear of buildings fronting along retail pedestrian streets and to the rear or side of buildings fronting along primary and secondary streets. Access to parking and loading areas shall be via the secondary street or alleyway. Driveways along retail pedestrian, primary and secondary streets existing at the time of the adoption of this article are required to be removed at the time substantial expansion or redevelopment occurs on the parcel in order to conform with the access requirements of this division. 
(2)  In cases where access to a parking lot, garage or loading area is not available via an alleyway or secondary street, access to the parking/loading area shall be located along the side yard or at the side of the building, but no parking or loading is permitted in front of the building or within the street frontage build-to-line area. The access driveway area (driveway and landscaping) shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. A parking lot (access driveway and limited parking, but no loading) that fronts along a primary or secondary street shall not exceed more than fifty (50) percent of the total lot street frontage or a minimum of thirty (30) feet, whichever is greater. All parking lots including required landscape buffers that front along a retail pedestrian, primary or secondary street shall not be located within the build-to-line area. 
(3)  Parking garages may front along a primary or secondary street provided the ground floor frontage is designed to accommodate commercial, office and/or recreational/cultural uses. All parking garages shall have decorative facades on all parking levels that front along streets, and such facades shall be designed in one of the architectural styles described in section 12-290. All parking garages shall meet the design guidelines set forth in sections 12-291 and 12-292. 
(4)  Uses with drive-through service windows shall be limited to the side of buildings, or to the rear of buildings and accessed via secondary streets or alleys provided they do not substantially disrupt pedestrian activity or surrounding uses. Drive-through service windows shall be accessible by bicyclists. 
(b)  Within the Downtown Community Redevelopment Area there shall be established a maximum number of parking spaces permitted within a development to ensure compliance with the DMU-35 plan category and promote pedestrian oriented development. The maximum parking permitted for residential, retail and office is as follows; all other uses shall comply with the minimum standards contained in this LDC: 
(1)  Residential three (3) bedrooms or more: two and two-tenths (2.2) spaces per du. 
(2)  Residential two (2) bedrooms or less: one and six-tenths (1.6) spaces per du. 
(3)  Retail in mixed-use building: four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
(4)  Freestanding retail: four and one-half (41/2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
(5)  Office in mixed-use building: three (3) spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
(6)  Freestanding office: three and one-half (31/2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.6; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-295. - Signs. 
(a)  Only ground and wall signs shall be permitted, except for signs not requiring a permit pursuant to this LDC. One ground sign is permitted pursuant to this LDC for the C-G zoning district. In addition, one wall sign is permitted up to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the wall area of the building facade, but not to exceed a maximum of one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet in sign area. Wall signs shall be placed on flat, unadorned parts of the building facade, such as the horizontal band between the store front (ground floor) and second floor or the equivalent wall sign area may be placed on awnings. 
(b)  At the time of sign permit application or as part of the site plan review process, all projects shall develop a unified sign program for review and approval. The sign program shall address the coordination of the size, style, number, type and color scheme of all the signs to be erected on the site. (These regulations are not meant to regulate or approve the contents of the signage.) Signage for individual sites, while designed to satisfy the objective of expressing individual corporate image, must also be of a character and size consistent with the overall sign program. The following standards shall be incorporated in all new or modified signs: 
(1)  All signs within a project shall be consistent in color, size, type and lettering style (font). 
(2)  The property address shall be included on the project's wall or ground sign. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.7) 
Sec. 12-296. - Site lighting. 
    The following light standards shall be incorporated into all nonresidential site improvement plans: 
(1)  Ornamental poles shall be manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting, or the equivalent thereof; ornamental poles shall be "Augusta Series," Model 4212-FP4, twelve (12) inches in height, standard finish-black, or the equivalent thereof. 
a.  Poles shall be required only along Retail Pedestrian and Primary Streets where site plans are submitted for approval. This includes existing properties that are modified and required to follow the site plan approval process. 
b.  Poles shall be spaced sixty (60) feet on center maximum, or one pole per sixty (60) linear feet of roadway frontage. 
c.  Use of matching ornamental poles and light fixtures shall be encouraged for the interior portions of a site (i.e., parking lots). 
d.  Poles shall be installed on concrete base pad. Base pad shall be circular. 
(2)  Lighting fixtures shall be manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting; fixtures shall be "Old Town," Model A850/508 polycarbonate acorn, or the equivalent thereof. 
a.  Lamping: Metal Halide, 175 watt. 
b.  Socket type: Mogul Base. 
c.  Finial: Four-vaned, black (standard with fixture). 
d.  Optic systems: Glass Refractor, Type III. 
e.  Fitters: 508 Series fitter with ballast compartment. 
(3)  Miscellaneous lighting accessories include: 
a.  Banner arm: Single banner arms eighteen (18) inches by thirty-six (36) inches shall be specified for each pole located adjacent to the right-of-way. Banner arms are not required for internal site lighting. 
b.  Single convenience receptacle: Convenience receptacle shall be required for all poles. 
c.  Photocells: All street lighting shall utilize photocells to automatically control lights. 
d.  Bollard lighting: "Augusta" 4201-LB (optional). 
e.  Wall fixtures: "Old Town" A840 on No. 50 WB (optional). 
f.  Street sign arm: Optional. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.8) 
Sec. 12-297. - Public and private streetscape and open spaces. 
(a)  Street planting shall be installed along all major thoroughfares. Trees, shrubs and ground cover will be planted along 56th Street and Busch Boulevard. Landscape materials recommended are: 
(1)  Palms along the arterial streets and seasonal annuals planted between the curb and the sidewalks at major intersections; and 
(2)  Planter beds with low flowering shrubs (dwarf oleander or plumbago) used as color accent beds along arterial planting strips. 
Streetscape improvements are shown in Exhibit XIII following this division. 
(b)  Any proposed or required landscaping for private development that fronts along a street and/or is located within parking areas that front along a street pursuant to section 12-294 shall be compatible with the streetscape landscape plan shown in Exhibit XIII following this division by incorporating palm trees such as Royal Palm, Queen Palm, Date Palm or other similar type/scale palm trees in the design. 
(c)  Private and public open spaces shall be located so as to provide for physical and visual connections to adjacent street/public sidewalk networks. Such open spaces shall include the following design features: pedestrian path hardscape materials (brick or stone pavers), water features (fountains, pools, artwork), artwork, and landscape areas (Exhibit XIV following this division). 
(d)  Where open spaces abut retail pedestrian streets, open space areas shall provide seating areas and shade (canopies, tables with umbrellas, shade trees and/or awnings) (Exhibit XIV following this division). 
(e)  To the greatest extent possible, private and public open spaces shall interconnect physically to create an interconnected system of open spaces throughout the Downtown Redevelopment Area. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.9) 
Sec. 12-298. - Color palette. 
    New development or substantial expansion of existing development shall use the color palette, found in Exhibit XV following this division, as a guide and/or use colors appropriate for Spanish Renaissance Revival or Mediterranean Revival architectural styles. 
(Code 2001, § 29.925.10; Ord. No. 1340, § 1, 4-16-2013) 

EXHIBIT I. LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
    BEING A PORTION OF SECTIONS 22 AND 27, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, TEMPLE TERRACE, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA. 
    BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 6A OF RIVERHILLS PARK UNIT NO. 1 ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 30 PAGE 57 AND THE WATERS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH RIVER; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 6A TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF TO A POINT ON THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF RIVERHILLS DRIVE; THENCE NORTHEASTERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO A POINT OF INTERSECTION WITH THE SOUTHERLY EXTENSION OF THE WESTERLY LOT LINE OF LOT 3 OF SAID RIVERHILLS PARK; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG SAID EASTERLY LINE TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY LOT CORNER OF LOT 12, BLOCK 2 OF GRANDVIEW ACRES UNIT N. 1 ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 32 PAGE 19; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 12 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER THEREOF, ALSO BEING THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 2 BLOCK 2; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 2 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE NORTHERLY TO A POINT OF INTERSECTION OF THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BEVERLY DRIVE AND THE SOUTHERLY EXTENSION OF THE EASTERLY LINE OF LOTS 4 AND 5 BLOCK 1 OF SAID GRANDVIEW ACRES UNIT NO. 1; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 6 OF SAID BLOCK 1; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 6 AND EXTENDED TO THE INTERSECTION WITH THE WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BEVERLY DRIVE; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 7 BLOCK 5 OF SAID GRANDVIEW ACRES UNIT NO. 1; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF LOTS 7 THROUGH 1 OF SAID BLOCK 5 AND EXTENDED TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 1 BLOCK 7 OF SAID GRANDVIEW ACRES UNIT NO. 2 ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 32 PAGE 38; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF LOTS 1 THROUGH 5 OF SAID BLOCK 7 TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 5 OF SAID BLOCK 7; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 5 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE NORTHERLY TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 1 BLOCK 2 OF TERRACE OVERLOOK NO. 1 ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 12 PAGE 36; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF LOTS 1 THROUGH 24 AND LOT 27 OF SAID BLOCK 2 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER OF SAID 27; THENCE NORTHERLY TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 27 BLOCK 4 OF TERRACE OVERLOOK NO. 2 ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 12 PAGE 24; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF LOTS 27 AND 24 THROUGH 1 OF SAID BLOCK 4 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER OF SAID LOT 1; THENCE NORTHERLY TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF WASHINGTON SQUARE TOWNHOME CONDOMINIUMS ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN CONDOMINIUM PLAT BOOK 6, PAGE 34; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID CONDOMINIUM TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF SAME ALSO BEING THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF UNIVERSITY SQUARE UNIT NO. 3 ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 43 PAGE 82; THENCE ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID UNIVERSITY SQUARE UNIT NO. 3 TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER OF A PARCEL AS DESCRIBED IN O.R. BOOK 4443 PAGE 1642; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID O.R. BOOK 4443 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER OF A PARCEL AS DESCRIBED IN O.R. BOOK 8420 PAGE 1166; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE NORTHERLY LINE OF SAID O.R. BOOK 8420 TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF A PARCEL AS DESCRIBED IN O.R. BOOK 3471 PAGE 185; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID O.R. BOOK 3471 TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF SAID CORNER ALSO BEING THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF A PARCEL AS DESCRIBED IN O.R. BOOK 4521 PAGE 406; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID O.R. BOOK 4521 TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE EASTERLY TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF A PARCEL AS DESCRIBED IN O.R. BOOK 4602 PAGE 1952; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID O.R. BOOK 4602 TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF, SAID CORNER ALSO BEING ON THE WESTERLY BOUNDARY OF TEMPLE HEIGHTS ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 37 PAGE 13; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 7 OF SAID TEMPLE HEIGHTS; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 7 AND EXTENDED TO THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID TEMPLE HEIGHTS; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF SAID CORNER ALSO BEING ON THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF TEMPLE TERRACE PLAZA ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 33 PAGE 42; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 14 OF SAID TEMPLE TERRACE PLAZA; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 14 TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE NORTHERLY LINE OF LOTS 15 THROUGH 18 OF SAID TEMPLE TERRACE PLAZA AND EXTENDED TO THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF 56TH STREET; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 1 BLOCK 5, TEMPLE TERRACE HEIGHTS ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 31 PAGE 76; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERN LINE OF SAID BLOCK 5 TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF SAID BLOCK 5; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF RACHEL STREET AND LOT 1 BLOCK 4 TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER OF SAID BLOCK 4; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF BLOCK 4 TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER THEREOF SAID CORNER ALSO BEING ON THE WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF RIDGEDALE ROAD AND ALSO THE INTERSECTION OF THE NORTH LINE OF LOT 7 OF TEMPLE TERRACE ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 25 PAGE 68; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF LOT 8 OF SAID TEMPLE TERRACE AND SAID WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 8 TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 23 PAGE 25; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES TO THE P.I. OF THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF BLOCK F-10 OF SAID TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER OF LOT 20 BLOCK C-3 OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 10 PAGE 62; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 20 TO THE SOUTHWESTERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE NORTHERLY LINE OF LOT 22 OF SAID BLOCK C-3 TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER OF SAID LOT 22; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG THE WESTERLY LINE OF LOTS 22 THROUGH 25 OF SAID BLOCK C-3 TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 13 OF SAID BLOCK C-3; THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHERLY LINE OF SAID LOT 13 AND EXTENDED TO THE WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SUNNYSIDE ROAD AND THE EASTERLY LINE OF BLOCK D-8 OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 17 PAGE 22; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF SAID BLOCK D-8 AND THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SHADOWLAWN AVENUE; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY ALONG SAID LINE AND EXTENDED TO THE EASTERLY LINE OF A PARCEL AS DESCRIBED IN O.R. 8237 BOOK 1234; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE AND EXTENDED TO THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CHICAGO AVENUE; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE NORTHEASTERLY CORNER OF BLOCK D-14 OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 17 PAGE 22; SAME ALSO BEING THE WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SPRING DELE PLACE; THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG SAID LINE AND EXTENDED TO THE NORTHEASTERLY LINE OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES ACCORDING TO MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 10 PAGE 67; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY ALONG THE EASTERLY LINE OF SAID SUBDIVISION TO THE EASTERLY CORNER OF LOT 10 OF SAID SUBDIVISION; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHEASTERLY LINE OF LOTS 10 AND 7 OF SAID SUBDIVISION TO THE SOUTHERLY CORNER THEREOF; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY ALONG THE SOUTHWESTERLY LINE OF LOT 8 OF SAID SUBDIVISION TO A POINT OF INTERSECTION WITH THE NORTHEASTERLY EXTENSION OF THE NORTHERLY LINE OF LOT 1, RIVER TERRACE ESTATES ACCORDING TO THE MAP OR PLAT THEREOF AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 53 PAGE 15; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY ALONG SAID LINE TO THE NORTHWESTERLY CORNER THEREOF AND THE WATERS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH RIVER; THENCE MEANDERING NORTHWESTERLY ALONG THE WATERS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH RIVER TO THE AFORE-DESCRIBED POINT OF BEGINNING AND BINDING THEREWITH TO. 

















DIVISION 5. - TEMPLE TERRACE DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 12-299. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the Downtown Overlay District (DOD) is to establish architectural, landscaping, design, building, and use and site development regulations that encourage urban compatible land uses, ensure higher quality development and function in order to protect property values, improve economic development opportunities, provide safe and efficient access with a focus on the pedestrian and further the overall goals of the community redevelopment plan (adopted May 15, 2001, as updated), the Downtown Temple Terrace Revitalization Master Plan (adopted January 31, 2005) and the Downtown Mixed Use future land use category of the city's comprehensive plan. These architectural, landscaping, design, building, use and site development criteria can encourage quality development through the use of a variety of design and site techniques while continuing to provide for a wide range of economic development opportunities. The DOD shall include the real property described in the map and legal description set forth at the end of this division as exhibit 1. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-300. - Relationship to underlying zoning district/planned development. 
(a)  In the event of a conflict between the entitlements, regulations or standards established in this division and the equivalent provisions in the underlying zoning districts, the provisions of this division shall govern. Except in the event of preemption by this division, the underlying zoning district provisions and all other provisions of the Land Development Code shall be applicable and enforced within the DOD. 
(b)  The DOD shall have no application to those properties zoned PD (Planned Development) as of the date of the enactment of this DOD until and unless such properties are rezoned. 
(c)  The Downtown Community Redevelopment Plan Overlay Zoning District (code sections 12-282 through 12-298) shall not apply to the properties located in the DOD. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-301. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the DOD. These permitted uses shall be allowed on all properties within the DOD in addition to the permitted and accessory uses allowed in the underlying zoning district: 
(a)  Multifamily dwellings, townhouses, live/work units. Live/work units are residential units consisting of both a commercial/office and a residential component that is occupied by the same resident as a primary dwelling. 
(b)  Office buildings. 
(c)  Research facilities (a center where research is done). 
(d)  Community and cultural facilities. (Library, museum, performing arts spaces and other similar uses.) 
(e)  Government offices. 
(f)  Meeting and convention facilities. 
(g)  Restaurant(s) The regulations set forth in subsection 12-234(b)(48)a. and b., and subsection 12-234(c)(12) shall not apply to restaurants located in the DOD. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-302. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted in the DOD even if permitted in the underlying zoning district: 
(a)  Appliance stores, including repair, conducted entirely within the building. 
(b)  Car rental agencies. 
(c)  Automotive supply store. 
(d)  Exterminator. 
(e)  Golf courses and driving ranges. 
(f)  Restaurant(s) with drive thru. 
(g)  Automobile sales, services and leasing. 
(h)  Automobile washing service, manual or mechanical, coin-operated or self-service facilities. 
(i)  Gas station. 
(j)  High turnover retail automotive services. 
(k)  Landscape nursery. 
(l)  Service stations, with or without convenience sales. 
(m)  Blood donor center, which is a business primarily engaging in the activity of receiving or taking whole blood, plasma or any component thereof from human donors for consideration. 
(n)  Free standing communications towers. 
(o)  Single-family residential. 
(p)  Towing services, trash removal operations, wrecked, junked or abandoned vehicle storage or similar uses. 
(q)  Uses that involve hazardous processes or that emit noxious odors, fumes, or particulates, or that involve levels of noise that are incompatible with other permitted uses. 
(r)  Dry cleaners unless the use is for pick up and drop off only. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-303. - Development standards. 
    The following development standards shall apply within the DOD: 
(a)  No minimum lot size. 
(b)  Maximum lot coverage: one hundred (100) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Minimum side yard: zero (0) feet. 
(d)  Minimum front yard: zero (0) feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: zero (0) feet. 
(f)  Maximum building setback: a minimum of fifty (50) percent of a building's linear footage facing a public roadway must have a setback of zero (0) to ten (10) feet with a direct pedestrian connection. 
(g)  Maximum fence height: ten (10) feet. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-304. - Crown design and building height. 
(a)  A building's crown design and communication equipment/tower(s) shall be subject to approval of the city council based on aesthetic design, and conformity with the downtown mixed use, pedestrian oriented development. The crown of a building is defined as the area of the structure that is above the top floor, and may include angled roofs, decorative elements, towers and other similar construction. 
(b)  Building heights within the DOD are regulated as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height is five (5) stories, excluding the crown of the building. (Doesn't include the crown of a building.) 
(2)  Minimum building height is two (2) stories. 
(3)  A landowner/developer may request that a proposed project exceed five (5) stories. Such a request shall be subject to approval of the city council based on compatibility with surrounding development, aesthetic design, and conformity with the downtown urban development. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-305. - Design standards. 
(a)  All project design shall be based on an urban pedestrian oriented focus, and shall satisfy the following standards: 
(1)  Window or transparency. The first floor elevations facing a public roadway shall provide at least fifty (50) percent window or transparency at the pedestrian level. Transparency that is open (such as but not limited to parking garage space) shall provide decorative transparency. The window or transparency is measured in lineal fashion. (For example, a 100-foot long building elevation shall have at least fifty (50) percent transparency in length.) The height of the glass or Plexiglas or opening must be a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
(2)  Accessory structures. The design of accessory structures shall incorporate design elements of the primary structure and should not be a dominant feature on the property. 
(3)  Rooftop equipment. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view on all sides visible to the general public, by building parapet walls or other building elements that appear as integral elements of the overall building. 
(4)  Outdoor storage associated with building equipment and servicing areas shall be: 
a.  Set back fifteen (15) feet from the front lot line; 
b.  Screened by an opaque wall or fence with a height of ten (10) feet. An opaque wall or fence must completely screen the property beyond the fence and can include stockade fences or walls. Chain-link fences with slat, cloth or other similar measures are not considered to be opaque fences. The design of the screens should integrate elements of the overall building. 
(5)  Landscaping. All developments shall adhere to the following landscaping requirements with a focus on the pedestrian space and sidewalk areas. A landscaping plan shall be required with all site plan submittals, showing the proposed landscaping for the site. One large palm tree will be required for every twenty (20) linear feet (on center) of property fronting along a public roadway. The following landscaping provisions include a ratio relationship between the number of plantings required, based upon the number of trees required. All shrub plants must be a minimum size of three (3) gallons at planting and all flowering perennial plants must be a minimum of one gallon at planting. For every required tree, a corresponding number of plantings from either subsection a., or b., below, will also be required to satisfy the landscape plan requirements for each site plan: 
a.  Shrubs: Five (5) per required tree. 
b.  Perennial plants: Seven (7) per required tree. 
(6)  Planters: 
a.  Planters shall be no more than three (3) feet in height and shall be spaced at intervals of four (4) feet or more unless otherwise directed. 
b.  Planters shall not occupy an area of more than four (4) square feet or two (2) feet in diameter. 
c.  Planters shall be placed with the face or outer edge eighteen (18) inches from the face of the curb or no more than three (3) feet from the building line. ADA requirements for the sidewalk and pedestrian space must be met. 
d.  City council my allow planters of different sizes or locations on a case by case basis. 
(7)  Parking requirements: 
a.  No parking space requirements but a project needs to provide competent substantial evidence that its parking/transportation needs are being met. 
b.  Parking lots located along public roadways will be required to provide a landscaping buffer that is four (4) feet or greater in width, between the parking area and the public sidewalk. 
c.  No on-site parking is allowed in front of any structure. All parking must be on the side or rear of a structure. 
(8)  Sidewalk requirements. All sidewalks along public roadway must be designed and built to meet the city's sidewalk construction and design regulations with a minimum width of eight (8) feet. 
a.  All buildings will be required to have a minimum of one sidewalk connection from a sidewalk located along a public roadway to the entrance of the primary structure. 
(9)  Awnings and coverings over the public sidewalk facing public roadway are required for all building entry points and over commercial space: 
a.  The first floor elevations facing a public roadway shall provide at least sixty (60) percent awning or coverings at the pedestrian level over the building entry points and commercial space. 
b.  The awning or covering at the pedestrian level shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. 
(10)  Exterior wall elevations. There shall be no uninterrupted lengths of blank wall longer than ten (10) feet facing a public roadway. Walls shall be differentiated with recesses, offsets, building height, variations in rooflines, windows, awnings and materials or other architectural elements. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply to the first floor of a building. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-306. - Waivers. 
(a)  The city council, pursuant to chapter 12, article VIII, division 3, is authorized to consider and grant a waiver(s) from the following sections of division 5: 
(1)  Development standards in section 12-303; 
(2)  Crown design and building height in section 12-304; and, 
(3)  Design standards in section 12-305. 
(b)  The city council may grant a waiver(s) only if an applicant establishes that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of the provisions of this LDC to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this LDC; and 
(5)  Any waiver granted shall be the minimum waiver which makes possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or property. 
(c)  For each waiver granted, the city council shall make a finding as part of the record stating specifically the factual basis upon which the waiver is based. 
( Ord. No. 1383, § 1(Exh. A), 12-15-2015 ) 
Exhibit 1 

Exhibit "C" 
Legal Description of Property Subject to
Temple Terrace Downtown Overlay District 
Folio Number: 201949-0000 
Legal Description: 
AREA "A" NORTH: THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND LYING AND BEING IN SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA BEING MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE ALONG THE SURVEY CENTERLINE OF STATE ROAD S-583, ALSO KNOWN AS 56TH STREET, SOUTH 00°00'31? EAST, A DISTANCE OF 50.14 FEET; THENCE LEAVING SAID LINE NORTH 89°59'29? EAST, A DISTANCE OF 45.00 FEET TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583 AND THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BULLARD PARKWAY AND THE POINT OF BEGINNING; THENCE SOUTH 89°20'43? EAST, ALONG THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BULLARD PARKWAY, FORMERLY KNOWN AS TEMPLE TERRACE HIGHWAY, A DISTANCE OF 589.73 FEET; THENCE LEAVING SAID LINE SOUTH 00°00'50? WEST, A DISTANCE OF 1,464.67 FEET; THENCE NORTH 89°57'31? WEST, A DISTANCE OF 589.11 FEET TO THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583, 45.00 FEET EASTERLY OF SAID SURVEY CENTERLINE; THENCE NORTH 00°00'31? WEST, ALONG SAID RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE A DISTANCE OF 1,470.98 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
    LESS AND EXCEPT THEREFROM THAT PORTION LYING WITHIN PHASE 1 PARCEL: 
A PARCEL OF LAND LYING IN SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA. SAID PARCEL BEING THOSE PORTIONS OF TRACTS A-1, A-2, B-1, D-1, H AND ADDITIONAL CITY PARCEL, ALL AS DESCRIBED IN THAT CERTAIN QUIT CLAIM DEED RECORDED IN OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 19336, PAGE 1616, OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE ALONG THE WEST BOUNDARY OF SAID SOUTHEAST 1/4, SOUTH 00°06'43? WEST, 238.17 FEET; THENCE DEPARTING SAID WEST BOUNDARY, SOUTH 89°53'17? EAST, 44.71 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583 (56TH STREET); THENCE ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, SOUTH 00°10'20? WEST, 704.46 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING OF THE HEREIN DESCRIBED PARCEL; THENCE DEPARTING SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, SOUTH 89°49'40? EAST, 589.22 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE CLOSED COMMONWEALTH AVENUE (BROADWAY ON PLAT), AS SHOWN ON MAP OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES, AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 17, PAGE 22, OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, AND THE SOUTHERLY EXTENSION THEREOF, SOUTH 00°12'09? WEST, 283.56 FEET; THENCE SOUTH 89°04'57? EAST, 67.07 FEET TO A POINT ON THE WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SPRINGDALE AVENUE; THENCE ALONG SAID WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, SOUTH 02°50'45? EAST, 109.21 FEET TO A POINT ON A TANGENT CIRCULAR CURVE, CONCAVE WESTERLY; THENCE 122.64 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE TO THE RIGHT, HAVING A RADIUS OF 700.00 FEET, A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 10°02'17?, A CHORD WHICH BEARS SOUTH 02°10'22? WEST, A CHORD DISTANCE OF 122.48 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE SOUTH 07°11'31? WEST, 63.86 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY EXTENSION OF THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF CHICAGO AVENUE, AS SHOWN ON SAID MAP OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES; THENCE DEPARTING SAID WESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, AND ALONG THE EASTERLY EXTENSION OF SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, AND SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, NORTH 89°46'14? WEST, 649.80 FEET TO A POINT ON THE AFORESAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583; THENCE DEPARTING SAID NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, AND ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, NORTH 00°10'20? EAST, 578.63 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
AREA "A" SOUTH: A PARCEL OF LAND LYING IN SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA. SAID PARCEL BEING THOSE PORTIONS OF TRACTS A-2, D-I AND H, ALL AS DESCRIBED IN THAT CERTAIN QUIT CLAIM DEED RECORDED IN OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 19336, PAGE 1616, AND THAT CERTAIN CORRECTIVE QUIT CLAIM DEED RECORDED IN OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 19954, PAGE 1849, BOTH OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE ALONG THE WEST BOUNDARY OF SAID SOUTH 1/4, SOUTH 00°06'43? WEST, 238.17 FEET; THENCE DEPARTING SAID WEST BOUNDARY, SOUTH 89°53'17? EAST, 44.71 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583 (56TH STREET); THENCE ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, SOUTH 00°10'20? WEST, 704.46 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING OF THE HEREIN DESCRIBED PARCEL; THENCE DEPARTING SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, SOUTH 89°49'40? EAST, 589.22 FEET TO A POINT ON THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE CLOSED COMMONWEALTH AVENUE (BROADWAY ON PLAT), AS SHOWN ON MAP OF TEMPLE TERRACE ESTATES, AS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 17, PAGE 22, OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, SOUTH 00°12'09? WEST, 18.67 FEET; THENCE DEPARTING SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, NORTH 89°49'40? WEST, 589.21 FEET TO A POINT ON THE AFORESAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583; THENCE ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY, NORTH 00°10'20? EAST, 18.67 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
12.22 ACRES (M.O.L.) 
Folio Numbers: 201977-0000 and 201978-0000 plus vacated rights-of-way. 
Legal Description: 
AREA "B": THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND LYING AND BEING IN SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA BEING MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 22, TOWNSHIP 28 SOUTH, RANGE 19 EAST, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE ALONG THE SURVEY CENTERLINE OF STATE ROAD S-583, ALSO KNOWN AS 56TH STREET, SOUTH 00°00'31? EAST, A DISTANCE OF 50.14 FEET; THENCE LEAVING SAID LINE NORTH 89°59'29? EAST, A DISTANCE OF 45.00 FEET TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583 AND THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF BULLARD PARKWAY; THENCE SOUTH 00°00'31? EAST, ALONG THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583 A DISTANCE OF 1,535.98 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING; THENCE LEAVING SAID LINE SOUTH 89°57'41? EAST, A DISTANCE OF 414.81 FEET TO THE POINT ON A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE RIGHT; THENCE SOUTHERLY 250.27 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE, HAVING A RADIUS OF 1,562.38 FEET, A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 09°10'40?, AND A CHORD BEARING AND DISTANCE OF SOUTH 00°19'20? WEST 250.00 FEET; THENCE NORTH 89°58'12? WEST, A DISTANCE OF 32.73 FEET TO THE POINT ON A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE RIGHT; THENCE SOUTHERLY 249.54 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE, HAVING A RADIUS OF 1,530.01 FEET, A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 09°20'41?, AND A CHORD BEARING AND DISTANCE OF SOUTH 09°38'39? WEST 249.26 FEET TO THE NORTHERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF RIVERHILLS DRIVE; THENCE SOUTH 78°39'00? WEST, ALONG SAID RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE A DISTANCE OF 205.00 FEET; THENCE LEAVING SAID LINE NORTH 00°00'41? EAST, A DISTANCE OF 150.04 FEET; THENCE SOUTH 78°45'29? WEST, A DISTANCE OF 140.59 FEET TO THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD S-583; THENCE NORTH 00°00'31? WEST, ALONG SAID RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE A DISTANCE OF 413.71 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING; TOGETHER WITH THE SOUTH l/2 OF THAT PORTION OF THE VACATED CHICAGO AVENUE APPURTENANT THERETO AS VACATED AND CLOSED BY ORDINANCES RECORDED IN OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 19380, PAGE 1918; AND OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 20161, PAGE 1527, ALL OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY, FLORIDA. 
3.9 ACRES (M.O.L.) 
(Ord. No. 1383, § 3(Exh. C), 12-15-2015) 
Secs. 12-307-12-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLATTING, SITE PLANS, DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND OTHER APPROVALS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating the subdivision of land required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(a); platting, F.S. § 177.011 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-330. - Vacating, discontinuing, abandoning, or closing streets, alleys, roads, rights-of-way and easements. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to establish procedures for closing, discontinuing, abandoning or vacating streets, alleys, roads, rights-of-way and easements. 
(b)  The city council, upon the request of any person or persons, made in accordance with the requirements of this section, may entertain and consider a petition to vacate, discontinue, close or abandon any street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof. Any such request shall be addressed to the city council and shall petition the city to renounce, disclaim or release any right of the city in any recorded map or plat as a street, road, alley, right-of-way or easement, within the corporate limits of the city. Such petition shall include six (6) copies for the city departments and one copy for each other entity that may be affected by the request and be submitted to the city engineer for review and presented to the city council in the following form: 
(1)  Form; oath. The petition shall be complete and sworn to by the petitioner(s) and acknowledged before a notary public. 
(2)  Contents. The petition shall include the street address of the petitioner(s) and shall contain an accurate legal description of the street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof petitioned to be closed, discontinued, vacated or abandoned. 
(3)  Abstract of title. The petitioner(s) shall attach to said petition an ownership and encumbrance report or certificate from an abstract company, acceptable to the city, showing the name(s) and street addresses of all owners, encumbrancers, mortgage holders, lienors and lessees of all lands abutting any such street, road, alley, right-of-way or any part or portion thereof, or, in the case of an easement, the owners, encumbrancers, mortgage holders, lienors and lessees of any part or portion of the easement requested to be vacated, discontinued, closed or abandoned. 
(4)  Release and hold harmless agreement. The petition shall state the reason why the petitioner(s) request the closing, discontinuing, vacation or abandonment of the street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof and shall recite: 
"The petitioner(s) herein named hereby waive, renounce, relinquish, absolve and discharge the city, its officers, employees, representatives and successors, of and from any and all claims, suits, actions, causes of action, responsibilities, duties and liabilities of any nature and kind whatsoever that such petitioner(s) may have, claim or demand, now or in the future, by reason of vacating, discontinuing, closing or abandoning of said street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof and agree to indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees, representatives and successors, harmless from and against any and all claims, suits, responsibilities, actions, causes of action, duties and liabilities of any nature and kind whatsoever that any third party may have, claim or assert against the city, its officers, employees, representatives and successors, by reason of the vacating, discontinuing, closing or abandoning of said street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof." 
(c)  Hearing notice. Vacation of right-of-way or easement applications shall require at least one public hearing and notice of said public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the municipality. It is the legislative intent that, whenever possible, the advertisement appears in a newspaper that is published at least five (5) days a week unless the only newspaper in the community is published less than five (5) days a week. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper ten (10) days, unless state statutes or law requires additional notification, prior to each public hearing date and include the public hearing date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. An affidavit indicating that the city advertised such notice in the newspaper on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the petition record. The city engineer or designee shall post a sign that includes the hearing date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing at least ten (10) days prior to each public hearing, unless the first sign posted includes multiple public hearing dates, and said notice shall be posted at either end of the street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof which is to be vacated, discontinued, closed or abandoned. An affidavit indicating that the city posted such notice on the property on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the petition record. 
(d)  Recommendations of the city engineer. Upon receipt of the petition, the city engineer or designee shall forward a copy of the petition to the development review committee, city clerk, and city attorney. The city engineer or designee shall coordinate and submit the plat application to the development review committee to review the said petition and make recommendations to the city council prior to the public hearing. The city engineer or designee shall provide comments from all city departments regarding the petition during the review process and the final recommendation(s) to the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail, at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
(e)  Costs. Filing fees for petitions to vacate shall be paid as follows: 
(1)  Petitions to vacate, discontinue, close or abandon any street, road, alley, right-of-way, easement or any part or portion thereof within the city shall be submitted to the city council with a receipt showing payment by the petitioner(s) to the city of the filing fee, in the amount established by the city. (Ord. No. 834, 4-20-1993) 
(2)  No fee shall be required of a governmental agency. 
(3)  No fee shall be refunded if the petition is withdrawn after the public hearing is ordered to be advertised. If the petition is withdrawn prior to the time the public hearing is ordered to be advertised, four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the fees paid shall be refunded to the petitioner(s). 
(f)  Vacation of public or private streets, alleys, ways, lands, and rights-of-way may be considered under the following conditions: 
(1)  The street, alley, way, land or right-of-way is unneeded for existing or future vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian access, or other public purpose, is unimproved or dead-end; or (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(2)  Traffic on a minor street should be eliminated; or 
(3)  The subject area has sufficiently changed since the area was dedicated and vacation or closing is warranted; or 
(4)  The vacation or closing would be in accordance with the comprehensive plan for that area; and 
(5)  The location of utilities or drainage patterns will not be adversely affected by the vacation or closing. 
(g)  Traffic routing. No collector street may be vacated or closed unless sufficient adequate provision is made to handle the affected traffic. 
(Code 2001, § 25.625; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 834, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 12-331-12-348. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating the subdivision of land required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(a); platting, F.S. § 177.011 et seq. 

Sec. 12-349. - Purposes. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this division to establish a procedure for the division of unplatted property and the re-division or recombination of previously platted property to further the orderly layout of property proposed to be divided, redivided, or recombined and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monuments of platted property. 
(b)  Further, it is the purpose of this division to assure that the platting process is applied in a uniform manner to conventional divisions of property for individual lots owned in fee simple and to the division of property for the purpose of conveying ownership in a condominium form. 
(Code 2001, § 25.600) 
Sec. 12-350. - Prohibitions on transfer of lots in unapproved subdivisions. 
    It shall be a violation of this division for anyone who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land to transfer, sell, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell such land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision of such land without having the plat approved as required by this article. 
(Code 2001, § 25.600.1) 
Sec. 12-351. - Platting required. 
(a)  Filing of plat or replat. Except as specifically exempted below, the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the immediate or future purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, will require the filing of a plat; or the development of three (3) or more lots, blocks or parcels which elements bear no definable relationships to lot or parcel dimensional criteria of the applicable zoning district will require the filing of a replat, in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. 
(b)  Exempted activities. 
(1)  Any division by inheritance (whether testate or intestate) or by partition or other order of court. 
(2)  Acquisition of property for public purposes. 
(3)  The division of air space into units within a building wherein said building is held in common, undivided ownership. 
(4)  The city council may, by resolution, allow building permits to be issued after plat approval and before recordation provided no certificate of occupancy is issued prior to recordation. 
(5)  The combination of all or portions of previously exempted, platted, or recorded lots or parcels, where no new additional lots or parcels are created or residual lots or parcels result in lots or parcels of less area or width than any one of the original lots or parcels of record. 
(6)  Divisions of land for purposes of conveyances, where such divisions were lawful under regulations in effect at the time such divisions were made and where vested rights have been acquired by the subdivider (developer) in reliance upon previous regulations. 
(c)  Determination of exemptions. Exemptions or vested rights under this section shall be administratively determined by the director. Any person aggrieved by the city engineer's determination may appeal such determination to the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 25.600.2; Ord. No. 1076, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-352. - Optional pre-submission conference. 
(a)  The intent of this procedure is to provide an opportunity for the applicant and the city staff to confer regarding the concept and basic elements of the proposed subdivision plat. This procedure is intended to provide the foundation for a clear understanding and line of communication between the applicant and the city concerning the applicant's proposal and the city's platting procedures and improvement standards. This procedure is intended to facilitate the formal plat review and approval process by providing the applicant an early opportunity to seek the city's input relative to the proposed plat. A specific purpose of this procedure is to provide the applicant with staff comments concerning flood prone areas in the proposed subdivision and to provide staff recommendations concerning those flood prone areas and the level of development considered to be acceptable by the development review committee. 
(b)  The pre-submission conference will be conducted according to the following: 
(1)  The pre-submission conference will be scheduled with the city engineer and such other staff members deemed appropriate. 
(2)  The applicant is encouraged to prepare such preliminary information and sketch plat as may be useful to establish a full understanding of the location, nature, and parameters of the proposed subdivision. There will be no fee for the review of any information or sketch plat which may be submitted. 
(3)  All written comments from the development review committee shall be maintained and filed in the public works department, along with the pre-submission information and any subsequent submissions. 
(c)  It is recommended that requests for pre-submission conferences be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Aerial photograph. 
(2)  Site boundaries. 
(3)  General site topography. 
(4)  Diagrammatic representation of proposed lot boundaries and dimensions. 
(5)  Existing and proposed street configuration, including existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle ways. 
(6)  Proposed public or common open space and facilities. 
(7)  Generalized surface drainage pattern and proposed detention facilities. 
(8)  Identification of existing and proposed utility system features. 
(9)  Site access points and adjoining/abutting roadway, bicycle way, and pedestrian way systems. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(Code 2001, § 25.600.3; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-353. - Overall development plan review. 
    Where the subdivision of a tract of land is to be carried out in two or more stages, a master plan of the tentative future lot layout and infrastructure system for the entire tract shall be submitted in conjunction with the preliminary plat submittal requirements of this division. 
(Code 2001, § 25.600.4) 
Sec. 12-354. - Preliminary plat review. 
(a)  Procedure. The preliminary plat review procedure is established to provide sufficient information regarding a proposed subdivision plat in order that the department can evaluate the site development concept as it relates to the city's comprehensive plan in general, and for the property being subdivided in particular, and decide on the merits of the proposed subdivision before the applicant has invested substantial amounts of time and money in the detailed site and engineering design and plans. 
(b)  When required. A preliminary plat review is required where the tract of land is proposed to be subdivided into three (3) or more lots and requires the construction or opening of new streets, or the construction of water or sanitary sewer facilities. 
(c)  Process. The preliminary plat review process shall be initiated upon submittal to the city engineer of the following: 
(1)  Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat and preliminary plat supplementary drawing or a conceptual plan, which incorporates the requisite content of the supplementary drawing, unless additional copies are required for non-city departments or agencies. 
(2)  The appropriate application fee. 
(3)  A school concurrency application shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with the preliminary plat and reviewed per article X, division 2 of this LDC. 
(4)  A transportation concurrency application shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with the preliminary plat and reviewed and evaluated for accordance with article X, division 3 of this LDC, multimodal transportation concurrency management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual in effect on the date review takes place. 
The preliminary plat and preliminary plat supplemental drawing shall contain all of the information required below. Any property being platted that is also subject to the site plan review process of this article shall not be required to have submitted the preliminary plat supplementary drawing if a preliminary site plan displaying the required information of the supplementary drawing is submitted with the preliminary plat. 
(d)  Submittal requirements. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or engineer, shall be drawn to scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed plat is to be recorded. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, property owner (if other than the applicant), and person preparing the plat. 
(3)  Identification clearly stating that the drawing is a preliminary plat. 
(4)  Legal description of the property; U.S. Survey section, township, and range lines. 
(5)  Existing and proposed rights-of-way, easements, and access points. 
(6)  Proposed street names. 
(7)  Names (appropriately positioned) of adjoining plats. 
(8)  Approximate (to the nearest foot) dimensions and area of: 
a.  The overall plat. 
b.  Each lot. 
c.  Street rights-of-way including radii of cul-de-sacs. 
d.  Common open space or other land to be dedicated for a public purpose. 
(9)  North arrow, scale and date. 
(e)  Preliminary plat supplementary drawing. The preliminary plat supplementary drawing shall be prepared by a surveyor or engineer; be drawn to the same scale as the preliminary plat; and shall include the following: 
(1)  Title of the associated preliminary plat. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, property owner (if other than the applicant), and the person preparing the drawing. 
(3)  Nearest arterial or collector roadway intersection, abutting roads and access points. 
(4)  Buildings, watercourses, wetlands, tree masses, specimen trees, and other existing features within the area to be platted and similar facts regarding existing conditions on land immediately adjacent thereto. 
(5)  Inventory of existing natural resources and/or environmentally sensitive areas on the site. 
(6)  Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the plat or immediately adjacent thereto, including the location and size of the nearest water and sewer lines. 
(7)  Existing contour lines and proposed spot elevations. 
(8)  Proposed use of each lot and existing and proposed zoning of all property within the plat. 
(9)  Zoning district classification for adjoining property. 
(10)  Location and designation of common open space, parks, bicycle ways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, public transit stops and shelters, and other public or semi-public areas or facilities within or immediately adjacent to the property to be platted. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(11)  Location and size of sanitary sewers or other sewage disposal facilities planned. 
(12)  Land to be dedicated to the public including street right-of-way by functional classification, and recreation land, recreational facilities and open space. 
(13)  Preliminary site drainage system, including general surface drainage pattern (including proposed retention/detention areas), and floodplain definition and effect of applicable local, state or federal standards or elevations. 
(f)  Review. Upon determination that all submission requirements have been met, the department shall transmit the preliminary plat to the development review committee. Within ten (10) working days after receiving the preliminary plat, the development review committee shall review said preliminary plat and shall prepare a preliminary plat review report which will be presented to the applicant. The development review committee shall review the preliminary plat for accuracy, content, and consistency with the requirements of the city's comprehensive plan and the design standards set forth in this LDC. The development review committee may, for the purpose of allowing the applicant an opportunity to address unresolved issues, continue consideration of the preliminary plat prior to formulating a decision to approve or disapprove. 
(g)  Appeal to the city council. Upon receipt of the department's review report, the applicant may appeal any disapproval regarding the preliminary plat to the city council. 
(h)  Lapse period. The applicant shall file a final plat covering all or part of the approved preliminary plat within six (6) months from the date of the issuance of the report from the development review committee or the city council's decision in the case of an appeal, otherwise that preliminary plat approval shall be deemed withdrawn. An extension may be granted by the city council for reasons beyond the control of the applicant. 
(Code 2001, § 25.600.5; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-355. - Optional technical design conference. 
(a)  It is the intent of the optional technical design conference to provide an opportunity for the applicant to voluntarily review with the city engineer and other appropriate city officials, the city's design and construction standards and levels of service as they affect the applicant's development objectives. This procedure should enable the applicant to receive the benefit of input from the city prior to the design of the subdivision construction plans and preparation of the final plat. 
(b)  Subsequent to preliminary plat approval, the applicant may submit a letter to the city engineer requesting a technical design conference. It is the responsibility of the city engineer to schedule a meeting with the applicant and appropriate city personnel in a timely manner. 
(c)  No formal action will be taken as a result of any technical design conference since its purpose is informational only. Written direction or confirmation of procedures and standards as may be requested in writing by the applicant shall be provided by the city engineer. 
(Code 2001, § 25.605.1) 
Sec. 12-356. - Subdivision construction plan review. 
(a)  Procedure. The subdivision construction plan review procedure is established to provide a technical review of the documents upon which improvements shall be based and construction contracts let by the applicant. The plans reviewed shall consist of working drawings and design specifications. The subdivision construction plans shall provide the city with complete design and construction information. This information is necessary for evaluation of the quality and completeness of the proposed engineering design, site and landscape planning, compliance with applicable regulations of the city, and the establishment of a construction schedule for the proposed improvements. 
(b)  Written request. Following certification of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall submit a written request to the city engineer for review and approval of the subdivision construction plans according to the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit a minimum of seven (7) copies of complete subdivision construction plans for distribution by the city engineer to other appropriate city departments for review. 
(2)  The city engineer shall supervise and coordinate the technical review by the various city departments and shall: 
a.  Determine the completeness of the plans and compliance with the approved preliminary plat for the subdivision. 
b.  Evaluate the degree of compliance with the technical requirements in the design standards of this LDC and other applicable city regulations. 
c.  Identify any deficiencies or issues which require further attention and should be considered as conditions of approval. 
(3)  The city engineer shall, upon completion of the review, inform the applicant that the plans have been either approved, approved subject to conditions, or disapproved. 
(4)  The city engineer shall require all technical design details to be reviewed and authorized or conditioned by the department head responsible for overseeing the respective design or improvement. 
(5)  If conditions have been placed upon approval of the subdivision construction plans, such conditions shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the city engineer before a final plat is accepted for review. 
(c)  Submission requirements/subdivision construction plan documentation. Requirements for submission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Letter of transmittal. The following information shall be completed by the applicant and submitted to the department: 
a.  Proposed name of plat. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant. 
c.  Proposed common open space and methods of meeting open space requirements. 
d.  Water supply, indication of the location and size of existing and proposed water lines, size of valves, and location of fire hydrants. 
e.  Indication of source of sanitary sewer service and size, location, and design of any extension thereof. 
f.  Such further information as the applicant wishes to bring to the attention of the city. 
(2)  Subdivision construction plan drawings. Subdivision construction plan drawings shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state and shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger, on a sheet size of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, except where a smaller scale may be determined appropriate by the city engineer. The subdivision construction plans shall be identified by the name of the plat and shall include: 
a.  Existing and proposed contours shown at intervals of not more than two (2) feet. Additional spot elevations may be required by the city engineer. USGS data shall be used with benchmarks shown on the plans. Existing and proposed elevations shown at appropriate intervals shall be extended a minimum of one hundred (100) feet beyond the boundaries of the proposed plat. 
b.  Proposed site design including streets with proposed street names, lot lines, utility access and service easements, land use and land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses. 
c.  Data as may be required to determine compliance with the zoning requirements of this LDC. 
d.  Natural features within and adjacent to the proposed plat including drainage channels, bodies of water, wetlands, the location of all protected trees four (4) inches or greater in diameter at breast height, significant wildlife habitat, and other significant features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated and for all watercourses entering the tract, the approximate drainage area and watershed name above the point of entry shall be noted. 
e.  Storm drainage analysis showing drainage data for all watercourses or drainageways entering and leaving the plat boundaries. The storm drainage design shall be prepared to comply with current city retention and drainage criteria. 
f.  Designation of any portion of property within the 100-year floodplain, based upon calculations recognized by the Federal Flood Insurance Administration as the most recent and accurate available of the city's floodplain overlay district as set forth in article IX of this LDC, "Design Standards and Development Criteria," whichever shall be the more restrictive. 
g.  Public facilities existing or to be located within the plat boundaries or within one hundred (100) feet surrounding the proposed plat including streets, bridges, culverts, bicycle ways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, public transit stops and shelters, utility lines, pipelines, power transmission lines, all easements, park areas, structures, and other public structures and facilities. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
h.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving dimensions and all bearings. 
i.  North arrow and graphic scale. 
(3)  Required supporting technical information. 
a.  Typical roadway cross-section and profiles. A typical roadway cross-section shall be provided which includes all information for construction of the street within the right-of-way. Also, roadway profiles shall be provided which display the existing and proposed elevation along the street centerline. The stationing for the profiles shall be at appropriate intervals based upon the existing terrain and proposed underground construction, but in no case shall the intervals be less than fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Floodplain analysis. Where a portion of a plat is known or suspected to be flood prone and a Federal Flood Insurance Administration report or city floodplain overlay district is not sufficiently definitive, an engineering analysis shall be required. Such analysis performed by a registered engineer for the applicant shall determine the 100-year floodplain line. Regardless of the method of determination, the 100-year floodplain line shall be clearly and legibly drawn on the grading and excavation plan. 
c.  Erosion and stormwater runoff control plan. 
1.  Grading and excavation plan. The grading and excavation plan shall seek to minimize the amount of grading necessary, protect to the maximum extent possible the natural features and vegetation on the site, and minimize erosion resulting from the grading activities. It shall include, in addition to existing and proposed spot elevations of appropriate intervals, the estimated cubic yards of cut and fill. 
2.  Detailed storm drainage design plan. The detailed storm drainage plan shall incorporate proposed easement location and dimensions, typical sections, and construction details. 
3.  Erosion control plan. This shall include details of soil preparation, erosion control and vegetation or soil stabilization measures to be taken during construction including construction of berms, diversions or other barriers to siltation, temporary mulching, and landscape planting consistent with the requirements provided in the printed booklet entitled Construction Specifications and Standard Drawings available at the office of the city engineer. Any erosion control measures to be utilized shall also be identified by location on the grading and excavation plan and storm drainage design plan. 
d.  Utilities plan. This plan shall indicate public and private water and sewer facilities, lines, valves, pumps, fire hydrants, pump stations, and treatment which shall be designed to conform to the development standards for water and sewer services. 
(4)  Trust indenture. A draft of any trust indenture proposed for the plat describing proposed covenants, restrictions and conditions applicable to a property shall be submitted for review at the time of construction improvement plan review. In the event the plat includes streets, open space or other facilities commonly usable and accessible to the residents of the development, said trust indenture shall provide for assessments to be levied against the property owners within the development to maintain, repair and replace said facilities or open space areas as necessary. Trust indenture shall include a statement that zoning applies unless covenants are more restrictive. 
(Code 2001, § 25.605.2; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
Sec. 12-357. - Final plat review. 
(a)  The intent of the final plat review and approval procedure is to establish a legal record of the plat in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The final plat review and filing process shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Subsequent to submission and approval of the subdivision construction plans, the applicant shall submit ten (10) copies, of the final plat to the city engineer, unless additional copies are required for outside agencies. 
(2)  The city engineer shall circulate the copies of the final plat to appropriate members of the development review committee to: 
a.  Determine the completeness of the final plat and compliance with the certified preliminary plat; 
b.  Verify the accuracy of information provided; and 
c.  Evaluate the degree of compliance with the technical requirements in the design standards of this LDC and other applicable city and state requirements. Those members reviewing the final plat shall, upon completion of their review, recommend to the city engineer approval or disapproval of the final plat. 
(c)  Following review of the final plat by the development review committee, and upon determination by the city engineer that the final plat is complete, accurate and consistent with the preliminary plat and all conditions of approval, and that an acceptable financial guarantee has been provided for the satisfactory completion of all required site improvements or that the installation of all required improvements has been satisfactorily completed by the applicant in accordance with city specifications, the city engineer shall forward the final plat to the city council for approval. 
(d)  Following final approval by the city council, the city engineer shall coordinate final plat recording at the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(e)  Any amendment of a final plat other than administrative or scriveners' corrections required by the office of the clerk of the circuit court shall require a revised or amended final plat to be prepared by the applicant and reviewed consistent with the terms contained in this section for final plat review. The city engineer shall determine when a correction is administrative or substantive in nature. 
(f)  Submittal requirements. The final plat shall be suitable for recording at the office of the clerk of the circuit court. It shall be prepared and sealed by a land surveyor registered by the state and shall conform with the requirements of F.S. ch. 177 and the requirements of this subsection. It shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet or other scale determined appropriate by the city engineer. The overall sheet size of the plat shall be consistent with the standards established by the clerk of the circuit court for recording. Each sheet shall be provided with a one-inch margin on each of three (3) sides and a three-inch margin on the left side of the plat for binding purposes. 
(g)  Content. Information required on the final plat in a form satisfactory to the city shall include: 
(1)  Name of plat. 
(2)  Location of the plat by U.S. Survey System and political subdivision, including section, township, range, county and state. 
(3)  Names of existing streets abutting or giving access to the proposed plat. 
(4)  All plat boundaries based on an accurate transverse, with all angular and linear dimensions shown. Error of enclosure of such boundary survey shall not exceed one foot for each ten thousand (10,000) feet of perimeter survey. 
(5)  All blocks, lots, streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle ways, public transit stops and shelters, easements and waterways within and adjacent to the plat, all of which shall have all angular and linear dimensions given and all radii, internal angles, bearings, points of curvature, tangents and lengths of all curves, so that no dimensions or data are missing which are required for the future location of any of the corners or boundaries of blocks, lots, or streets, as listed above. When any lot or portion of the plat is bounded by an irregular line, the major portion of that lot or plat shall be enclosed by a witness line showing complete data with distances along such lines extended beyond the enclosure to the irregular boundary shown with as much certainty as can be determined or as "more or less" if variable. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest hundredth of a foot. True angles and distances shall be drawn to the nearest established official monuments, not less than three (3) of which shall be accurately described on the plat. The intended use of all easements shall be clearly stated. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(6)  Curvilinear lots shall show arc distances and radii, chord and chord bearing. Radial lines will be so designated. Direction of nonradial lines shall be so indicated. 
(7)  Sufficient angles and bearing shall identify the direction of all lines and shall be shown to the nearest second. 
(8)  All rights-of-way centerlines shall be shown with distances, angles, bearings or azimuth, points of curvature, arc distance, central angles, tangents, radii, chord, and chord bearing or azimuth or both. 
(9)  All easements or rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any limitations of such easements. 
(10)  All lot numbers and lines. Lot lines shall be marked with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet and bearings or angles to street lines. 
(11)  Accurate descriptions of any area to be dedicated or reserved for public use with the purpose indicated thereon. 
(12)  Title, date of survey, graphic scale of map, and north arrow. The bearing or azimuth reference shall be clearly stated on the face of the plat in the notes or legend. 
(13)  Permanent reference monuments shall be placed in accordance with requirements of the county. 
(14)  Each plat shall show a description of the lands platted and the description shall be the same in the title certification. The description shall be so complete that from it, without reference to the plat, the starting point and boundary can be determined. 
(15)  The clerk of the circuit court's certificate and the land surveyor's certificate and seal. 
(16)  All section lines and quarter section lines occurring in the map or plat shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. If the description is by metes and bounds, the point of beginning shall be indicated together with all bearings and distances of the boundary lines. If the platted lands are in a land grant or are not included in the subdivision of government surveys, then the boundaries are to be defined by metes and bounds and courses. The point of beginning in the description shall be tied to the nearest government corner or other recorded and well-established corner. 
(17)  All contiguous properties shall be identified by plat title, plat book and page number, or as unplatted land. If the area platted is a replatting of a part of the whole of a previously recorded plat, sufficient ties shall be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an overlay to be made and reference to the replatting shall be stated as a subtitle following the name of the plat wherever it appears on the plat. 
(18)  All lots shall be numbered either by progressive numbers or, if in blocks, progressively numbered or lettered in each block, except that blocks in numbered additions bearing the same name may be numbered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
(19)  Park and recreation parcels shall be so designated. 
(20)  All interior excepted parcels shall be clearly indicated and labeled "Not a part of this plat." 
(21)  The purpose and ownership of all areas dedicated must be clearly indicated or stated on the plat. 
(22)  When it is not possible to show curve detail information on the map, a tabular form may be used. 
(h)  Documentation. The following documentation shall accompany the final plat: 
(1)  A title opinion of an attorney licensed in the State of Florida or a certification by an abstractor or a title company stating that the public records identify that the title to the land as described and shown on the plat is in the name of the person, persons, or corporation executing the dedication. In addition, a document entitled "consent to platting of lands and partial release of mortgage" shall be filed together with the final plat for each person or corporation holding a mortgage on all land included on the plat where such person or corporation has not signed the final plat. 
(2)  Certification by a registered land surveyor that the plat represents a survey made by that individual and, further, that all the necessary survey monuments, lots sizes, and lot dimensions are correctly shown thereon. Impressed thereon, and affixed thereto, shall be the personal seal and signature of the registered land surveyor by whom or under whose authority and direction the plat was prepared. 
(3)  Certification that all real estate taxes have been paid. 
(4)  Every plat of a subdivision or condominium filed for record shall include any required dedication by the applicant. The dedication shall be executed by all owners having a record interest in the land being platted in the same manner in which deeds are required to be executed. All mortgagees having a record interest in the land platted shall execute, in the same manner in which deeds are required to be executed, either the dedication contained on the plat or in a separate instrument joining in the ratification of the plat and all dedication and reservations thereon in the form of a consent to plat from all mortgage interests acceptable to the city attorney. When a tract or parcel of land has been platted, and a plat thereof bearing the dedication executed by the developer and approval of the city has been secured and recorded in compliance with this LDC, all streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way, and other public areas shown on such plat, unless otherwise stated, shall be determined to have been dedicated exclusively to the public for the uses and purposes stated thereon, notwithstanding any separate action by resolution of the city council to formally accept such offers of dedication. However, acceptance of dedication by the city shall not be construed as creating an obligation upon the city to perform any act of construction or maintenance within the dedicated area unless the obligation is assumed voluntarily by the city. 
(5)  Pursuant to article X, division 2 of this LDC, a written report from the school district identifying a finding of available school capacity. If the finding requires a proportionate share mitigation agreement for schools, an acceptable executed mitigation agreement shall accompany every final plat which is to be recorded to ensure the school capacity is available or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program following the date of recording. 
(6)  Pursuant to article X, division 3 of this LDC, a certificate of transportation concurrency or a conditional certificate of transportation concurrency issued by the city. 
(7)  Any existing or proposed private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence shall be filed as a separate instrument and reference to such instrument shall be noted on the final plat. 
(8)  After a final plat has been approved, three (3) prints of as-built drawings showing the improvements that have been constructed according to the approved subdivision construction plans, and a copy of the financial guarantee for completion of required improvements shall be filed with the city engineer before said plat shall be recorded. The subdivider shall be responsible for paying the recording fee. 
(9)  Upon recording by the clerk of the circuit court, the subdivider shall furnish the city one reproducible Mylar and two (2) blue line prints of the recorded plat. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(i)  Financial guarantee. Unless all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, an acceptable financial guarantee for required improvements shall accompany every plat which is to be recorded to ensure the actual satisfactory completion of construction of all required improvements within not more than two (2) years following the date of recording, or one year if sidewalks are the only required improvement to be completed following the date of recording. An acceptable financial guarantee for required improvements shall be in an amount not less than one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of the improvements, as approved by the city engineer, but may be reduced by the city engineer from time to time in proportion to the work completed, and may take one of the following forms, subject to the approval of the city engineer and the city attorney: 
(1)  Cash, to be held in escrow by the city; 
(2)  An irrevocable letter of credit written by a bank chartered by the State of Florida, or the United States government, or any other state of the United States if the bank is authorized to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the finance director. The letter of credit shall include, among other things, an expiration date not earlier than one year from the date of issuance; a provision requiring the issuer of the letter of credit to give at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the city prior to expiration or renewal of the letter; and a provision that the letter is automatically renewed for a period of time equaling its original term if the required notice is not given; or 
(3)  A surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Florida. The surety bond shall include, as a minimum, the provisions required above for letters of credit. 
(Code 2001, § 25.610; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-358. - Lot split provision. 
    Notwithstanding the above requirements, the one-time division of a parcel of land into two (2) lots of record may be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior to the subdivision of land occurring, a survey of the existing and proposed parcels shall be provided which provides sufficient information to ensure that both parcels meet any and all requirements of the zoning district in which the parcels are located. This includes, but is not limited to, structural setbacks, lot coverage, parcel size, shape, access to public rights-of-way, availability of utilities, or any other matters determined by the director needed to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(2)  A copy of the recorded deed transferring title to the newly created parcel shall be provided to the community development department. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(3)  If it is determined that a lot split has previously occurred subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations as established in this Code, this provision allowing for an additional lot split shall not apply and a final plat meeting the requirements of this section and F.S. ch. 177 shall be provided. 
(Code 2001, § 25.611; Ord. No. 1076, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-359. - Condominium plats. 
    Before any condominium plat is filed of record in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, a copy of the ground level survey drawing shall first be submitted to the city engineer for determination that all requisite easements are properly delineated on the plat, all streets are properly named without duplication, and the plat comports with other engineering practices of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.615) 
Secs. 12-360-12-376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SITE PLANS 

Sec. 12-377. - General site development plans. 
(a)  For all property in the city except for single-family residential lots, but including residential subdivisions and uses requiring conditional uses, and other applicable developments requiring city council or development review committee approval, a general site development plan shall be required for any building permit application for new construction or for repair, addition, alteration or rehabilitation of existing construction, in accordance with this section. 
(b)  When the director determines any of the following criteria are exceeded, a final site plan in accordance to section 12-379 shall be required instead of a general site development plan and size and value of the building, based on the property appraiser's office records and valuation at the time of the application: 
(1)  The estimated cost of the proposed construction exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the total estimated value of the existing structure, based on the property appraiser's office valuation; 
(2)  The proposed construction substantially alters the existing structure, in appearance or otherwise; 
(3)  More than twenty-five (25) percent of the total square feet of the existing structure will be affected by the proposed construction; 
(4)  The total number of square feet in the proposed structure exceeds twenty-five (25) percent from the existing structure; 
(5)  A modification of the traffic pattern, including, but not limited to, relocation of the driveway, changes to internal traffic flow, etc., that does not reduce interconnection to surrounding properties, including access points to the site, or other changes affecting traffic patterns in the surrounding area; 
(6)  Redevelopment of the site increases the volume of traffic generated by the new use or requires more parking spaces than the prior use; or 
(7)  New construction on vacant land; 
(8)  The redevelopment of the site includes demolishing the sole existing principal building or for multiple buildings, demolishing more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total square footage of all principal buildings on the site; or 
(9)  Addressing other criteria or factors not identified in this section that may warrant the submission of a final site plan application. 
    If the director or designee determines that none of the criteria above are applicable, then the application can be processed as a general site development plan in accordance with this section with the applicable building permit application(s) and associated fees. 
(c)  As to any building permit application, the applicant shall have the right to request in writing that the city council waive the general site development plan submittal and review requirements on the grounds that the proposed building permit is not intended for construction, which will substantially affect the property and, therefore, a general site development plan review for said permit is not necessary to achieve the purpose of this LDC. Any such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the director has advised in writing, by email or U.S. mail, that the applicant must submit a general site development plan and city council shall consider and grant or deny a waiver within thirty (30) days after receipt of any such request. All time limits imposed by this section shall be stayed during the pendency of a request for waiver. 
(d)  Pre-application conference. 
(1)  Building permits not required for review by the DRC shall not require a pre-application conference, unless the applicant and/or staff deem it necessary to clarify the intent of the proposed development or application to be submitted for city review. 
(2)  For all other applications, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the community development staff and appropriate departments to discuss the proposed development, conceptual plan, or general site development plan before submittal of an application(s) and the applicable fee(s). 
(e)  A general site development plan application shall include and be reviewed as follows: 
(1)  Review of plans submitted to the community development department for DRC review shall provide up to ten (10) copies and one copy to be sent directly to each outside agency, as necessary. 
(2)  Review of plans submitted to the building department for department review shall provide up to five (5) copies. 
(3)  The number of copies of the general site development plan will vary depending on the type of review and departments deemed necessary to review the application as determined by the director or designee. 
(4)  All applications shall include a summary of the proposed development. 
(5)  The applicant shall have held a pre-application conference, if required by this Code or deemed necessary by staff to clarify the intent of the application, prior to the submission of the application. 
(6)  The general site development plan shall be a dated, scaled plan (one inch = twenty (20) feet), twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size, depicting the proposed structure or development's location on the parcel and shall include the following information, although not all items may be required depending on the type of application and detail required: 
a.  Ownership and encumbrance report or other documentation, such as, corporate articles of incorporation, listing of corporate officers, etc., evidencing the ownership of entire property to be developed, registered agents, authorized agents, etc., to act on behalf of a corporate or individual property owner; 
b.  The project name, specified address and location, legal description, size, building and site details (building area, impervious surface area, stormwater management, landscape areas, parking area, recreation and open space, etc.), and type of development or uses; 
c.  The contact information, including name, address, telephone number, and email address of the owner(s) and developer(s) of the property proposed for development, and proof of authorization by owner for petitioner to proceed with the request for the subject property; 
d.  The contact information, including name, address, telephone number, email address, firm, and titles of all person(s) responsible for preparation of the site development plan; 
e.  The land use(s) and zoning of the site; 
f.  A survey showing all existing manmade features, easements of record, boundaries and dimensions of the property, acreage of the property, and be signed and sealed by a surveyor; 
g.  Building (principal and accessory uses) details, including floor area, square footage, height, setbacks, building separation, and building floor plan; 
h.  Building and lot coverage calculations; 
i.  Identification of service providers (water, sanitary sewer, drainage, solid waste, police, and fire) for building or site; 
j.  All areas proposed to be conveyed or dedicated, such as, easements, right-of-way, utilities, etc.; 
k.  Floodplain or wetland designations where applicable; 
l.  Tree survey, identification of trees to be preserved, removed, protected by a tree barricade during construction, and new landscaping and tree and landscaping information and details, and addressing of compliance provisions; 
m.  Landscape and irrigation plan and design detail; 
n.  Lighting plan for the site or building and design detail; 
o.  Master signage plan or update for site or building; 
p.  Covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements, agreements associated with the site; 
q.  All existing and proposed access roads, driveway easements, rights-of-way, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle ways, points of ingress/egress located on the site; and 
r.  Such other information as the director or designee may require to effectuate the intent and purposes of this LDC. 
(f)  Application completeness review. A review of all applications shall occur within five (5) working days to ensure that the application is complete and sufficient for review. 
(1)  Building permits not required to reviewed and approved by the DRC. 
a.  If the application is deemed sufficient, the application will proceed as described in this subsection (g) of this section. 
b.  If the application is deemed insufficient, the director or designee shall contact the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) to inform them by telephone call or in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail, of the reason(s) for the insufficiency. The applicant will be responsible for insuring that the application is sufficient and responding to staffs comments in a timely manner; and the applicant's failure to do so will result in delay of the review of the application. 
(2)  Building permits associated with general site development plan that requires review and approval by the DRC, whether the application is approved administratively by the DRC or if the application needs to be approved by city council. The same procedure as noted in subsection (1)(a) and (b) of this section shall be followed, except the director or designee shall contact the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) to inform them in writing, by email or U.S. mail, of the reason(s) for the insufficiency. 
(g)  Development review process. 
(1)  Upon certifying that the general site development plan meets the requirements set forth above, the director or designee shall transmit a memo summarizing the request and said plans to the appropriate city departments or DRC for review, comments, and approval and inform the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail that the application has been deemed sufficient and sent to the DRC for review. 
(2)  Within ten (10) working days after receipt of said plans, each department shall return its comments and recommendations, in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section, to the director or designee, who shall forward such comments to the applicant(s) and/or property owner(s) in writing by email, fax, or U.S. mail. 
(3)  The applicant may alter the general site development plan to conform to the departmental recommendations and this Code or seek relief as allowed by the Code. 
(4)  Department review criteria for general site plans shall include the following: 
a.  Compatibility with the specific regulations and standards for the appropriate zoning district; 
b.  Compatibility with the stated purpose and intent of the specific district regulations; 
c.  Compatibility with all existing development in the area surrounding the proposed development; 
d.  Harmony with the existing natural features in the area surrounding the proposed development and design and appropriateness of proposed use or structure for the size and configuration of the property; 
e.  Availability of public improvements, utilities and facilities, including access to public transit routes, stops, and shelters, sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian ways, and bicycle ways 
f.  Impact on traffic volumes and flow in the area surrounding the proposed development and ingress/egress, off-street parking, loading and service area patterns, encouragement of alternative modes by providing public transit bus stops, benches, shelters, bus bays, sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle ways, preferential parking spaces and/or fees for carpools/vanpools. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
g.  Impact on the condition and adequacy of the present abutting rights-of-way and known future city acquisition plans; 
h.  Availability of fire protection; 
i.  Compliance with adopted buffering, landscape, sign, open space and lighting regulations and standards; 
j.  Compatibility with the adopted purposes in the policy element and the land use classifications of the comprehensive plan applicable to the site and its surrounding area; 
k.  Public safety, welfare, and health for the surrounding area and community. 
l.  Compliance with the building and fire codes, ADA, and other local, state, and federal regulations prior to allowing the business to be open to the public. 
(5)  General site development plan application approval process, in accordance with this section and Code. 
a.  Building department approval. 
1.  First review. Such applications shall be approved administratively by the director, building official, or designee after all appropriate departments have reviewed and provided comments and recommendations to identify how the application complies with all city adopted regulations and requirements. 
2.  Outstanding comments. The director, building official, or designee will provide outstanding comments generated by the departments that reviewed the application to the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail. 
3.  Resolution of outstanding comments and final approval. The director, building official, or designee will inform the applicant of the final approval in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail. 
b.  DRC administrative approval. 
1.  First review. Such applications shall be approved administratively by the director or designee after the DRC has reviewed and provided comments and recommendations to identify how the application complies with all city adopted regulations and requirements. 
2.  Outstanding comments. The director or designee will provide outstanding comments generated by the DRC to the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail. 
3.  Resolution of outstanding comments and final approval. The director or designee will inform the applicant of the final approval in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail. 
c.  City council approval. 
1.  Review by the DRC. Such applications, including conditional use or planned development zoning districts, shall be reviewed by the DRC, which will provide recommendations for city council to consider and approve, approve with modifications, or deny. 
2.  Outstanding comments. The director or designee will provide comments generated by the DRC to the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. Mail. 
3.  Resolution of outstanding comments and final DRC recommendations. The director or designee shall compile the final DRC recommendations, including recommended conditions of approval or waivers where the applicant has not met, either partially or entirely, the city's development regulations. The city manager or designee shall forward the application and general site plan requiring city council approval with the DRC recommendations thereon to the mayor and city council for review and action at the earliest council meeting possible, and in accordance with the council's and city manager's rules of order and procedure. 
4.  Public hearing for conditional use application. General site development plans as part of a conditional use application shall require a public hearing and notice of said public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the municipality. It is the legislative intent that, whenever possible, the advertisement appears in a newspaper that is published at least five (5) days a week unless the only newspaper in the community is published less than five (5) days a week. General site development plans as part of a conditional use application shall require one public hearing with notice of said hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. An affidavit indicating that the city advertised such notice in the newspaper on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. A notice of said hearing shall be posted on the subject property. A picture shall be taken of the sign posted on the site and an affidavit indicating that the city posted a sign on the property on a certain date that meets this requirement and both shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. A notice in writing by U.S. mail or by email (if known) to the owners of all property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the subject property ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The properties within one hundred (100) feet of the subject site shall be generated using the buffer tool from the Hillsborough County Property Appraiser's Office website. An affidavit indicating that the city sent such notice on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. 
5.  City council may defer action on any such application for no more than thirty (30) days after considering the departmental recommendations and holding any public hearings that may be required with regard to the application. Council shall then approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for conditional use, including the general site development. Implicit in any city council approval shall be the requirement that the applicant shall comply with all statutory, city, regulatory, building or other codes unless the city council specifically waives compliance with any such law, ordinance or regulation. Applications for building permit(s) and construction plans cannot be submitted until after city council approves the application(s) and associated general site development plan. In the event the city council fails to act within the time limits set forth herein, the application(s) shall be automatically denied. 
6.  The applicant may file an application for reconsideration to be heard before city council following the same process for denial of a rezoning application in accordance with section 12-193(d)(12) of this Code. 
d.  Modification of approved general site development plan. The applicant(s) and/or owner(s) may request a modification of the general site plan by submitting a new application and general site plan, in accordance to the adopted building code, this section, and Code. 
e.  Extension. The applicant(s) and/or property owner(s) may request an extension prior to the expiration of the general site development plan, as allowed by and in accordance to the adopted building code, this section, and this Code. 
f.  Expiration. If a general site development plan expires, the applicant(s) and/or property owner(s) shall be required to submit a new application and general site development plan along with all applicable fees, in accordance to the adopted building code, this section, and this Code, unless granted an extension by city council after the general site development plan has expired. 
(h)  Fees for the processing of applications associated with or requiring a general site plan shall be established in accordance with this Code. 
(i)  The applicant shall be responsible for any fees charged by the planning commission. 
(Code 2001, § 25.630; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-378. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 18, 2017, repealed § 12-378, which pertained to preliminary site plans and derived from Code 2001, § 25.635; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; and Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009. 
Sec. 12-379. - Final site plans. 
(a)  For all property in the city except for single-family residential lots and where only a general site development plan is required by this Code, but including residential subdivisions and uses requiring conditional uses, planned developments, and other applicable developments requiring city council or development review committee approval, a final site development plan shall be required for any building permit application for new construction or for repair, addition, alteration or rehabilitation of existing construction, in accordance with this section. 
(b)  A final site plan shall be required to be submitted in accordance with this section if one or more of the general site development plan criteria of section 12-377(b) is or are exceeded. 
(c)  An applicant shall have the right to request in writing that the city council waive the submittal and review requirements of a final site plan on the grounds that the proposed building permit or general site development plan is not intended for construction which will substantially affect the property and, therefore, a general site development plan review or building permit review for said application is sufficient to achieve the purpose of this LDC. Any such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the director has advised in writing that the applicant must submit a final site plan, for either DRC to review administratively or for DRC to provide a recommendation for city council approval, and city council shall consider and grant or deny a waiver within thirty (30) days after receipt of any such request. All time limits imposed by this section shall be stayed during the pendency of a request for waiver. 
(d)  Pre-application conference. The applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with community development staff and appropriate departments to discuss the proposed development and conceptual plan before submittal of an application(s) for final site plan and the applicable fee. 
(e)  A final site development plan application shall include and be reviewed as follows, in addition to all of the information required for a general site development plan in section 12-377(f)(6) of this division: 
(1)  Review of plans submitted to the community development department for DRC review shall provide ten (10) copies for DRC review and one copy to be sent directly to each outside agency, as necessary, with a summary of the proposed development and an acknowledgment to the city that such information was provided as identified in the pre-application conference. 
(2)  All applications shall include a summary of the proposed development. 
(3)  The applicant shall have held a pre-application conference prior to the submission of the application. 
(4)  The final site development plan shall be a dated, scaled plan (one inch = twenty (20) feet), twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size, depicting the proposed structure or development's location on the parcel and shall include all of the following information, at a minimum: 
a.  The proposed land use(s) and zoning of the site, and surrounding uses within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the site; 
b.  External public or private lighting features/fixtures, pursuant to parking lot and area lighting illumination standards and photometric study in accordance to section 12-830; 
c.  Initial transportation concurrency worksheet to estimate projected traffic generation rates and off-site traffic impact analysis, including trips assumed to be diverted to public transit, bicycle, and pedestrian modes; 
d.  Consultant certifications; 
e.  Preliminary subdivision plat (if applicable); 
f.  Renderings of all buildings (building elevations of north, south, west, and east facades) and a floor layout, including horizontal and vertical dimensions and variations of the facade, window areas, and other details of the building to address all applicable development regulations for the project; 
g.  Preliminary engineering plans for all infrastructure; 
h.  Pursuant to article X, division 2 of this LDC a written report from the school district identifying a finding of available school capacity. If the finding requires a proportionate share mitigation agreement for schools, an acceptable executed mitigation agreement shall accompany every final site plan application to ensure the school capacity is available or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program following the date of council approval; 
i.  Pursuant to article X, division 3 of this LDC, a certificate of transportation concurrency or a conditional certificate of transportation concurrency issued by the public works department; 
j.  The general location and arrangement of all proposed and existing buildings and structures (principal and accessory uses), including floor area, square footage, height, setbacks and building separation; 
k.  For multi-family residential developments, the total square footage of the building(s), the number of dwelling units, proposed dwelling units per acre, and the number of units by bedrooms and their size (square footage); 
l.  The layout and size of all existing and proposed off-street parking, loading and service areas, including traffic circulation plans and requirement calculations, bicycle circulation and parking plans, pedestrian circulation plans, bike racks, and mass transit stop (in coordination with HART); 
m.  All existing and proposed access roads, driveway easements, rights-of-way, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle ways, points of ingress/egress located on the site and within two hundred (200) feet of the site perimeter; 
n.  Existing and preliminarily proposed topography, including lakes, marshes, swamps, watercourses and environmental jurisdictional designations; 
o.  Proposed location of all public uses and open space; 
p.  Demolition plan for the site; 
q.  Phasing plan showing stability and desirability of proposed phasing and uses of within the project; 
r.  Grading and drainage of the site; and 
s.  Lighting plan and photometric study with engineer's signature and seal. 
t.  Such other information as city council or city staff may require to effectuate the intent and purposes of this LDC. 
(f)  Application completeness review. The director or designee shall have up to five (5) working days to review the application and final site plan to ensure that both are complete and sufficient for review. 
(1)  If the application is deemed sufficient, the application will proceed as described in subsection (g) of this section. 
(2)  If the application is deemed insufficient, the director or designee shall contact the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) to inform them in writing, by email or U.S. mail, of the reason(s) for the insufficiency. The applicant will be responsible for insuring that the application is sufficient and responding to staffs comments in a timely manner; and the applicant's failure to do so will result in delay of the review of the application. 
(g)  Development review process. 
(1)  Upon certifying that the final site plan meets the requirements set forth above, the director or designee shall transmit a memo summarizing the request and said plans to the appropriate city departments for their review and recommendations and inform the applicant in writing, by email, fax, or U.S. mail that the application has been deemed sufficient and sent to the DRC for review. 
(2)  Within ten (10) working days after receipt of said plans, each department shall return its comments and recommendations, in accordance with the criteria set forth below, to the director or designee, who shall forward such comments to the applicant(s) and/or property owner(s), in writing by email or U.S. mail. 
(3)  The applicant may alter the final site plan or application to conform to the departmental recommendations and this Code or seek relief as allowed by the Code. The director or designee shall then submit the applicant responses and site plan or application revisions to the DRC for further review for up to ten (10) working days, and send the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) the DRC's comments in writing by email or U.S. mail. The application will be approved administratively by the DRC or scheduled on city council's agenda by the city manager when the director and applicant(s) and/or owner(s) mutually agree on the development plan and conditions of approval. 
(4)  Criteria for DRC review of applications. Departmental review of the final site plans shall include the following criteria: 
a.  Compatibility with the specific regulations and standards for the appropriate zoning district; 
b.  Compatibility with the stated purpose and intent of the specific district regulations; 
c.  Compatibility with all existing development in the area surrounding the proposed development; 
d.  Harmony with the existing natural features in the area surrounding the proposed development and design and appropriateness of proposed use or structure for the size and configuration of the property; 
e.  Availability of public improvements, utilities and facilities, including access to public transit routes, stops, and shelters, sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian ways, and bicycle ways; (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
f.  Impact on traffic volumes and flow in the area surrounding the proposed development and ingress/egress, off-street parking, loading and service area patterns, encouragement of alternative modes by providing public transit bus stops, benches, shelters, bus bays, sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle ways, preferential parking spaces and/or fees for carpools/vanpools; (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
g.  Impact on the condition and adequacy of the present abutting rights-of-way and known future city acquisition plans; 
h.  Availability of fire protection; 
i.  Compliance with adopted buffering, landscape, sign, open space and lighting regulations and standards; 
j.  Compatibility with the adopted purposes in the policy element and the land use classifications of the comprehensive plan applicable to the site and its surrounding area; 
k.  Public safety, welfare, and health for the surrounding area and community. 
(h)  Final site plan approval processes. 
(1)  City council approval. 
a.  Conditional use and planned development applications with a final site plan. 
1.  The city manager or designee shall forward the applicable final site plan and departmental recommendations to the mayor and city council for review and action. 
2.  The mayor and city council shall consider the final site plan and departmental recommendations at the earliest council meeting possible, and in accordance with the city council's and city manager's rules of order and procedure. 
3.  Final site plans associated with a conditional use or planned development zoning application shall require one to two (2) public hearings and notices of said hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the municipality. It is the legislative intent that, whenever possible, the advertisement appears in a newspaper that is published at least five (5) days a week unless the only newspaper in the community is published less than five (5) days a week. Such final site plans shall require one public hearing if it is for a conditional use application or two (2) public hearings if it is a planned development zoning application, with notice of said hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing for a conditional use application and seven (7) days prior to the first public hearing and five (5) days prior to the second public hearing for a planned development zoning application, consistent with state statutes. An affidavit indicating that the city advertised such notice in the newspaper on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. A notice of said hearing(s) shall be posted on the subject property. A picture shall be taken of the sign posted on the site, for each hearing if applicable unless the first posted sign advertises both hearing dates, and an affidavit indicating that the city posted a sign on the property on a certain date that meets this requirement and both shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. A notice in writing by U.S. mail or by email (if known) to the owners of all property lying within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the subject property ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing(s), for each hearing if applicable unless the first notice letter includes both hearing dates. The properties within one hundred (100) feet of the subject site shall be generated using the buffer tool from the Hillsborough County Property Appraiser's Office website. An affidavit indicating that the city sent such notice on a certain date that meets this requirement shall be kept as part of the zoning application record. 
4.  City council may defer action on any such application for no more than thirty (30) days after considering the departmental recommendations and holding any public hearings that may be required with regard to the application. Council shall then approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for conditional use, planned developments, general site development or final site plan, and other applicable development applications that require city council approval. Implicit in any city council approval shall be the requirement that the applicant shall comply with all statutory, city, regulatory, building or other codes unless the city council specifically waives compliance with any such law, ordinance or regulation. Applications for building permit(s) and construction plans cannot be submitted until after city council approves the application(s) and associated development plan. In the event the city council fails to act within the time limits set forth herein, the application(s) shall be automatically denied. The applicant may file an application for reconsideration following the same process for denial of a rezoning application in accordance with section 12-193 of this Code. 
b.  Other final site plans. The same process as noted in above in subsection (h)(1)a, shall be followed, except that a public hearing, posting of a sign on the property, newspaper notice, and notice to surrounding property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the property shall not be required. 
(2)  Development review committee (DRC) administrative approval. The director or designee shall make the final action to approve the general site development or final site plan, based on departmental reviews and recommendations and compliance with the comprehensive plan, zoning district, and other development standards within this Code. If the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) does not agree with one or more department director's decisions, recommendation(s), or interpretation of this Code, then the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) may file an appeal of the administrative decision(s) of the director(s) to the board of adjustment. 
(i)  Fees for the processing of all applications associated with a final site plans shall be established in accordance with this Code. 
(j)  The applicant shall be responsible for any fees charged by the planning commission. 
(Code 2001, § 25.640; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1045, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-380. - Deviation from approved plans. 
(a)  Building permits for construction on property subject to the general site development or final site plan review process may be issued only for development that does not substantially deviate from the approved site plan. 
(b)  The building permit, conditional use, or other applicable development applications, excluding planned developments, issued for the site shall be automatically revoked without further action by the city unless site clearing and substantial construction has been commenced within two (2) years, if located within a planned development or development of regional impact (DRI), or one year, for any other approved development application, after the date of city council approval or DRC administrative approval for the general site development or final site plan. The applicant must begin and substantially complete the development within two (2) years from the time of final approval, including planned developments. If the development is to be constructed in stages, the applicant must begin and substantially complete the development of each stage within two (2) years of the time provided for the start of construction of each stage in the development schedule, unless a longer timeframe for development is approved as part of a development of regional impact (DRI). If a planned development with a conceptual plan or final site plan expires or is not constructed within two (2) years of city council approval, then the applicant shall be required to submit a new rezoning application and conceptual plan or final site plan, in accordance to this section and Code. 
(c)  An applicant may request an extension of time, including an explanation of the need for an extension, in writing for a planned development with a conceptual plan or final site plan by mail sent or letter dropped off in-person to the director or designee. The city manager or designee shall forward the request for extension together with the departmental recommendations thereon to the mayor and city council for review and action at the earliest council meeting possible, and in accordance with council's and city manager's rules of order and procedure if the plan was approved by city council, or to the DRC if approved administratively by staff. 
    City council or the DRC shall approve an extension, revoke the approval, or amend the approval with conditions within thirty (30) days of such request or it shall be automatically denied. If an extension is not granted, the applicant(s) and/or owner(s) shall be required to submit a new development plan(s) and application(s). 
(d)  In the event that proposed alterations, changes or amendments to the approved final site plan constitutes substantial deviations from the approved final site plan as described in subsection (e) of this section, such proposed alterations, changes or amendments shall first be submitted to the director or designee. The director or designee shall distribute the final site plan and related development application(s), if applicable, detailing the proposed alterations, changes or amendments to those departments affected thereby for review and recommendation consistent with the requirements of section 12-379 and other applicable sections of this Code, based on the submission of a new development application(s) and appropriate fees, and in accordance to section 12-380 and this Code. 
(e)  Any one of the following proposed alterations, changes or amendments shall constitute a substantial deviation, requiring initiation of the process described above: 
(1)  A reduction or relocation of five (5) percent or more of the approved plan's open space; 
(2)  An increase of more than five (5) percent of the site being occupied by buildings or structures; 
(3)  An increase of more than five (5) percent of the approved total floor area; 
(4)  An increase of more than five (5) percent in the height of any approved building or structure; 
(5)  An increase of more than one percent in the number of dwelling units, a modification in the original design concept, including, but not limited to, additional or changed proposed uses, substantial changes in traffic patterns, substantial dimensional or locational changes to points of ingress/egress; substantial dimensional or locational changes for off-street parking, loading or service areas; 
(6)  Any change which would increase total traffic generation by ten (10) percent or more, which in the reasonable, professional judgment of the director, substantially or materially alters the basis upon which any department or the city council made its original recommendation or decision; 
(7)  Any change or modification not specified above, which in the reasonable, professional judgment of the city manager or designee substantially or materially alters the basis upon which the departments or the city council made their original recommendation or decision. 
(8)  Other changes, not mentioned above, that are not deemed substantial deviations, may be considered minor changes that can be administratively approved by the DRC, director of the affected department, or the city manager or designee upon review and recommendation by the appropriate department(s) regarding the requested change(s), in accordance with this Code. 
(f)  Fees for the processing of proposed alterations, changes or amendments to the approved general site development or final site plan or other development applications shall be established in accordance with this Code. 
(g)  The applicant shall be responsible for any applicable fees charged by the planning commission. 
(Code 2001, § 25.645; Ord. No. 532, 12-4-1984; Ord. No. 608, 2-3-1987; Ord. No. 669, 9-6-1988; Ord. No. 731, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1421 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 12-381-12-403. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND OTHER APPROVALS 

Sec. 12-404. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Development permit means an official action of the city having the effect of permitting the development or redevelopment of land, including, but not limited to, any building permit, site plan approval, subdivision approval, infrastructure permit, tree removal permit, sign permit, or any other permit required in this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.650.1) 
Sec. 12-405. - General provisions. 
(a)  Review of permits, license and use applications. The community development department shall review all applications for building permits and land use permits to ensure their conformity with the provisions of this LDC. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(b)  Permits not to be issued. 
(1)  Nonconforming buildings: No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land or water, which is not in conformity with all the provisions of this LDC. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses: No license or permit shall be issued by any building official or by any department, agency or official of the city for the use of any premises or the operation of any business, enterprise, occupation, trade, profession or activity which would involve, in any way, or constitute a violation of this LDC. 
(3)  Architect approvals: No permit shall be issued by the building official for the altering, remodeling or construction of any commercial building or structure, or for any multifamily dwelling or building to be used for public occupancy until the plans and specifications have been approved by an architect registered in the state. 
(c)  Outstanding permits. Where, at the effective date of the ordinance from which this LDC is derived, or an amendment thereto, there are outstanding valid building permits authorizing the construction of buildings, structures, additions or alterations, the use or construction of which does not conform to the requirements of "zoning" or any amendment thereto, such permits shall be void unless actual construction work, excluding grading or excavating, is substantially underway within six (6) months of the date of issuance of said permit. 
(d)  Buildings under construction. Any building or structure for which a lawful building permit has been issued and the construction of which has been started prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this LDC is derived, or a subsequent amendment thereto, may be completed and used in accordance with the plans and specifications upon which said building permit was granted, provided said construction is completed within one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this LDC is derived or any subsequent amendment thereto. 
(e)  Uncompleted structures. No building or structure not completed in substantial conformity with plans and specifications upon which the building permit for its construction was issued, shall be maintained, or be permitted to remain unfinished, for more than twelve (12) months after the construction of such building was begun, except under such conditions and for such period as may be determined as reasonable by the director, based on conformity with, and promotion of, the spirit and purpose of this LDC. 
(f)  Plot plan. Wherever an exterior wall, an increase in cubical content or height, or a new building is involved, all applications for building permits shall contain, or be accompanied by, a "plot plan" in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the "plot" involved in the application, the location of the use proposed and/or the building to be erected or altered, yards and setbacks, and all other uses and buildings on the "plot" as well as such other pertinent information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this LDC. 
(g)  Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be put to use, or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a new or different use, unless a building permit is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(h)  Permits for new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to, or occupied by, a use of a different kind, unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(i)  Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have first been obtained for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, kind or class of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress or egress, or other changes affected or regulated by the building code of this LDC, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
(j)  Assignment of street names and numbers. Assignment by the department of a street name and/or street address number to a projected future building shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for any such building. 
(k)  Building setbacks. Plans for all structures proposed to be built in the city shall depict the front, side and rear setbacks in relation to the property boundaries on which they are to be located. 
(Code 2001, § 25.655; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-406. - Surveys; when required. 
(a)  Required. Perimeter, foundation, and final surveys are required to support and document applications for building permits, construction activities, and applications for certificates of occupancy. 
(b)  Submittal of surveys. 
(1)  A perimeter survey shall be submitted to the building official with each application for a building permit for new construction. If a previous survey is used as a drawing to satisfy plot plan or site plan requirements, a separate unaltered perimeter survey shall be provided. 
(2)  A foundation survey shall be submitted to the building official immediately after the placement of the building slab for new construction. (To prevent encroachment into setbacks and other established control areas, the builder/developer should provide field notes, based on actual survey, to the building inspector at time of footing or foundation inspection prior to pouring the concrete. The subsequent receipt of the completed survey can be used to review and confirm the approved field notes.) 
(3)  A final survey must be submitted to the building official with each application for a certificate of occupancy regarding new construction. Final surveys of structures previously completed must also be submitted to the building official with each application for a building permit for alterations, modifications, additions, or for any new construction on a developed property which changes existing lot or building coverage factors (percentages). 
(4)  The building official may reject any survey at any time, and require a more current or a clearer survey or a survey under seal if, for any reason, the building official deems that the submitted survey is insufficient to meet the purposes and intent of this section, including, but not limited to, age, clarity, accuracy, defect, or any other criteria. 
(Code 2001, § 25.660; Ord. No. 674, 11-1-1988; Ord. No. 737, 5-15-1990) 
Sec. 12-407. - Construction in flood hazard areas. 
    When building within areas of special flood hazard, a building permit issued by the building official or designee in conformity with the provisions of the design and construction standards in article IX, division 3, of this LDC, Floodplain Protection, shall be secured prior to the erection, repairs, reconstruction or alteration of, or improvements to, any structure or portion thereof resulting in substantial improvement thereto, or other development, including, but not limited to, the placement of a mobile home, dredging, filling, grading, paving or clearing of land lying within areas identified as areas of special flood hazard or floodways, on the flood hazard boundary map. 
(Code 2001, § 25.665) 
Sec. 12-408. - General site development plan; requisite to permit. 
    For all property in the city in zoning districts other than single-family residential zoning districts, but including uses requiring special approval and allowing planned developments in single-family residential zoning districts, a general site development plan shall be required for any building permit application for new construction. (Refer to section 12-377 for specific plan requirements.) 
(Code 2001, § 25.670) 
Sec. 12-409. - Site plan, plat and service plan review. 
(a)  Filing and review fees are required at the time of submittal of: 
(1)  A preliminary site plan, or final site plan if preliminary site plan review is waived. 
(2)  A preliminary plat. 
(3)  An application for water and/or sewer service. 
(4)  An application for review of infrastructure plans for new residential subdivisions. 
(b)  Filing and review fees are required immediately following initial contact regarding a project, or development, and before any extensive discussions or staff reviews take place. 
(c)  The owner, owner's agent, or developer of the property shall pay the filing fee and all applicable review charges. 
(d)  Services. In consideration of the filing fee and review charges, the applicant shall receive twenty-five (25) hours of city staff review. For all hours in excess of twenty-five (25) hours, the applicant shall reimburse the city for actual time spent, according to the review fee schedule outlined in the city's schedule of fees and charges for development permits. 
(e)  Payments. The city shall invoice the owner or developer for such additional review charges, and no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or development until all city invoices have been paid. 
(Code 2001, § 25.675) 
Sec. 12-410. - Development permits. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of any land development activity, excluding activity related to the construction of a single-family home, the owner or developer must first obtain all development permits applicable and pay the appropriate fees as outlined herein. 
(b)  Interpretation of standards and fees. The city manager or designee shall establish procedures for the review and issuance of permits and required inspections under this section. In the event of a dispute as to the classification of a development activity, the method by which a permit fee is calculated, or the standard upon which inspections are based, the city manager or designee shall have the authority of final determination of the appropriate classification, cost or standard. 
(Code 2001, § 25.680) 
Sec. 12-411. - Development authorization. 
(a)  An authorization to proceed with development in accordance with an approved site plan or subdivision plat outlining all of the agreements, conditions, and understandings pertinent to development approval is required. No on-site development activity shall commence prior to receiving a development authorization. The development authorization may be revoked or suspended by the city upon determination that conditions related to the development activity have been changed or have been altered by the developer from those which were prevailing at the time of development approval, or are not in compliance with the conditions of approval. Revocation of a development authorization shall immediately cause the cessation of all construction and work associated with the project. The development authorization shall supersede all other permits and revocation of same will result in all other permits associated with development on the site to be suspended. A suspended, withdrawn, or revoked development authorization may be reissued upon the satisfactory correction of the deficiencies. 
(b)  The fee and charges for a development authorization are as indicated in the city's schedule of fees and charges for development permits. 
(Code 2001, § 25.680.1) 
Sec. 12-412. - Site preparation permits. 
(a)  Conservation area permit. Authorization to install and maintain barriers, buffers, silt screens, hay bales, etc., along the boundaries of established conservation areas to protect water quality and prevent contamination of wetlands in accordance with an approved site development plan. 
(1)  Terms and conditions of the permit. 
a.  Pursuant to this LDC, a developer/contractor shall install and maintain barriers and buffers to protect the established conservation areas. 
b.  This permit is intended to retain the land and water areas of the conservation areas in predominately their natural, scenic, open or wooded condition; retaining the areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife; retaining the physical appearance of the sites; maintaining existing land uses, and protecting their environmental significance. 
c.  Developer/contractor shall install a line of hay bales along the upland sides of the conservation lines (department of environmental protection (DEP) lines) to intercept and/or absorb sheet drainage flow when construction or land clearing activities are to be carried out. 
d.  Developer/contractor shall further identify the required buffer zone (extending landward from the DEP line) by erecting a wire fence or several strands of wire with flagging markers so that construction will not encroach within the buffer zone. 
e.  The specific plan to prevent and/or mitigate erosion, control sedimentation, and/or prevent pollution shall be subject to approval of the city engineer prior to the commencement of land clearing and tree removal operations. 
f.  Failure to obtain the city engineer's approval as stated above prior to initiation of land clearing and tree removal operations shall be cause for immediate revocation of this permit, and development operations may not be restarted until a replacement permit has been issued. Permit fees shall not be refunded for revoked permits. 
(2)  The following activities are prohibited within the conservation areas: 
a.  Construction or placing of buildings, roads, utilities or other structures on or above the ground. 
b.  Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as landfill or dumping or placing of trash, waste, or unsightly or offensive materials. 
c.  Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation. 
d.  Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or other material substance in such a manner as to affect the surface. 
e.  Surface use, except for purposes that permit the land or water area to remain predominately in its natural condition. 
f.  Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion control, soil conservation, or fish and wildlife habitat preservation. 
g.  Acts or uses detrimental to such retention of land or water areas. 
h.  Acts or uses detrimental to the preservation of the physical appearance of the site or property of environmental significance. 
i.  Any other activities prohibited by F.S. § 704.06. 
(b)  Tree removal permit. Authorization to remove and/or relocate trees from or to a parcel of land in accordance with an approved site development plan, agreement, or letter of understanding, including those trees located within public rights-of-way abutting the developed parcel of land. 
(1)  A tree survey is required with every application for site plan or plat approval, and it shall include the following: 
a.  Location of all accountable and protected trees having five-inch diameter or more at breast height and identification as to type; 
b.  Location of proposed structure(s) and other planned impervious areas; 
c.  Identification and differentiation of trees to be retained and trees to be removed, including dead trees, and the percentage of canopy coverage being retained on the plot; 
d.  Number of trees to be retained, removed and/or relocated; and 
e.  Grade changes which might adversely affect or endanger retained trees, with details as to how trees will be protected. 
Requested information above shall be field checked by the community development director or designee, and approval or disapproval of tree removal plans (with suggestions) shall be expressed in writing on the permit application. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(2)  Final approval. Final approval of any tree removal plan will be subject to the planting of new replacement trees, relocation of trees, or payment of equivalent value to the city, as required in article IX, division 8 of this LDC. 
(c)  Site clearing, grading, filling permit. Authorization to proceed with the clearing, grading, and/or filling of a parcel of land in accordance with an approved site development plan, approved plat, or approved subdivision infrastructure plans. 
(1)  Conditions of the permit: 
a.  Land clearing operations shall not create a drainage problem for the adjacent lands or adjacent public rights-of-way. All stormwaters shall be retained on site during clearing and after clearing until such time that stormwaters can be handled in accordance with approved development plans. 
b.  Land clearing operations shall not create or cause a hazard to the health and safety of citizens. 
1.  Open burning is prohibited within the city limits, except when using forced air systems, as approved by the city's fire chief. 
2.  Cut trees, stumps and other debris will not be buried on site without specific approval of the city engineer and director. 
3.  Routes of travel for equipment and trucks to and from the work site and disposal site, within the corporate limits, will be reviewed and approved by the director of public works and police chief. 
4.  Operations will be conducted in such a manner as to prevent dust from becoming a public nuisance. Water trucks will be immediately available on site during dry weather as requested by the city engineer. 
5.  Operations shall not result in any unattended excavation within fifteen (15) feet of any right-of-way, public or private. 
c.  Contractor agrees to comply with any and all reasonable requests of the city to eliminate hazards to the health and safety of citizens. 
d.  Tree removal is authorized pursuant to separate permit and letter of understanding. All trees not to be removed shall be protected from clearing activities permitted herein. 
e.  Work restrictions are in effect between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays and Saturdays, and no work is permitted on Sundays. 
f.  The permit is valid for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, unless work ceases, in which case the permit is revoked. 
(2)  Should the city manager or designee find that land clearing operations are being carried out in violation of any of the terms and conditions of the permit, the city manager or designee may give notice of violation, take appropriate steps to obtain compliance and/or take enforcement action as outlined in this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.680.2; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-413. - Infrastructure permits. 
(a)  Excavation permits. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in control of any lot, parcel or tract of land within the city to alter, excavate, fill or remove any of the land or its surface without first obtaining a permit to do so from the department. 
(1)  Submission of plans for approval. Permits to alter, excavate, fill or remove land or its surface within the limits of the city shall not be issued by the director without first obtaining the approval of the city engineer. The city engineer shall not be required to give approval unless and until the applicant for such permit shall have submitted to the director plans and specifications covering the project and a description of the intended result. The city engineer shall have the right and privilege of disapproving the application or permit if, in the engineer's judgment, the work intended to be done shall cause a substantial difference in the appearance of the lands immediately adjacent thereto or shall create a drainage problem, or shall create or cause a hazard to the health and safety of the citizens. 
(2)  Refusal of permit; right of appeal. Should the director or the city engineer, or both, disapprove the application for a permit to alter, excavate, fill or remove land or its surface within the limits of the city, such applicant shall have a right of appeal to the city manager or designee. Appeal from decision of the city manager or designee may be made to the city council. 
(3)  Excavation, filling. No person shall permit any excavation, made for the purpose of mining, quarrying, building or for other purposes, of more than ten (10) square feet of superficial area and more than four (4) feet in depth, to remain open in the city on land belonging to such person for more than ninety (90) days. Such owner shall cause such excavation to be filled with clean sand or dirt or covered over in such a manner and within such time as the city engineer may direct. 
(4)  Sand, filling, etc., prejudicial to health. Any hole, low-lying ground, pit or excavation, likely to be or become prejudicial to the health of the community shall, upon order of the city, be filled, drained or otherwise placed in sanitary or salubrious condition by the owner thereof. 
(b)  Public/private infrastructure improvements and inspections (water, sewer, paving and drainage). 
(1)  City inspections shall be required to verify the quality or specifications of materials or installation for the following public and private infrastructure improvements: 
a.  Public and private streets and roadways and related markers and signs. 
b.  Public and private storm sewers, drainage systems and detention/retention ponds, including "building storm sewer" lines and parking lot drainage systems. 
c.  Public and private sidewalks and walkways. 
d.  Public and private sanitary sewer lift and/or pump stations, gravity and force main collection/transmission lines, including "building sewers." 
e.  Public and private water mains and lines, including private "water service pipes" and fire lines for hydrants and sprinkler systems. 
(2)  All costs incurred by the city for inspections outlined in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be paid by the owner or developer. Owner or developer shall deposit with the city a sum equal to five (5) percent of the estimated construction cost (as prepared by the engineer of record), and the balance, if any, shall be paid prior to acceptance of said improvements or issuance of a building permit. Any excess funds shall be returned to the owner or developer. Inspection fees outlined under this section shall include the cost of city inspection beginning with the pre-construction conference through final acceptance of the improvements or issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  In the event of a dispute as to the proper classification of infrastructure improvements, the estimated cost of said improvements, or cost of city inspections, the city manager or designee shall have the authority of final determination of the appropriate classification or cost. 
(c)  Curb cut permit. Authorization is required to construct or modify a driveway access point, curb cut, or driveway apron area located in the public right-of-way and joining the street surface with a vehicle accommodation area. Curb cuts involving state right-of-way require prior state approval. 
(d)  Parking lot construction permit. 
(1)  Authorization is required to construct or repair a private parking lot area. 
(2)  Plan approval. Except for single or two-family residential uses, prior to the issuance of any permit for resurfacing or paving a parking lot under the provisions of this section, a plot planting or landscaping plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development director or designee. The plan shall be drawn to scale showing the location and size of all buildings including all pertinent dimensions; and shall indicate clearly the existing and proposed parking spaces, other vehicular use areas, access aisles, driveways, hydrants, source of water supply for landscaping, the location and size of all landscape materials, the location of planting protective devices, and the identification of all plants by name. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(Code 2001, § 25.680.3; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-414. - Landscaping and buffering permit. 
    Authorization is required to install landscaping in conformance with article IX, division 17 of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.680.5) 
Sec. 12-415. - Accessory structure permits. 
(a)  Sign permits. See article IX, division 15 of this LDC. 
(b)  Swimming pool permits. 
(1)  Definition. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the term "swimming pool" means a structure designed to contain a body or bodies of fresh water for swimming, wading or other recreational purposes, not available for general public use or owned by social clubs. 
(2)  Permits; contents of applications. 
a.  Applications. Before the erection, construction or alteration of any swimming pool is begun, there shall be submitted to the director an application for permit on appropriate forms to be furnished by the city. 
b.  Statements. The application shall contain the full name of the owner of the premises upon which the swimming pool is to be erected or altered. The application shall be accompanied by adequate documentation to meet the survey requirements of this LDC. 
c.  Plans and specifications. The application shall be accompanied by full and complete plans and specifications, in duplicate, for such proposed work and such detail structural drawings thereof as hereinafter specified. The plans of all swimming pools to be constructed in the city, that are governed by state laws, must have the standard approval of the department having jurisdiction before application is made for permit. Full and complete plans shall consist of the following: 
1.  Drawings shall clearly show plan at not less than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. 
2.  Sections of all component parts at three-fourths (3/4) inch per foot. 
3.  Location or site plan at not less than one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) inch per foot. 
4.  Complete mechanical and electrical layout specifying type and capacity of equipment to be used, including: 
(i)  Source of water; 
(ii)  Mechanical equipment; 
(iii)  Filtration equipment; 
(iv)  Disposal of: 
A.  Pool water for emptying; 
B.  Backwash water; 
C.  Scum gutter drain; 
(v)  All pool piping and valve arrangement, including main drain: 
A.  Inlets; 
B.  Vacuum fittings; 
C.  Scum gutter. 
d.  Fencing or safety barrier. 
(Code 2001, § 25.680.6) 
Sec. 12-416. - Miscellaneous permits. 
(a)  Fumigation. No permit shall be required for fumigation services, however, the fire chief shall be notified, in writing, at least twenty-four (24) hours before any building or structure is to be closed in connection with the use of any toxic fumigant. 
(b)  Temporary uses of buildings, structures or land. Temporary uses of buildings, structures, or land in connection with land development, sales, or construction projects, may be established, erected or placed within any zoning district for occupancy or use other than as dwelling or lodging units. Any such use shall require a permit, specifying location, type of construction, maintenance requirements, buffering requirements, time period of operation, planned utilization of such building, structure, or land, and such other requirements as the director may deem necessary. No permit shall be issued for a period of more than six (6) months, subject to renewal upon approval of the director. Failure to obtain a permit or violation of any condition or requirement specified as part of an issued permit shall be a violation of this section. 
(c)  Moving permits. 
(1)  Moving of buildings. No building or structure shall be moved from one lot or premises to another unless such building or structure shall thereupon be made to conform with all the provisions of this LDC relative to buildings or structures herein permitted to be erected upon the lot or premises to which such building or structure shall have been moved. 
(2)  Code compliance bond. The owner of any real property within the city seeking to apply for a permit to move a ready-made building onto said property within the city's corporate limits, shall, together with the application, post a bond, with a surety acceptable to the director, which shall guarantee that said building will be refinished, remodeled, and completed within ninety (90) days from the date of said bond in accordance with all requirements in the removal permit and this LDC. 
(3)  For the purpose of this section, the term "ready-made buildings" shall include any "building" or "structure," as defined in article II of this LDC. 
(4)  Upon the issuance of said moving permit, the house moving contractor shall notify the fire marshal, chief of police, utility companies and others whose property may be affected by the building move. All notices shall state the route that will be taken, start time, and approximate time of completion. All moving contractors shall comply with applicable rules and regulations of the state department of transportation building moving permit regulations and all other provisions of this Code. 
(d)  Septic tanks. 
(1)  Installation and use of septic tanks. Septic tanks or other similar equipment for sewage treatment may be installed and used within the city in areas where the city does not furnish sewer facilities, upon the approval of the city manager or designee, until such time as such service becomes available. 
(2)  Permit and final inspection. 
a.  Construction permit. Prior to application for a permit percolation tests shall be performed under the direction of either the county health department or the city, in the area where the absorption field is to be installed, and said tests shall have given satisfactory evidence that the intended drainfield will function under normal conditions. No septic tank and/or drain field shall be constructed or installed until a permit for such construction or installation has been obtained from the county health department and the city. 
b.  Non-issuance of permit. A permit shall not be issued for an installation in an area determined to have unsuitable soil characteristics, a high water table during the wet test period of the year, inadequate drainage, or other influencing factors adversely affecting the operation to the extent that the system may not be expected to function satisfactorily as a temporary sewage treatment method. 
c.  Septic tank and drainfields shall not be installed within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the Hillsborough River. 
d.  Final inspection. After the completion of construction or installation of a septic tank and drain field and before covering and putting into service, the installation shall be inspected by a representative of the county health department and the city. If installation meets all applicable requirements, a "final inspection certificate" will be issued. Permanent connection of city water will not be made to any dwelling or other building until final approval has been given to the installation. 
e.  Nothing herein is intended to exempt any person from full compliance with the provisions of the city plumbing code. 
(e)  Privately owned wells. 
(1)  Conditions for approval. Within the city where city-owned water mains are adjacent to a parcel, privately owned wells may be drilled and used only for lawn sprinkling, irrigation, operation of air conditioning units, filling of swimming pools or other similar uses on that parcel. In areas within the city where public water mains are not available, privately owned wells may be drilled and used for domestic supply, provided that said wells and the water therefrom are in compliance with all applicable government requirements and regulations; that the water therefrom is analyzed as to suitability for drinking purposes by the local state laboratory of the state department of health, and subsequently approved by the county health officer; that the drilling of the well is permitted by the Southwest Florida Water Management District; and provided further that when city water service becomes available, connection shall be made in accordance with this Code. No well may be drilled or used within the corporate limits of the city without a permit approved by the director. 
(2)  Digging wells, permit required. Within the city no person shall bore, dig or drill a well by mechanical power or otherwise unless an application has been made and a permit obtained from the community development department. The application shall include data concerning the proposed size and anticipated depth of the well, its location, intended use, etc. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(3)  Refusal of permit if detrimental to health. A permit to bore, dig or drill a well shall be refused if, in the opinion of the county health officer, the character or location of the well is such that it is liable to be a menace or detrimental to health and safety. 
(4)  Maintaining well detrimental to health. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a well within the limits of the city if, in the opinion of the county health officer, its maintenance is a detriment to health. 
(5)  Wells to be inspected and approved. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a well within the corporate limits of the city unless the same has been reported to, inspected and approved, and a permit issued by the community development department, unless a permit has been previously issued by the county health department, the Southwest Florida Water Management District, or the city. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(6)  Sale of water from private wells. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or maintain pipes providing water for sale from private wells to other buildings or property. 
(7)  Compliance with plumbing code. Nothing herein shall exempt a person from satisfying all requirements of the city plumbing code. 
(Code 2001, § 25.680.7; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-417. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  A new building shall not be occupied, or a change made in occupancy of a commercial or office building (i.e., a new or different tenant), or a change in nature or use of a building (change in occupancy or group use category; i.e., assembly, business or mercantile, etc.) until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required fire protection systems have been tested and approved. 
(b)  New certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for remodeled, altered or repaired buildings unless the building is: enlarged or expanded, remodeled or modified to accommodate a new tenant or a new use or category of tenant, or remodeled or modified so as to increase the number of persons for each floor, the total square footage, or the maximum load per square foot. 
(c)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued merely to document completion of construction; however, a letter attesting to completion will be provided on request. 
(d)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. Temporary certificates shall not be issued for a period in excess of six (6) months, and then only when the occupied area meets all requirements of codes. 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with building codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two (2) sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the Code for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy may be issued. A fee shall be charged for all plan reviews and inspections performed pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Certificates of occupancy for new single-family residences will be issued within five (5) working days of the completion of the final building inspection. 
(g)  Certificates of occupancy for commercial (mercantile), office, and/or institutional buildings and different departments will be issued within ten (10) working days of the completion of the final building inspection. 
(Code 2001, § 25.685) 
Sec. 12-418. - Certificates of occupancy relative to land. 
(a)  No land upon which a new or different use is established shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefor. 
(b)  Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwelling. 
(c)  Certificate for nonconforming uses. No nonconforming use shall be maintained, continued, renewed, extended or changed unless a certificate of occupancy therefor shall have been issued pursuant to this LDC. 
(d)  A certificate of occupancy may be issued and a structure which encroaches no more than two and one-half (21/2) feet into any setback may be allowed to continue, but said encroachment shall not be expanded, extended or enlarged, provided that said structure had received a foundation inspection before the effective date of Ordinance No. 661, and provided further that said minimal encroachment was the result of a good faith error and no foundation survey was required to be submitted as to said structure by any other ordinance, statute or other law. 
(e)  Unlawful to occupy building pending final approval. It shall be unlawful in the case of a complete new installation for any person to occupy the building or structure until the tag showing final inspection and compliance has been attached to the meter box; and it shall be unlawful for any utility company to connect any premises, upon which a complete installation has been made, to its service lines until said utility company has received written notice from the chief electrical inspector that said work has had final inspection and been found to comply with the requirements of this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.685.1) 
Sec. 12-419. - Application. 
    Before any water line or sewer line extension is made to the water and/or sewer system of the city, the owner of the tract or parcel of land to be served shall make application to the city for permission to make the extension, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of the owner or owners of the tract or parcel of land to be served, together with evidence of ownership thereof. 
(2)  The legal description of the tract or parcel of land to be served, together with the recorded plat of all parts or portions thereof subdivided, and if any part or portion thereof has not been subdivided, a map or plot showing the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  The estimated number of consumers to be served by the city in such tract or parcel of land. 
(4)  If the proposed development in the tract or parcel of land to be served is for commercial, industrial or manufacturing purposes, the nature of such use and the probable water needs of each establishment, sewer discharge from each establishment and the character of such wastes. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant agrees that, at the discretion of the city, the water mains and all appurtenances thereto, when installed, shall be the property of the city and the same shall constitute a part of the water distribution system of the city and be subject to all rules and regulations relating to the operation of the water department of the city. 
(6)  A statement that applicant agrees that, at the discretion of the city, the sewers, house connections, lift stations, force mains and all appurtenances thereto, when installed, shall be the property of the city and that same shall constitute a part of the sewer system of the city and be subject to all rules and regulations relating to the operation of the sewer department of the city. 
(7)  The name and address of the applicant's consulting engineer. 
(8)  A preliminary layout of the proposed construction. 
(9)  If the proposed development is a part of a larger tract, a master plan for the development of the entire tract. 
(10)  Completion of a "water data sheet" showing all proposed uses, fixtures and connections. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.1) 
Sec. 12-420. - Submittal of application. 
(a)  Applications for water and sewer service and the prevailing filing and review fees shall be sent to the department. For filing and review fees, refer to the city's schedule of fees and charges for development permits. 
(b)  Preliminary application review procedures. 
(1)  City staff will meet with developer to discuss preliminary development plans. 
(2)  City staff will evaluate the adequacy of the present water and sewer system to serve the proposed development. 
(3)  City staff will set up a meeting with the developer's engineers to discuss design and specification parameters. 
(4)  Staff will notify the developer of acceptability of the application or of required changes, and requirements for execution of development agreement with the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.2) 
Sec. 12-421. - Submittal of final construction plans and specifications. 
    After acceptance of the application, five (5) sets of final construction plans and specifications must be submitted to the department (size twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, scale one inch = fifty (50) feet) for final city engineer approval. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.3) 
Sec. 12-422. - Development agreement and improvement fees. 
    Prior to construction and connection of the development or project to the city's utility system, payment must be made of applicable water and sewer improvement fees in accordance with the terms of a development agreement. The development agreement shall contain provisions regarding improvement fees, construction, and conveyance and warranty of all off-site water and sewer infrastructure. The development agreement must be executed and submitted for city council consideration. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.4) 
Sec. 12-423. - Final processing. 
    Upon compliance with the foregoing, the city staff shall further process the application. Final approval is contingent upon city council approval and execution of the development agreement. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.5) 
Sec. 12-424. - Other permits. 
    DEP general use permits and other required permits may be transmitted to the city after construction plans are approved. The city will process the permits when the city council approves the development agreement. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.6) 
Sec. 12-425. - Pre-construction meeting. 
(a)  The city staff will arrange a pre-construction meeting with the developer's engineers and the project contractor. 
(b)  The city will give written authorization to proceed with construction after receiving an approved copy of the state water construction application and DEP sewer construction application. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.7) 
Sec. 12-426. - Post construction. 
    The project will be submitted to the city council for acceptance by the city of all off-site improvements after: 
(1)  Receipt of the project engineer's certification of completion. 
(2)  Receipt of state approval (water). 
(3)  Receipt of EPC approval (sewer). 
(4)  Receipt of the water bacteriological clearance. 
(5)  Project inspection approval. 
(6)  City engineer's approval. 
(7)  Contractor's release of lien. 
(8)  Bill of sale for conveyed improvements. 
(9)  Bond or letter of credit guaranteeing improvements for one year from date of acceptance. 
(10)  One sepia Mylar and two (2) copies of the recorded plat (as appropriate). 
(11)  One sepia Mylar and three (3) copies of as-built plans. 
(12)  All applicable charges have been collected and other considerations for the development agreement have been complied with. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.8) 
Sec. 12-427. - Service. 
    Water and sewer service will be activated when all of the terms and conditions of the development agreement have been satisfied. 
(Code 2001, § 25.690.9) 
Sec. 12-428. - Application for extension to serve fire sprinkler systems. 
    Before any existing water main of the city shall be extended to serve any fire sprinkler system, application shall be made in writing, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of the owner or owners of the tract or parcel of land to be served, together with evidence of their ownership thereof. 
(2)  The legal description of the land to be served. 
(3)  The general nature of the business or industry to be served and its respective fire sprinkler system water needs. 
(4)  Size of water main required. 
(5)  A statement wherein the applicant agrees to be bound by and comply with all the rules and regulations relating to the operation of the water department of the city. 
(6)  A statement by the owner that, at the discretion of the city, the mains, when installed, will be the sole property of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.691.1) 
Sec. 12-429. - Application approval; payment of costs. 
    Such application will be checked by the city and estimated cost determined. The city will notify the applicant, in writing, of its determinations and the applicant shall thereupon pay to the city a sum of money equal to the cost, at current price, before work is begun. 
(Code 2001, § 25.691.2) 
Sec. 12-430. - Application for extension to serve fire hydrants on private property. 
    Before any existing water main of the city shall be extended to serve fire hydrants located on private property, application shall be made therefor in the same manner, and with similar payment made to the city as provided for in regard to fire sprinklers above. Such extensions shall be made to the exterior boundary only of the tract, parcel or plot of land in which such fire hydrants are to be located. 
(Code 2001, § 25.691.3) 
Secs. 12-431-12-458. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-459-12-504. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating land use required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(b). 

Sec. 12-505. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide the regulations applying in the zoning districts established by the city for area, height, bulk and placement regulations; together with additional regulations related to building standards. 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.1) 
Sec. 12-506. - Schedule of area, height, bulk and placement regulations. 
    Regulations governing the minimum lot area and width; required front, side and rear yard; floor area ratio; height of structure, and related matters are shown in the following schedule of area, height, bulk and placement regulations. In addition, certain standards exclusive to specific zoning districts are included in section 12-507. 
(The next pages represent the schedules referred to in this section and section 12-505.) 
SCHEDULE OF AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
R-10 Single Family Residential 
Area 10,000 square feet Width 100 feet at front property line; 75 feet on irregular lot with 100 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 35 feet Side: 2 (10% average lot width or 7.5 whichever is greater) Rear: 20 feet (residential) 25 feet (nonresidential) Corner: 15 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 35% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 47.5% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,500 square feet 2 story or more 1,200 square feet (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
  
R-9 Single Family Residential 
Area 10,000 square feet Width 90 feet at front property line, 75 feet on irregular lot with 90 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 25 feet Side: 2(10% lot width at the rear of required front yard) Rear: 20 feet (residential) 25 feet (nonresidential) Corner: 15 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 35% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 47.5% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,500 square feet 2 story or more 1,200 square feet (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
*See also perimeter setback alternative in following section. 
  
R-7.5 Single Family Residential 
Area 7,500 square feet Width 75 feet at front property line; 50 feet on irregular lot with 75 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 35 feet Side: Residential 2 (10% average lot width or 5 feet, whichever is greater Nonresidential 2 (20 feet with increase of 1 foot in width for each 4 feet in height principal structure exceeds 22 feet) Rear: 20 feet (residential) 25 feet (nonresidential) Corner: 10 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 35% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 47.5% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,050 square feet/garage 1,250 2 story or more 900 square feet/garage 1,100 (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
  
R-7 Single Family Residential 
Area 7,000 square feet Width 70 feet at front property line; 50 feet on irregular lot with 70 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 25 feet Side: Residential: 2 (10% average lot width or 5 feet, whichever is greater) Nonresidential: 2 (20 feet with increase of 1 foot in width for each 4 feet in height principal structure exceeds 22 feet) Rear: 20 feet (residential) (Ord. No. 1019, 8-15-2000) 25 feet (nonresidential) 30 feet (with septic tank and well in rear yard) Corner: 10 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 35% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 47.5% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,050 square feet/garage 1,250 2 story or more 900 square feet/garage 1,100 (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
*See also perimeter setback alternative in following section. 
  
R-MF Multi-Family Residential-Two (2) dwelling units 
Area 10,000 square feet Width 100 feet at front property line Required yards* Front: 35 feet Side: 2 (10% average lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater) Rear: 25 feet Corner: 25 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 30% Maximum lot coverage N/A Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,050 square feet/garage 1,250 2 story or more 900 square feet/garage 1,100 (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
  
R-MF Multi-Family Residential-Three (3) dwelling units or more 
Area 43,560 square feet Width 100 feet at front property line Required yards* Front: 35 feet Side: 2 (10% average lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater) Rear: 25 feet Corner: 25 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 30% Maximum lot coverage N/A Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,050 square feet/garage 1,250 2 story or more 900 square feet/garage 1,100 (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
*See also perimeter setback alternative in following section. 
  
R-MF Multi-Family Residential-Other 
Area 7,500 square feet Width 75 feet at front property line; 50 feet on irregular lot with 75 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 35 feet Side: 2 (20 feet with increase of 1 foot in width for each 4 feet in height principal structure exceeds 22 feet) Rear: 25 feet Corner: 25 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height Residential 35 feet Nonresidential 50 feet Maximum building coverage 30% Maximum lot coverage N/A Minimum foundation coverage 1 story 1,050 square feet/garage 1,250 2 story or more 900 square feet/garage 1,100 (exclusive of porches and breezeways)  
R-MFA Multi-Family Residential-Two (2) dwelling units 
Area 8,500 square feet Width 75 feet at front property line; 50 feet on irregular lot with 75 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 25 feet Side: 2 (10% average lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater) Rear: 25 feet Corner: 25 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height 50 feet (variance to 80 feet on condition that for each 1 foot in excess of 50 feet an additional 3 feet be added to required setback) Maximum building coverage 40% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 60% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage N/A  
*See also perimeter setback alternative in following section. 
  
R-MFA Multi-Family Residential-Three (3) dwelling units or more 
Area 8,500 square feet Width 75 feet at front property line; 50 feet on irregular lot with 75 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 25 feet Side: 2 (10% average lot width or 10 feet, whichever is greater) Rear: 25 feet Corner: 25 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height 50 feet (variance to 80 feet on condition that for each 1 foot in excess of 50 feet an additional 3 feet be added to required setback) Maximum building coverage 40% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 60% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage N/A  
R-MFA Multi-Family Residential-Other 
Area 8,500 square feet Width 75 feet at front property line; 50 feet on irregular lot with 75 feet at rear of required front yard Required yards* Front: 25 feet Side: 2 (20 feet with increase of 1 foot in width for each 4 feet in height principal structure exceeds 22 feet) Rear: 25 feet Corner: 25 feet abutting side street Maximum FAR N/A Maximum height 50 feet (variance to 80 feet on condition that for each 1 foot in excess of 50 feet an additional 3 feet be added to required setback) Maximum building coverage 40% Maximum lot coverage Not more than 60% of lot covered by impermeable surface Minimum foundation coverage N/A  
PD-R Planned Development Residential 
    Each lot created may be no smaller than sixty-five (65) percent of area and width requirements of zoning district superseded by PD-R. 
    All yard, height, building coverage, lot coverage, foundation coverage requirements to be the same requirements of zoning district superseded by the PD-R zoning. 
    FAR: N/A. 
All other standards provided in section 12-507(e). 
*See also perimeter setback alternative in following section. 
  
INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS 
E-I Educational Institutional 
Area 50,000 square feet Width 100 feet at front property line Required yards None Maximum FAR None Maximum height 50 feet Maximum building coverage 50% Maximum lot coverage N/A Minimum foundation coverage N/A  
  
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
C-O Commercial Office 
Area 10,500 square feet Width 100 feet at front property line Required yards None Maximum FAR * Maximum height 50 feet Maximum building coverage 50% Maximum lot coverage N/A Minimum foundation coverage N/A  
*Maximum FAR in the C-O Commercial Office district shall be governed by FAR requirements stipulated in the Future Land Use Element of the Future of Hillsborough Comprehensive Plan for the City of Temple Terrace. 
  
C-G Commercial General 
Area 10,500 square feet Width 100 feet at front property line Required yards None Maximum FAR None Maximum height 50 feet Maximum building coverage 50% Maximum lot coverage N/A Maximum foundation coverage N/A  
OTHER DISTRICTS 
PD Planned Development 
    All standards provided in article VII of this chapter. 
PROF Planned Research Office Facilities 
    Area - 40,000 square feet per zoning lot. 
    Width - 200 feet at property line of the zoning lot. 
    All other standards provided in section 12-507(d). 
(Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005) 
LI Light Industrial 
Area Minimum 20,000 sq. ft. Width 100 feet Maximum height 110 feet * Structures (excluding communication towers and mobile or fixed equipment) with a permitted height greater than 50 feet shall be set back an additional one (1) foot for every one (1) foot of structure height over 50 feet. Maximum Impervious Surface 85% Required yards Front: 30 feet Side: 20 feet if abutting lands are zoned or used for residential purposes 
0 feet if abutting nonresidential zoned property Rear: 20 feet if abutting lands are zoned or used for residential purposes 
0 feet if abutting nonresidential zoned property  
* Subject to Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) review and approval per Res. #41-16, Interlocal Agreement between Hillsborough County Aviation Authority and Temple Terrace. 
  
A-U Agricultural Urban 
Area Minimum 5 acres, except for property in public ownership Width 150 feet Maximum height 50 feet Required yards Front: 50 feet Side: 25 feet Rear: 50 feet  
(Ord. No. 1239, 12-2-2008) 
  
PRS Preservation 
Maximum height 35 feet*  
*The city council, not the board of adjustment, may grant a waiver to this requirement. The city council shall review such waiver request pursuant to the criteria in section 12-72(c)(3). 
(Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
P/QP Public Quasi-Public 
Area Minimum 2 acres Width 200 feet Maximum height 50 feet Required yards Front: 35 feet Side: 20 feet; to include a solid buffer where abutting lands zoned for residential use or a public street Rear: 20 feet; to include a solid buffer where abutting lands zoned for residential use or a public street  
(Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.2; Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1159, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 1239, 12-2-2008; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1399, §§ 1(Exh. A), 2(Exh. B.), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-507. - Building standards exclusive to specific zoning districts not included on the schedule of area, height, bulk and placement regulations. 
(a)  R-10 Single Family Residential, R-9 Single Family Residential, R-7.5 Single Family Residential, R-7 Single Family Residential and PD-R Planned Development Residential zoning districts. 
(1)  Yard requirements. As to any lot platted after May 5, 1987, no principal structure, swimming pool, accessory building or other structure shall be located nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to any environmental jurisdictional (DEP/EPC) line or, where no such environmental jurisdictional line has been established, to the established mean high water line of the Hillsborough River, or its tributaries. 
(2)  As to any lot platted before May 5, 1987, no principal structure shall be located nearer than twenty (20) feet to any environmental jurisdictional (DEP/EPC) line or, where no such environmental jurisdictional line has been established, to the established mean high water line of the Hillsborough River, or its tributaries. Further, as to any lot platted before located nearer than ten (10) feet to any environmental jurisdictional (DEP/EPC) line or, where no such environmental jurisdictional line has been established, to the established mean high water line of the Hillsborough River, or its tributaries. 
(b)  R-MF Multi-Family Residential townhouse development standards. 
(1)  The minimum gross lot area shall be ten (10) acres and the minimum gross lot width shall be four hundred eighty (480) feet. 
(2)  Each townhouse dwelling shall have a minimum lot area of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of usable land and a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Each townhouse dwelling shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet and a rear yard with a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  No less than four (4) townhouse dwellings and no more than twelve (12) townhouse dwellings shall be contiguous. No more than two (2) contiguous townhouse dwellings shall be built in a row with a common front building line, and the minimum difference in building line setback to provide variation shall be two (2) feet. No contiguous group of dwellings shall exceed two hundred forty (240) feet in length. 
(5)  There shall be a minimum gross floor area of seven hundred (700) square feet of usable interior living area for one- or two-bedroom units and a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of usable interior living area for three-bedroom units, exclusive of utility area, attics or garages. 
(6)  No portion of a townhouse or accessory structure in or related to one group of contiguous townhouses shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any portion of a townhouse or accessory structure related to another group, or shall be closer than thirty (30) feet to a property line adjoining the side yard of an adjacent lot not included within the townhouse development. A side yard having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the side of any townhouse dwelling and a public street or right-of-way. 
(7)  Townhouse developments shall have a common open area suitably developed for recreation purposes equal to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of open area per dwelling unit. Satisfactory provisions for the development and perpetual maintenance of said open area shall be submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(8)  Where a townhouse development is proposed in accordance with a comprehensive plan upon a total site exceeding the minimum gross lot area set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, and where interior streets are proposed within said development, the city council may permit reasonable variations from the yard and setback provisions set forth herein, provided that no variation shall be made in yard or setback provisions relating to an exterior property line of the total site. 
(9)  City council may approve actual construction of phases, provided that the initial phase shall comprise not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area proposed for ultimate development. 
(10)  Before a building permit for construction shall be issued, a subdivision plat complying with all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the city shall have been approved by the city council and recorded in the records of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(11)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in the above subsections, all provisions and development standards of this LDC for the applicable zoning district shall apply to townhouse development. 
(12)  Area requirements. Each two-family (duplex) dwelling erected or begun after the effective date of this LDC and each multifamily dwelling having three (3) or more dwelling units and/or group of multifamily dwelling units erected or begun after the effective date of this LDC shall have a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of living area per dwelling unit, excluding porches, breezeways, garages, carports and utility rooms, including only actual living areas. 
(13)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Group of multifamily dwellings. Where two (2) or more multifamily dwellings are proposed for construction upon a zoning lot, open space and yard proposals substantially equivalent to the yard requirements as set forth hereinabove shall be submitted on the site development plan. As part of the open space requirements, there shall be a common open area suitably developed for recreational purposes equal to one thousand (1,000) square feet of open area per dwelling unit. 
b.  Inter-yards. The front, side and rear yard requirements listed in the matrix shall not apply to yard areas between structures within a multifamily residential unit complex which shall be subject only to a requirement that the minimum separation between any two such structures shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Where desirable, however, for the preservation of existing trees or under extraordinary or exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography, the required minimum separation may be reduced to not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet if the building separation distances of the opposite ends of each affected building are increased above fifteen (15) feet by a combined amount at least equal to the reduction allowed below fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  Perimeter. The minimum perimeter around any zoning lot used for a group of multifamily dwellings/multifamily residential units complex shall be thirty (30) feet, and the provision of said perimeter shall be deemed to satisfy any front, side or rear yard requirements otherwise imposed by this LDC, the specific terms thereof notwithstanding. 
(c)  R-MFA Alternate Multi-Family Residential. 
(1)  Minimum square footage, living area, per unit. The minimum square footage of living area per dwelling unit, excluding porches, breezeways, garages, carports and utility rooms and including only actual living area, shall be no less than five hundred and fifty (550) square feet. The average square footage of living area for all units located on the zoning lot shall be no less than seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet; and no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of units shall be five hundred and fifty (550) square feet. 
(2)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Group of multifamily dwellings. Where two (2) or more multifamily dwellings are proposed for construction upon a zoning lot, open space and yard proposals substantially equivalent to the yard requirements as set forth hereinabove shall be submitted on the site development plan. As part of the open space requirements, there shall be a common open area suitably developed for recreational purposes equal to one thousand (1,000) square feet of open area per dwelling unit. 
b.  Inter-yards. The front, side and rear yard requirements listed in the matrix shall not apply to yard areas between structures within a multifamily residential unit complex which shall be subject only to a requirement that the minimum separation between any two (2) such structures shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Where desirable, however, for the preservation of existing trees or under extraordinary or exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography, the required minimum separation may be reduced to not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet if the building separation distances of the opposite ends of each affected building are increased above fifteen (15) feet by a combined amount at least equal to the reduction allowed below fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  Perimeter. The minimum perimeter around any zoning lot used for a group of multifamily dwellings/multifamily residential units complex shall be thirty (30) feet, and the provision of said perimeter shall be deemed to satisfy any front, side or rear yard requirements otherwise imposed by this LDC the specific terms thereof notwithstanding. 
(d)  PROF Planned Research Office Facilities minimum site design standards. 
(1)  Height. Buildings and structures within a PROF zoning district shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height; provided, however, that buildings and structures adjacent to a single-family detached residential zoning district shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. The city council may grant a waiver to the thirty-five (35) feet height limit, provided that the city council finds that the increased height shown on the final site plan results in the mass of the proposed structure being reasonably proportional to surrounding structures, and that the waiver, singularly or in combination with other waivers allowed in this subsection (d) will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare, and does not undermine the integrity of any adjacent single-family residential zoning district uses or the purposes of the PROF zoning district. In no instance shall a building height exceed sixty-five (65) feet, except as allowed per section 12-510. (Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1207, 7-3-2007) 
(2)  Lot coverage. At least forty (40) percent of the total PROF zoning district land area shall be permeable, open area. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of each zoning lot shall be permeable, open area; provided, however, that city council may permit the required open coverage to be reduced to twenty-five (25) percent of a zoning lot if the applicant demonstrates that such a percentage of coverage is not inimical to the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetic purposes of this LDC and does not adversely affect or undermine the purposes of the PROF zoning district, including, but not limited to, the creation of a park-like atmosphere within the research corporate park. In no instance may the total zoning lot coverage (i.e., the area covered by buildings, parking, and all other nonpermeable structures or facilities) exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the area of the zoning lot. 
(3)  Zoning lot area and width. Each zoning lot shall have an area of no less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet and a minimum width of two hundred (200) feet at the front property line. 
(4)  Building coverage. Maximum building coverage within zoning lots encompassing two (2) or more acres shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total land area within the zoning lot and within zoning lots of less than two (2) acres, maximum building coverage shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total land area within the zoning lot. The maximum building coverage on a PROF development parcel may reach one hundred (100) percent in such instances where the PROF development parcel is comprised of the area that describes only the building or structure footprint of a permitted principal, accessory or conditional use. 
(5)  Setbacks. The minimum building setbacks, as measured from the zoning lot boundary, shall be: 
a.  Eighty (80) feet along all road rights-of-way, whether said road rights-of-way are public or private; provided, however, that city council may permit a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet along private road rights-of-way if the applicant demonstrates that such a setback is not inimical to the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetic purposes of this LDC and does not adversely affect or undermine the integrity of the PROF zoning district. 
b.  Thirty (30) feet along the side and rear property boundaries. 
c.  If the property is located adjacent to a single-family detached residential zoning district, two hundred (200) feet therefrom; provided, however, that city council may permit a smaller setback, to a minimum of thirty (30) feet, if the applicant demonstrates that such a setback is not inimical to the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetic purposes of this LDC and does not adversely affect or undermine the integrity of the single-family residential zoning district or the purposes of the PROF zoning district. 
d.  If the property is located along the Hillsborough River, two hundred (200) feet therefrom or one hundred (100) feet from the environmental protection commission and/or department of environmental protection (EPC/DEP) line, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the minimum building setback for a hotel may be one hundred fifty (150) feet from the river for structures up to thirty (30) feet in height and provided further that, hotel buildings, like other buildings and structures within a PROF zoning district, may be constructed to sixty-five (65) feet in height at a distance of two hundred (200) feet from the river. All distances from the Hillsborough River shall be calculated by reference to the mean high water line of the river. 
(6)  Setbacks. The minimum setbacks for other structures, parking lots, on-site private roads and parking aisles (excluding access drives), private walkways, swimming pools, tennis courts or pads for decorative or recreational use, as measured from the zoning lot boundary, shall be: 
a.  Thirty (30) feet, fully landscaped, from any road rights-of-way, whether said road rights-of-way are public or private. 
b.  Ten (10) feet fully landscaped from any side or rear property boundaries. 
c.  If the property is located adjacent to a single-family detached residential zoning district, one hundred (100) feet therefrom; provided, however, that city council may permit a smaller setback, to a minimum of thirty (30) feet, if the applicant demonstrates that such a setback is not inimical to the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetic purposes of this LDC and does not adversely affect or undermine the integrity of the single-family residential zoning district or the purposes of the PROF zoning district. 
d.  If the property is located along the Hillsborough River, one hundred fifty (150) feet therefrom or fifty (50) feet from the EPC/DEP jurisdictional line, whichever is greater; provided, however, that other structures, parking lots, driveways, walkways, fences, swimming pools, tennis courts or pads for decorative or recreational use may be constructed between that setback and two hundred (200) feet of the river, only if a continuous berm is constructed, between said structure, parking lot, driveway, walkway, fence, swimming pool, tennis court or pad and the river, and provided further that said berm shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  As a minimum, the mound or berm shall be configured with smooth, consistent slopes and shall be a minimum of thirty-two (32) inches in height. 
2.  The mound or berm shall meander and shall be constructed in such a way as to save as many existing trees as possible. 
3.  In addition to the mound or berm, a continuous hedge shall be planted along the berm and adjacent to the vehicular use area prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any building on the lot. 
4.  Said hedges shall be of an evergreen variety, planted and maintained to form a continuous, unbroken eighty (80) percent solid visual screen in conjunction with berms and mounds. 
5.  Plantings shall be planted and maintained at a minimum overall height of six (6) feet. 
6.  The berm/mound shall not encroach into the conservation easement by more than six (6) feet. 
(7)  Off-site impact. All research, development and related activities shall be conducted entirely within enclosed structures. No material, supplies, equipment or merchandise shall be stored outside of any building or structure. No use shall create any odor, liquids, smoke, gas, dust, litter, noise, vibration or other obnoxious, offensive or objectionable matter which shall be detectable outside of the zoning lot. 
(8)  Underground storage. Underground storage of hazardous or flammable materials, liquids or chemicals shall not be permitted in a PROF zoning district, except that combustible and flammable liquids and liquefied gas as defined in NFPA 30, 54 and 58 to include gasoline, kerosene, petroleum distillates, diesel fuel and liquefied gas in underground tanks which shall be designed, installed, constructed and located to prevent seepage of contained products into surrounding subsurface areas and which shall comply with the NFPA codes and F.A.C. ch. 62-761 and all prevailing statutory and regulatory requirements and standards. In addition, leak detectors shall be installed and maintained in accordance with city standards and criteria. 
(9)  Subdivision requirements. Development within a PROF zoning district shall be in accordance with division 10 of this LDC. 
(10)  Parking. Parking area requirements shall conform to the applicable Code provisions, unless city council varies said requirements pursuant to an approved site development plan, or, if the development is a development of regional impact, pursuant to the development order, in which case parking within the PROF zoning district shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as city council may impose in connection therewith. 
(11)  Landscaping and buffering. 
a.  Requirements as to landscaping and buffering shall conform to the applicable Code provision, unless city council varies said requirements pursuant to an approved site development plan, or, if the development is a development of regional impact, pursuant to the development order, in which case landscaping within the PROF zoning district shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as city council may impose in connection therewith. 
b.  In addition to the landscaping requirements of this LDC, where the rear or side property line of a zoning lot adjoins any residential zoning district or a public street adjoining any residential zoning district, suitable buffering in the form of a brick wall or plant material shall be provided along the entire length of the property line, unless this requirement shall be waived by the city council pursuant to an approved site development plan or, if the development is a development of regional impact, pursuant to the development order. Said buffering shall be at least six (6) feet in height and brick walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Should a landscape buffer be provided, the plant material shall be of an evergreen variety, planted and maintained to form a continuous, unbroken eighty (80) percent solid visual screen at a minimum overall height of six (6) feet. 
(12)  Tree removal. All tree removal shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Code, unless city council varies said requirements pursuant to an approved site development plan or, if the development is a development of regional impact, pursuant to the development order in which case tree removal within the PROF zoning district shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as the city council may impose in connection therewith. 
(13)  Conservation easement. All property located within the environmental protection commission and/or department of environmental protection (EPC/DEP) jurisdictional line and a fifty-foot strip contiguous thereto shall be conveyed to the city as a conservation easement in a form and substance acceptable to the city and in accordance with F.S. § 704.06; provided, however, that if the area contiguous to the EPC/DEP jurisdictional line is not contiguous to the River and if said area is part of a retention area, pond or lake, said conservation easement may extend only thirty (30) feet into the property contiguous to the EPC/DEP jurisdictional property. Property within the conservation easement shall be maintained by the developer and the developer's successor or assigns. Within conservation easements, native plant communities shall not be removed; provided, however, that additional plantings of native vegetation may be permitted with city council's prior approval. No filling, excavation or construction of permanent structures, parking lots, driveways, walkways, fences, swimming pools, tennis courts or pads for decorative or recreational use or other impermeable surfaces, except outfalls and utility lines, may be allowed in conservation easements without prior city council approval. Any and all clearing, landscaping or similar activity in the area between the conservation easement and the setback line for structures other than building, including parking lots, driveways, walkways, fences, swimming pools, tennis courts and pads for decorative or recreational uses, may be done only with prior city council approval. 
(14)  General site development plan submittal and review. Every zoning application and every application for a building permit within a PROF zoning district, shall be subject to the provisions of section 12-377; provided, however, that applicants for building permits which do not meet criteria established in section 12-377 and those for which city council has granted a specific waiver pursuant to section 12-377, shall not be required to submit site plans for city council review and approval. 
(15)  Review criteria for preliminary and final site plans. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  The proposed development shall be suitable in location and character for the uses and structures proposed and shall be planned and developed on a unified basis, according to the requirements and procedures set forth herein. 
2.  The proposed development may be established in appropriate locations: with respect to intended function; in conformance with the goals, policies, and objectives of the comprehensive plan; where compatible with the surrounding land uses and zoning districts; where facilities and services of the city will not be adversely impacted; where a precedent will not be set for the introduction of an inappropriate use into an area; and so as not to encourage nonresidential strip development along streets. 
3.  The preliminary site plan and final site plan review processes may involve negotiations between applicants, or their representatives, and representatives of the city. For the purposes of structuring the process of applying for site plan approval and any subsequent negotiations, the procedures, review criteria, and specific regulations in these PROF district regulations shall be utilized. 
b.  Physical characteristics of the site; relation to surrounding property. 
1.  The tract or zoning lot shall be suitable, or it shall be possible to make the tract or zoning lot suitable for development in the manner proposed without hazard to persons or property, on or off the tract or zoning lot, outside of the floodway, free from the probability of erosion, subsidence, or slipping of the soil or other dangers. Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and topography shall all be appropriate to both type and pattern of use intended. 
2.  Lands to be included in a proposed development within the PROF district may be divided by streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or easements, but shall be so located, dimensioned, and arranged as to permit unified planning and development and to meet all requirements in connection therewith, as well as to provide necessary protection against adverse relationships between uses in the proposed development and uses in surrounding areas. 
c.  Development intensity. The proposed development shall have an intensity consistent with the surrounding land uses and zoning. Intensity of a proposed development shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of the comprehensive plan or this Code and in determining the character of the proposed development. Net intensities of a portion of an existing development shall not be used as a precedent for higher intensities in surrounding areas. To ensure that a precedent is not set, net intensities of any portion of a district shall be compatible with other portions of the district and surrounding districts. 
d.  Relation to public utilities, facilities, and services. 
1.  The proposed development shall be so located in relation to transportation systems, sanitary sewers, emergency services, water lines, storm and surface drainage systems, and other utilities systems and installations that neither extension nor enlargement of such systems will be required in a manner, form, character, location, degree, scale, or timing resulting in higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than would development in forms generally permitted under current zoning and development policies for the area. 
2.  The proposed development shall be so located with respect to necessary public facilities as to have access to such facilities in the same degree as would development permitted under existing zoning and shall be so located, designed, and scaled that access for public services is equivalent to development as permitted under standard development controls. 
3.  The applicant shall have the option of providing private facilities, utilities and services, approved by appropriate public agencies, as substituting on at least an equivalent basis for inadequate public facilities, utilities, and services required by the PROF district within which the proposed development is to occur. In addition, the applicant shall make appropriate arrangements for the satisfactory continuing operation of such facilities, utilities, and services not dedicated to and accepted by the public, permanently or until similar public facilities, utilities, or services are available and used. 
4.  The applicant shall also have the option to make provisions, acceptable to the city, for off-setting any added cost or early commitment of public funds made necessary by such development. 
5.  Proposed developments within the PROF district shall be subject to the terms of all applicable development standards relating to the provision of public services. Determinations concerning the adequacy and efficiency of the provision of the described public facilities shall be based upon performance standards adopted by the city council. 
e.  Relation to major and minor transportation facilities. The proposed development, where appropriate because of the size or intensity, shall be so located with respect to minor arterial and collector streets, or mass transit facilities, and shall be so designed as to provide direct access to and from such facilities, where possible, without creating excessive traffic along minor streets in residential neighborhoods outside the district. Direct connections to major arterials shall be strongly discouraged and the burden of proving to the city that such a connection is required shall rest with the developer of the proposed project. 
f.  Compatibility. The proposed development shall be located and designed so as to minimize the negative effects of external impacts resulting from factors such as traffic, noise, or lights. Project control shall be accomplished through such techniques as buffering, architectural design, height limitations, and density or intensity limitations. 
g.  Transitions. The proposed development shall be responsive to the character of the area. When located in an area where land use types and/or intensities or densities vary, the proposed development shall be designed in such a manner as to provide for gradual changes in intensity and/or density. 
h.  Internal/external relationship. 
1.  Access. 
(i)  Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Merging and turnout lanes or traffic dividers and extra width of the approach street shall be required where existing or anticipated traffic flows indicate need. 
(ii)  Vehicular access to streets or portions of streets from off-street parking and service areas shall be so combined, limited, located, designed, and controlled as to channel traffic from and to such areas conveniently, safely, and in a manner which minimizes traffic friction, and excessive interruptions. 
(iii)  Pedestrian access may be provided at any suitable location within the district. Where practical, it shall be separated from vehicular access points in order to reduce congestion, marginal friction, and hazards, except where signalization is used to control pedestrian and vehicular movement safety. 
2.  Streets, drives, parking, and service areas. Streets, drives, parking, and service areas shall provide safe and convenient access to all buildings and general facilities. Streets shall be laid out so as to discourage outside traffic from traversing the development on minor streets. Streets shall not occupy more land than is required to provide access as indicated, nor create unnecessary fragmentation of the development into small blocks. Commercial and office uses shall be grouped in relation to parking areas such that after visitors arriving by automobile enter the walkway system, establishments can be visited conveniently with a minimum of internal automotive movements. Facilities and access routes for deliveries, servicing, and maintenance shall be so located and arranged as to prevent interference with pedestrian traffic within the district. Loading zones where customers pick up goods shall be located and arranged as to prevent interference with pedestrian movement. 
3.  Pedestrian systems. 
(i)  All proposed developments within PROF districts, as appropriate, shall provide internal or external walkways where pedestrian circulation requires them. 
(ii)  The site plan shall provide for safe, efficient, convenient, and harmonious groupings of structures, uses, facilities, and open spaces in a manner facilitating pedestrian movement between major origins and destinations within and adjacent to the proposed development with a minimum of conflict with vehicular traffic. 
(iii)  Pedestrian systems through buildings shall be related to a network of exterior open spaces reserved for pedestrian use and enjoyment. Interior and exterior pedestrian ways shall be scaled for anticipated traffic and form a convenient pattern connecting major concentrations of uses within the proposed development, and shall connect to principal access points within and outside the district. 
(iv)  Access for pedestrians and cyclists entering or leaving the proposed development shall be by safe and convenient routes. Where there are crossings of pedestrian ways and vehicular routes at edges of proposed developments, such crossings shall be safely located, marked, and controlled, and where such ways are exposed to substantial vehicular traffic at edges of the development, be required to prevent crossings except at designated points. Bicycle or pedestrian paths, if provided, shall be so related to the vehicular system that street crossings are combined. 
4.  Orientation. The orientation of the development shall generally be toward internal streets and pedestrian systems and away from adjacent local streets and adjacent residential land uses. 
5.  Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be provided in all developments that do not require street lights. Outdoor lighting shall be located so as to illuminate the project as necessary to provide safe passage within the development. The source of the light, such as the bulb or filament, of outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be directly visible from property outside the zoning lot on which it is located. Additionally, the maximum illumination permitted at the zoning lot line shall be 0.20 footcandle. 
6.  Underground utilities. Electrical distribution, with the exception of circuit feeder or larger lines and telephone service lines, shall be underground in all proposed developments within PROF districts that are in an area served by underground utilities and in other areas whenever possible. 
7.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and loading shall be as required by division 13 of this article. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided such that location and design is appropriate to the needs of occupants and users of the proposed development and protection of adjacent property from adverse effects. No space designated as a required off-street parking space for the general public shall be used as an off-street loading space or maneuvering room for vehicles being loaded or unloaded. (Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1207, 7-3-2007) 
(e)  PD-R Planned Development Residential. 
(1)  Lot area and width requirements. Subject to the limitations provided herein, the city council shall, in approving a PD-R district, establish the appropriate lot area and width requirements for each new lot. The city council is, however, prohibited from establishing lots which are less than sixty-five (65) percent of the area and width requirements of the zoning district ("existing zoning") which is in effect for the property at the time an application for a PD-R district is submitted. Further, all other land development regulations and dimensional requirements applicable to the existing zoning, including, but not limited to, setbacks, shall be applicable to and incorporated in the approved PD-R district. 
(2)  Standards. The following standards shall be used in evaluating an application for a PD-R zoning district: 
a.  The development shall be consistent with the existing pattern of development and character of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
b.  There shall be adequate infrastructure available to serve the development. 
c.  Upon approval of the PD-R zoning district, the project shall commence construction within six (6) months of the date of approval. 
(3)  Conflicts. The approval by the city council of the location of the proposed structures, driveways or improvements does not release the applicant from complying with all other regulations and ordinances of the city and/or other applicable regulations of agencies having jurisdiction within the city. 
(4)  Application requirements. In applying for a PD-R zoning district, the applicant shall provide the following information to the city: 
a.  An accurate drawing showing the location of all proposed structures, driveways and/or improvements. The setbacks, parcel area size, building dimensions, and any other appropriate information requested by the director, shall be depicted on the drawing. In addition, the drawing shall either graphically depict or note the location and distance of all abutting residential structures, driveways or improvements. 
b.  A scale shall be used for the drawing which will best depict the proposed development. When more than one sheet is necessary to adequately portray the project, a first sheet shall be a master of the entire project at a smaller scale which keys the surrounding area, including abutting roads and the additional pages. All sheets shall be the same size. 
c.  The graphic scale of the drawing shall be shown on all drawings with a prominent directional arrow pointing to the top of the drawings zero north. 
d.  The drawing shall identify the location of any existing easements, watercourses, lakes or other such significant natural features upon the site. 
e.  The drawing shall note the section, township, range and a metes and bounds or platted lot description of each parcel on which a single-family dwelling will be developed. The description must be complete to the extent that a starting point and boundary can be determined without reference to the drawing. In the metes and bounds description, the point of beginning shall be indicated on the drawing, together with all bearings and distance of the boundary lines. 
(5)  Approval of the PD-R zoning district. City council shall consider any request for a PD-R zoning in accordance with the provisions provided in section 12-193. The drawings described herein, representations made by the applicant during the public hearing when the zoning is considered, and any conditions imposed on the development by city council, shall become part of the zoning and shall run with the land. Development of the subject property shall be in strict compliance with the approval of the PD-R zoning. (Ord. No. 754, 9-17-1990) 
(f)  PRS Preservation. 
(1)  Parking maximums shall be observed such that a minimum level of disturbance of land is achieved. Pervious parking facilities are preferred and may be constructed up to one acre or up to ten (10) percent of the property, whichever is less. Impervious parking areas meeting the criteria specified in section 12-957 and division 17 of this article may be allowed but are subject to site plan approval by city council. Any land acquired by the city or conveyed to the city for environmental preservation or conservation purposes, which carries parking or environmental conditions more restrictive than required by this section, shall be further limited by those conditions. 
(2)  Pervious parking areas shall consist of pervious surface such as crushed shell, mulch, pervious pavers or other similar surface that allows for as near as possible the natural flow of rainwater. 
(3)  Internal roadways designed for maintenance shall consist of as close to possible pervious surface, with minimal portions of roadway paved only as deemed necessary for accessibility for access to internal shelters/structures. 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.3; Ord. No. 754, 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 1207, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-508. - Accessory uses, buildings or structures. 
    Pool and accessory structure setbacks shall be in full compliance with the yard and buffering requirements of the applicable zoning district, except as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise may be provided in this section, swimming pools, patios, decks and other outdoor living areas, including screened enclosures, not having a roof impervious to weather, must be located only within a rear yard; provided that no such allowed uses shall be located nearer than five (5) feet to any property line. An additional setback from the lot line of one foot shall be required for each one foot of enclosure height not having a roof impervious to the weather that exceeds eleven (11) feet. The maximum slope thus established may be extended and enclosures may rise accordingly, but no part of any enclosure shall rise in height above the prescribed slope and no enclosure shall exceed the maximum height of any accessory structure which is twenty-four (24) feet. Consequently, the following heights are the maximum allowed at the corresponding setbacks: 
Setback Maximum Height 5 feet 11 feet 6 feet 12 feet 7 feet 13 feet 8 feet 14 feet 9 feet 15 feet 10 feet 16 feet 11 feet 17 feet 12 feet 18 feet 13 feet 19 feet 14 feet 20 feet 15 feet 21 feet 16 feet 22 feet 17 feet 23 feet 18 feet 24 feet  
Maximum height of twenty-four (24) feet allowed for any setback greater than eighteen (18) feet. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, detached accessory buildings and structures, including but not limited to, garages, carports and storage sheds, but excluding uses set forth under subsection (1) of this section, must be located within a rear yard; provided that no such building or structure shall be located nearer than five (5) feet to any property line and not closer than three (3) feet to the principal structure. A covered walkway open on at least two (2) sides may be attached to the principal structure, provided it maintains the required separation. Principal and accessory structures shall not be connected by any type of enclosure unless all structures meet the principal structure setbacks. On corner lots, no detached accessory building or structure shall be located forward of the building line of the principal structure. 
Cargo containers and other temporary storage structures may be located in a front yard for no more than thirty (30) days. 
An additional setback from a lot line of one foot shall be required for each foot of total building or structure height exceeding eleven (11) feet, until a setback of ten (10) feet is reached. 
(3)  Total combined building coverage of all principal permitted and accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed the maximum building coverage allowed within the applicable zoning district. 
(4)  No permanent building or structure shall be located within a publicly dedicated easement. 
(5)  There shall be full compliance with the off-street parking and service requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(6)  On lots which abut the city golf course, accessory buildings and structures may be located in the side yard. On corner lots, no detached accessory building or structure shall be located forward of the building line of the principal structure. Accessory structures in a side yard shall maintain a minimum five-foot setback. 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.4; Ord. No. 770, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 1050, 9-13-2001; Ord. No. 1090, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1355, § 2(exh. A), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-509. - Yard encroachments. 
    Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as hereinafter provided or as otherwise permitted by this LDC: 
(1)  Sills or belt courses may project not over twelve (12) inches into a required yard. 
(2)  Cornices, eaves, gutters or movable awnings may project not over three (3) feet into a required yard. 
(3)  Chimneys, fireplaces, or pilasters may project not over two (2) feet into a required yard. 
(4)  Fire escapes, stairways and balconies which are unroofed and unenclosed may project not over five (5) feet into a required rear yard, or not over three (3) feet eight (8) inches into a required side yard of a multifamily dwelling or motel. 
(5)  Hoods, canopies or marquees may project not over three (3) feet into a required yard, but shall not extend closer than one foot to any lot line. 
(6)  Accessory parking may be located in a required side yard if the area so used for parking is properly screened from adjacent property by a fence, wall or planting. 
(7)  Air conditioner units and other mechanical equipment may extend not over four (4) feet into a required side or rear yard. 
(8)  Entrance stoops, including roof covering, may extend not over four (4) feet into a required yard. 
(9)  Tree well and planter structures may extend no more than twenty-four (24) inches above ground level as measured from a high point on the ground, which is no more than eight (8) feet from the centerline of the protected tree; provided, however, that such structure shall comply with the following terms and conditions: 
a.  Such structure shall be designed and installed in a proper manner to protect trees from grade changes that may adversely affect or endanger said trees; 
b.  No such tree well structure shall impair or hinder traffic and visibility from the road; and 
c.  The structure shall be constructed of materials appropriate to the purpose and aesthetically harmonious with the location. In no instance shall fiberglass, plastics or any type of corrugated panel or sheet metal be used. 
(10)  Retaining walls shall be permitted in any yard area, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  No such retaining walls shall be constructed, unless the plans for said retaining wall have been determined by the city to be in compliance with the requirements of this section and all applicable requirements of the city's building code, and a building permit has been issued for such construction prior to installation or erection; 
b.  The wall is necessitated by the unique topography or other extraordinary, exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property; 
c.  The wall shall be constructed of materials appropriate to the purpose and aesthetically harmonious with the location. In no instance shall fiberglass, plastics, corrugated panel or sheet metal be permitted; 
d.  All retaining walls shall have adequate provision for drainage of water from the retained site; and 
e.  Retaining walls shall not adversely affect the natural flow of surface water or create an adverse effect on adjacent property. 
(11)  Cantilevered, bay windows may not extend over two (2) feet into a required yard. 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.5; Ord. No. 590, 9-2-1986; Ord. No. 732, 5-1-1990) 
Sec. 12-510. - Exclusion from height limits. 
    Penthouses, scenery lofts, towers, cupolas, steeples and domes, not exceeding in gross area at maximum horizontal section thirty (30) percent of the roof area, and flag poles, airplane beacons, broadcasting towers, antennas, chimneys, stacks, tanks and roof structures used only for ornamental or mechanical purposes may exceed the permissible height limit in any district by not more than twenty-five (25) percent. Parapet walls may extend not more than five (5) feet above the allowable height of the building. 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.6; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 732, 5-1-1990) 
Sec. 12-511. - Lot adjacent to two or more streets. 
(a)  Where any lot extends through a block from street to street, except in cases where the lot is bounded on one of those streets by a subdivision wall, the applicable front yard requirements relative to both streets shall apply to said lot. In the case of a corner lot abutting the intersections of two (2) or more streets, the front of said lot shall be considered to be along the blockface with which said lot is most consistent in width and depth. 
(b)  Where a corner lot is equally consistent in width and depth with two (2) blockfaces, said lot shall be considered to be a multiple-frontage corner lot and buildings thereon shall comply with the front yard requirements applicable to both said blockfaces. (Ord. No. 796, 12-3-1991) 
(Code 2001, § 25.710.7; Ord. No. 796, 12-3-1991) 
Secs. 12-512-12-530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1368 , § 5(Exh. C), adopted June 2, 2015, repealed the former article IX, division 3, subdivision I, §§ 12-531-12-543, subdivision II, §§ 12-559-12-564, subdivision III, §§ 12-588-12-594, and enacted a new division 3 as set out herein. The former division 3 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating areas subject to periodic and seasonal flooding required, F.S. § 163.3202(2)(d). 

Subdivision I. - General 

Sec. 12-531. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the floodplain management ordinance of the City of Temple Terrace, hereinafter referred to as "this division." 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-532. - Definitions. 
    Certain terms used in this division are defined in chapter 12, article II, section 12-40 of this Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-533. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-534. - Intent. 
    The purposes of this division and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for city participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-535. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
    This division is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code, which has been adopted by the city in Code section 8-25, and which has been modified through an administrative amendment as provided for in section 553.73(5), Florida Statutes. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. For purposes of interpreting and enforcing this division, terms that are not defined in Chapter 12 of this Code of Ordinances, that are defined in the Florida Building Code, shall be given the meaning ascribed to them in the Florida Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-536. - Warning. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this division and the Florida Building Code, as amended by the city, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring the city to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this division. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-537. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    This division shall not create liability on the part of the City of Temple Terrace or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-538. - General and specific requirement applicability. 
    Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-539. - Areas to which this division applies. 
    This division shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Temple Terrace, as established in section 12-540 of this division. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-540. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
(a)  Flood hazard area map adoption. The flood insurance study for Hillsborough County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated September 27, 2013, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this division and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the City of Temple Terrace Public Works Department, 11210 North 53rd Street, Temple Terrace, FL 33617. 
(b)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 12-561 of this division, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the city indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this division and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-541. - Other laws. 
    The provisions of this division shall, to the extent possible, be interpreted as being consistent with applicable provisions of Florida law and federal law. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-542. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This division supersedes any previously adopted City of Temple Terrace ordinances in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, this division is not intended to repeal or abrogate existing ordinances relating to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this division and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This division shall not impair any previously recorded deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this division. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-543. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 12-544-12-558. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 12-559. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The public works director is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  Authority of the floodplain administrator. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this division consistent with the intent and purpose of this division and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this division without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 12-563 of this division. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the city, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this division; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this division is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this division. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this division is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 12-563 of this division. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this division. 
(g)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 12-562 of this division for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection 12-559(d) of this division; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six (6) months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this division and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Temple Terrace are modified. 
(6)  Other duties, responsibilities, and authority as conferred by the adoption of the new sections to the Florida Building Code as enumerated in section 8-25(b) of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this division and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this division; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this division and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the city's public works building. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-560. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this division, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this division and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this division for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this division: 
a.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
b.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
c.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
d.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
e.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
f.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
g.  Family mausoleums not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
h.  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
i.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(c)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the city. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 12-561 of this division. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(d)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this division shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this division, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this city. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(e)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this division or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this city. 
(g)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The Southwest Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-561. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan and applicable construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this division shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with subsection 12-561(b)(2) or (3) of this division. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection 12-561(b)(1) of this division. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this division but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this division. 
(b)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two (2) feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(c)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 12-561(d) of this division and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the city. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 12-561(d) of this division. 
(d)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-562. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(1)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
a.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with subsection 12-561(b)(3)b. of this division, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
b.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection 12-562(a)(2)a. of this division. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ; Ord. No. 1454 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 12-563. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  General. The board of adjustments shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this division. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the board of adjustments shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(b)  Appeals. The board of adjustments shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this division. Any person aggrieved by the decision of board of adjustments may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The Board of Adjustments shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection 12-563(f) of this division, the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection 12-563(g) of this division, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The board of adjustments has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this division. 
(1)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in subsection 12-561(c) of this division. 
(d)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this division, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection 12-563(c)(1), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(f)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the board of adjustments shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this division, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the city; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(g)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this division or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the board of adjustments that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-564. - Violations. 
(a)  Determination of violation. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this division that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this division, shall be deemed a violation of this division. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this division or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this division and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 12-565-12-587. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Flood Resistant Development 

Sec. 12-588. - Buildings and structures. 
(a)  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to subsection 12-560(b)(1) of this division, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 12-594 of this division. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-589. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with subsection 12-561(b)(1) of this division; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 12-590 of this division. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-590. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(c)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(d)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in subsection 12-561(c)(1) of this division demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(e)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this division, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-591. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this division. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection 12-591(d)(1) or 12-591(d)(2) of this division, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection 12-591(d)(2) of this division, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection 12-591(d)(1) of this division, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(e)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
(f)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-592. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(a)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(b)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection 12-592(a) of this division for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 12-591 of this division for manufactured homes. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-593. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection 12-593(c) of this division shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-594. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this division or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of subsection 12-590(d) of this division if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of subsection 12-590(d) of this division. 
(c)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 12-590(d) of this division. 
(d)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 12-590(d) of this division. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of subsection 12-561(c)(3) of this division. 
( Ord. No. 1368, § 5(Exh. C), 6-2-2015 ) 
Secs. 12-595-12-615. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER QUALITY 

Sec. 12-616. - Title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Stormwater Quality Management Division." 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.1) 
Sec. 12-617. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Application or apply means the actual physical deposit of fertilizer to turf or landscape plants. 
    Applicator means any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or being discharged from the MS4. BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment methods and practices to control the discharge of pollutants. With respect to the application of fertilizer, Best Management Practices or BMPs shall also mean turf and landscape practices which minimize the negative environmental impacts of installation and maintenance of landscapes. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA) means amendments, passed in 1972 by Congress, to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and commonly referred to as the Clean Water Act (CWA). 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. 
    Commercial fertilizer applicator means any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants in exchange for money, goods, services or other valuable consideration. 
    Construction activities means and includes such activities as clearing, grading, and excavation activities. 
    Discharge means and includes, but is not limited to, any release, spilling, leaking; seeping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of any substance or material. 
    Fertilize, fertilizing, or fertilization means the act of applying fertilizer to turf, specialized turf, or landscape plants. 
    Fertilizer means any substance or mixture of substances that contains one or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other corrective measures to the soil. For purposes of this section, when referring to "fertilizers" the meaning can include both those that contain nitrogen ("N") or phosphorous ("P"), and fertilizers that do not contain those substances. Nonetheless, this section may also use the following abbreviations to reflect a specific type of content-based fertilizer: "N-fertilizer", "P-fertilizer", or fertilizer that contains either N and/or P - "N/P-fertilizer". For purposes of this section only, reclaimed water does not fall under the definition of fertilizer. 
    Granular means composed of small grains or particles. Granular does not include products mixed with water prior to application. 
    Guaranteed analysis means the percentage of plant nutrients or measures of neutralizing capability claimed to be present in the fertilizer. 
    Illicit connections means point source discharges to the city's MS4 or to waters of the U.S., which are not composed entirely of stormwater and are not authorized by a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. Failure of an industrial facility or construction site to notify the city manager or designee of a connection to the city's MS4 constitutes an illicit connection. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a MS4 or to waters of the U.S. that is not composed entirely of stormwater, with the exception of discharges which are exempt pursuant to section 12-618. Any discharge in violation of an NPDES permit shall constitute an illicit discharge. 
    Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant or prevents infiltration by water. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, limerock, or clay, as well as conventionally surfaced streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar surfaces. 
    Industrial activities means activities which are conducted on properties designated for industrial land use in accordance with the city comprehensive plan and/or at facilities identified by the U.S. EPA as requiring an NPDES stormwater permit under the definition of "Storm Water Discharge Associated with Industrial Activity" in title 40, section 122.26 of the Code of Federal Regulations or any amendment thereto. 
    Inspection means and includes, but is not limited to, any on-site physical examination of all facilities and grounds which may discharge to a MS4, a review of all records on operation and maintenance of facilities and the results of any monitoring performed for compliance with state, federal and local regulations or permit conditions. 
    Institutional applicator means any person, other than a non-commercial or commercial applicator, that applies fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf and/or landscape plants. Institutional applicators shall include, but shall not be limited to, owners and managers of public lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business sites and any residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership. 
    Landscape maintenance means activities carried out to manage and maintain landscape plants and turf including but not limited to mowing, edging, and trimming. 
    Landscape plant means any native or exotic tree, shrub, ornamental, or groundcover (excluding turf). 
    Low maintenance zone means an area a minimum of six (6) feet wide adjacent to surface waters which is planted with non-turf grass vegetation and managed in order to minimize the need for fertilization, watering, mowing, etc. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains) owned or operated by a local government that discharges to waters of the United States or connects to other MS4s, that is designed solely for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 or any amendment thereto. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the federal program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318 and 405 of CWA. The term also includes an "approved program." 
    Pasture means land used for livestock grazing that is managed to provide feed value. 
    Person means any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer, or any other entity whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
    Point source means any discernible and confined conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, container, rolling stocks, concentrated animal feeding operation, vessel, or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Site Supervisor means the direct supervisor of landscape maintenance personnel. 
    Slow or controlled release fertilizer means a fertilizer containing a plant nutrient in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the plant significantly longer than a referenced "rapidly available nutrient fertilizer." 
    Specialized turf means areas of turf used for athletic fields, golf courses, golf course practice areas, and other private or public athletic fields. 
    Stormwater means surface runoff and drainage of water resulting from rainfall. 
    Surface water means those waters as identified by section 62-340.600, Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.), which include waters upon the surface of the earth, whether contained in bounds created naturally or artificially or diffused. They shall include, but not be limited to, bays, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, swamps, wetlands, canals, springs, impoundments and all other waters or bodies of water, including fresh, brackish or saline, tidal or intermittent, which are located, either entirely or partially, within the geographic boundaries of the City. 
    Turf, sod, or lawn means a piece of grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass. 
    Waters of the United States (U.S.) means as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in title 40, section 122 of the Code of Federal Regulations or any amendment thereto. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.2; Ord. No. 1352, § 2, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 12-618. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 12-619 through 12-627 of this division: 
(1)  Discharges from: 
a.  Water line flushing; 
b.  Landscape irrigation; 
c.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20) to separate storm sewers; 
d.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
e.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
f.  Air conditioning condensate; 
g.  Swimming pools; 
h.  Irrigation water; 
i.  Springs; 
j.  Lawn watering; 
k.  Individual residential car washing; 
l.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
m.  Street wash waters; and 
n.  Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities, and emergency response activities employing best management practices. 
(2)  Discharges which meet the water quality standards of F.A.C. 62-302. 
(3)  Discharges from facilities in compliance with the conditions of all required NPDES permits issued under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.11; Ord. No. 1352, § 3, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 12-619. - Enforcement, penalties and legal proceedings. 
(a)  This division shall be administered by the city manager or designee. All persons in violation of this division shall address such violations immediately upon written notification by the city. Violations shall be addressed by providing a written response to the city manager or designee, requesting outlining the temporary and permanent measures that will be taken to correct the violation and a proposed schedule for completion of each of the corrective measures. Proposals for corrective action are subject to the approval of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  The city manager or designee is authorized to issue cease and desist orders in the form of written official notice sent by registered mail to the person(s) responsible for the violation. Specific activities and operations may be ordered to be ceased based upon the following conditions: 
(1)  In a situation that may have a serious effect on the health, safety or welfare of the public or the environment, including the operation of and quality of stormwater in the city's MS4. 
(2)  When irreversible or irreparable harm may result, in the reasonable opinion of the city manager or designee, and immediate cessation of the activity is necessary to protect the public or the environment, including the operation of and quality of stormwater in the city's MS4. 
(c)  Any person who violates this division and/or fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be subject to legal action before the municipal code enforcement board or the City's Supplemental Enforcement Procedures and shall be subject to administrative fines and liens, or other penalties, as set forth in F.S. Ch. 162. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  In addition to any fines which may be imposed by this division, persons responsible for a discharge which adversely impacts a receiving water shall be liable for all sampling and analytical costs incurred in monitoring the discharge, any state or federal fines imposed as a result of the discharge and the cost of removing or properly treating the discharge for complete restoration of the quality of all receiving waters. 
(e)  If the person(s) responsible for a violation fails to take action(s) as required in this section, the city has the right to take remedial action. All costs incurred by the city in taking such action(s) shall be reimbursed by the person(s) responsible for the violation. 
(f)  In addition to the remedies provided herein, the city is authorized to make application in a court of appropriate jurisdiction for an injunction restraining any person from violating, or continuing to violate, any provisions of this division. In addition, the city may also seek entry of a court order requiring restoration and mitigation for any impacted land or waters or request any other appropriate, applicable legal remedy, including reimbursement of court costs. 
(g)  The city may elect any or all of the above remedies concurrently, and the pursuance of one shall not preclude the pursuance of another. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.12; Ord. No. 1083, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 1352, § 4, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 12-620. - Control of stormwater discharges. 
(a)  Discharges to the city's MS4 shall be controlled to the extent that such discharges will not impair the operation of the MS4 or contribute to the failure of the MS4 to meet any local, state or federal requirements. Discharges to waters of the U.S. shall be controlled to the extent that the discharge will not adversely impact the quality or beneficial uses of the receiving water or result in violation of any federal, state or local laws. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges determined by the city to be contributing to the degradation of the city's MS4 or the waters of the U.S., either directly or through a MS4, shall provide corrective measures in accordance with a schedule approved by the city and may be subject to paying fines and damages. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.3) 
Sec. 12-621. - Stormwater discharges from industrial activities and construction activities. 
(a)  Stormwater from construction sites shall be controlled in such a way as to retain sediment on-site and prevent violations of state water quality standards or NPDES permits. All erosion, pollution, and sediment controls required pursuant to the pollution prevention plan of a NPDES stormwater permit for construction or required pursuant to a state stormwater permit issued by either the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or the Southwest Florida Water Management District shall be properly implemented, maintained and operated. 
(b)  Stormwater from areas of industrial activity shall be treated or managed on-site, using best management practices, in accordance with NPDES permits, prior to discharging to the city's MS4 or to waters of the U.S. All stormwater discharges from the site shall be of a quality which will not adversely impact the water quality or beneficial uses of the receiving water. 
(c)  The owners or operators of industrial facilities or construction sites which will discharge stormwater to the city's MS4 or to waters of the U.S. must provide written notification of connection to the city prior to discharging. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.4) 
Sec. 12-622. - Control of pollutant contributions from interconnected MS4s. 
    The discharge of stormwater between interconnected state, county or other MS4s shall not impair the quality of the discharge of the receiving MS4. Owners of sections of an interconnected MS4 shall be responsible for the quality of discharge from their portion of the system and shall coordinate with the owners of the downstream segments prior to the connections into their systems. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.5) 
Sec. 12-623. - Prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections. 
    Any discharge, other than stormwater, to the city's MS4 or to waters of the U.S. which is not exempt under section 12-618, and any connection which is not composed entirely of stormwater or specifically permitted through an NPDES permit, is considered an illicit discharge or an illicit connection and is prohibited. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.6) 
Sec. 12-624. - Reporting illicit discharges or illicit connections. 
    Upon discovery of an illicit discharge or an illicit connection, persons responsible for the discharge or the connection shall report their findings by telephone immediately to the city and follow within 48 hours with written notification. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.7) 
Sec. 12-625. - Control of illicit discharges or illicit connections. 
    Persons responsible for illicit discharges or illicit connections shall immediately, upon notification or discovery, initiate procedures to cease discharging or provide suitable containment facilities. Such procedures shall include a requirement to obtain approval from the city manager or designee of a schedule for implementing proposed corrective measures. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.8) 
Sec. 12-626. - Inspection and monitoring for compliance. 
    City personnel shall be granted access for inspection of facilities discharging or suspected of discharging to the city's MS4 or waters of the U.S. in order to effectuate the purposes of this Section and to investigate violations or potential violations of any of the terms herein. All structures and processes which allow discharges to the city's MS4, as well as records concerning them, shall be made accessible to city personnel for monitoring of the quality of the discharges. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.9) 
Sec. 12-627. - Maintenance of control structures. 
    Structural controls and other BMPs used to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges shall be operated and maintained so as to function in accordance with the permitted design or performance criteria in compliance with NPDES or other permit conditions. Operation and maintenance shall be done so as to assure treatment of stormwater or reduction in pollutants in stormwater discharges consistent with appropriate federal, state, water management district, or local rules or permit requirements. 
(Code 2001, § 25.716.10) 
Sec. 12-628. - Fertilizer and landscape management. 
(1)  Purpose. To reduce the impairment to the surface waters of Temple Terrace caused by excessive nutrients, and to decrease levels of nitrogen in the surface and/or ground water within the aquifers or springs within Temple Terrace in compliance with the City's NPDES permit. 
(2)  Intent. The intent of this section is to regulate the proper use of fertilizers by any applicator; require proper training of commercial and institutional fertilizer applicators and landscape maintenance companies by establishing training and licensing requirements; establish a prohibited application period; specify allowable fertilizer application rates and methods, fertilizer-free zones, low maintenance zones, exemptions, and training and licensing requirements. This Section requires the use of best management practices (BMPs) which provide specific management guidelines to minimize negative secondary and cumulative environmental effects associated with the misuse of fertilizers and improper landscape maintenance practices. These secondary and cumulative effects have been observed in and on Temple Terrace's stormwater and drainage conveyances, rivers, creeks, canals, springs, ponds, estuaries and other water bodies, whether they are natural or artificial. Collectively, these water bodies are an asset critical to the environmental, recreational, cultural, and economic well-being of City of Temple Terrace residents and the health of the public. Overgrowth of algae and vegetation hinder the effectiveness of flood attenuation provided by natural and artificial stormwater conveyances. Regulation of nutrients, including both phosphorus and nitrogen contained in fertilizer, will help improve and maintain water and habitat quality. 
(3)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to and shall regulate any and all applicators of fertilizer, areas of application of fertilizer, and landscape maintenance activities within Temple Terrace, unless such applicator or activity is specifically exempted by the terms of this Section from the regulatory provisions of this Section. Exemptions are located in sub-section (9). 
(4)  Weather and seasonal restrictions. No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus to turf and/or landscape plants during one or more of the following events: i) if it is raining at the application site, or ii) within the time period during which a flood watch or warning, or a tropical storm watch or warning, or a hurricane watch or warning is in effect for any portion of Temple Terrace, issued by the National Weather Service, or iii) within 36 hours prior to a rain event greater than or equal to 2 inches in a 24 hour period is likely. 
(5)  Fertilizer content and application rate. 
(a)  N/P-fertilizers shall be applied to turf and/or landscape plants at the recommended rate per the "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries", December 2008, as revised. However, no more than four (4) pounds of nitrogen per 1000 ft 2 shall be applied in any calendar year. 
(b)  No fertilizer containing phosphorus shall be applied to turf and/or landscape plants in Temple Terrace, except where phosphorus deficiency has been demonstrated in the soil underlying the turf and/or landscape plants by a soil analysis test performed by a State of Florida-certified laboratory. 
Any person who obtains such a soil analysis test showing a phosphorus deficiency and who wishes to apply phosphorus to turf and/or landscape plants shall maintain a copy of the test results for two years and allow the City Manager or his designee to review the results upon request. 
(c)  Nitrogen fertilizer shall not be applied before planting new turf or on newly established turf for the first 30 days. 
(d)  Liquid fertilizers containing nitrogen applied to turf and/or landscape plants within Temple Terrace shall not be applied at a rate that exceeds 0.5 lbs/1000 ft 2 per application. 
(e)  It is a violation of this Section to fail to comply with the provisions of this Section and any requirements set forth in Rule 5E-1.003(2), F.A.C., Labeling Requirements For Urban Turf Fertilizers. 
(6)  Impervious surfaces and mode of application. 
(a)  Fertilizer shall not be applied or otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces. Any fertilizer applied or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container. Fertilizer shall not be washed, swept, or blown off impervious surfaces into stormwater drains, ditches, drainage conveyances, roadways, or surface waters. 
(b)  Spreader deflector shields are required when applying fertilizer by use of any broadcast or rotary spreader. Deflector shields must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces and surface waters. 
(7)  Fertilizer-free zones. Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten (10) feet from the landward extent of any surface water as identified in section 62-340.600(2), F.A.C. 
(8)  Management of grass clippings and vegetative material. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to wash, sweep, blow or otherwise cause grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative material to be deposited into stormwater drains, ditches, drainage conveyances, sewer systems, surface waters, or roadways. 
(9)  Exemptions. 
(a)  The following activities are exempt from this section: 
1.  Golf courses. For all golf courses and associated practice areas, the provisions of the FDEP document, "BMPs for the Enhancement of Environmental Quality on Florida Golf Courses, January 2007," as updated, are required and shall be followed. 
2.  Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right to Farm Act, F.S. § 823.14. 
3.  Other properties not subject to or covered under the Florida Right to Farm Act that have pastures for grazing livestock; 
4.  Any lands used for bona fide scientific research, including, but not limited to, research on the effects of fertilizer use on urban stormwater, water quality, agronomics or horticulture. 
(b)  Sub-section (5) (Fertilizer content and application rate) shall not apply to fertilizer applications on specialized turf, including but not limited to, privately and publicly operated athletic fields. Specialized turf managers must follow the provisions and directions in section 5E-1.003(2)(d), F.A.C., all other provision of this Section, and all applicable provisions of the Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries, as updated. Notwithstanding the definition of specialized turf, golf course and golf practice areas are governed by the exemption in subsection (a)(1) above. 
(10)  Certification and training. 
(a)  All commercial applicators and their supervisors, as well as government and institutional applicators, site supervisors and managers of professional landscape supervisors, and any employee of a lawn and landscape maintenance company performing fertilizer application shall (i) abide by and successfully complete a University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences (IFAS) approved BMP training program and have and carry in their possession at all times a copy of the certificate of completion of such program when applying fertilizer within the City, (ii) comply with Rule Chapter 1-15 of the Environmental Protection Commission of Hillsborough County (EPCHC), and (iii) after December 31, 2013, have and carry in their possession at all times when applying fertilizer within the City evidence of certification by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services as a Commercial Fertilizer Applicator per Rule 5E-14.117(18), F.A.C. The certificates required herein shall be provided to the City of Temple Terrace representative such as a Code Enforcement Officer or Public Works Department Stormwater Division staff upon request. 
(b)  A vehicle decal issued by the EPCHC Executive Director or other authorized organization indicating that the company is in compliance with the training and certification requirements of Chapter 1-15 of the EPCHC shall be affixed and maintained on the exterior of all vehicles used by any company in connection with landscape maintenance activities and/or the application of fertilizer within the City. 
(c)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants (including but not limited to residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties, and multi-family and condominium properties) must ensure that at least one employee has a "Florida Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" training certificate or a certificate from a substantially equivalent training program prior to the business owner obtaining a Local Business Tax Certificate. Owners of any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants shall provide proof of completion of such a program to the City. 
(11)  Recommendations and additional information. 
(a)  A voluntary six (6) foot low-maintenance, "no-mow" zone is strongly recommended from those areas described as fertilizer-free zones in sub-section (7) to reduce the potential for N/P-fertilizer residue entering adjacent water bodies and wetlands. A swale/berm system is recommended for installation at the landward edge of this low maintenance zone to capture and filter runoff. No vegetative material shall be deposited or left remaining in this zone or in the water. Care should be taken to prevent the overspray of aquatic weed products in this zone. 
(b)  It is recommended that the application of fertilizer for properties using reclaimed water service be reduced in accordance with the nutrient level contained in the reclaimed water. This information is available through the County and municipal water departments. 
(c)  The City strongly recommends the establishment of training programs using English and Spanish-speaking certified BMP trainers. 
(d)  The City recommends that private homeowners become familiar with and utilize the recommendations of the current IFAS Florida Yards and Neighborhoods Handbook when applying fertilizer. 
(e)  It is recommended that granular fertilizers containing nitrogen applied to turf and/or landscape plants contain the maximum available percent of slow release nitrogen possible per guaranteed analysis label. 
(f)  Collection and proper disposal of pet waste is encouraged, consistent with City Code Section 6-37. 
(g)  This section is not applicable to farm manure products and dolomite. 
(h)  The City will conduct an educational campaign regarding this section. 
(i)  Funds generated by penalties imposed for violation of the provisions of this section shall be used by the City for the administration and enforcement of this section, and to further water conservation and nonpoint pollution prevention activities. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 5, 11-19-2013) 
Secs. 12-629-12-657. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 12-658. - Title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Environmentally Sensitive Lands Protection Division." 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.1) 
Sec. 12-659. - Definitions. 
    Where appropriate to the context, words and terms defined in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan shall have the same definitions herein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adverse impact. 
(1)  The term "adverse impact" means any impact which would be counter to the purpose and intent, or to the specific provisions, of this division. For the purposes of this division, the following are examples of adverse impact: 
a.  Any significant reduction in the quality of surface water reaching environmentally sensitive land, including increases in suspended sediments, pesticide residues, or other pollutants which would affect the ability of the environmentally sensitive area to continue to function in its natural state; 
b.  Any significant increase or reduction in the quantity of surface water reaching environmentally sensitive land, such that the increase or reduction would affect the ability of native plant and/or animal species to continue to thrive; or 
c.  Introduction of incompatible land uses in close proximity to environmentally sensitive land, such that the activities associated with the adjoining land uses would threaten the natural operation of the environmentally sensitive land (an example being the presence of domesticated pets which, if allowed to enter habitat area, might threaten native species therein) or such that normal activities necessary in the management of the environmentally sensitive land would be considered a nuisance to the adjoining land uses. 
(2)  The nature and extent of what constitutes an "adverse impact" is a function of the nature and extent of the environmentally sensitive area in question. Generally, all development activities located within one thousand (1,000) feet of an environmentally sensitive area shall be reviewed to determine if they create an adverse impact. 
    Environmentally sensitive lands means lands located within the city that are characterized by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Located within the 100-year floodplain of a stream, river, lake, or depression and including the boundary or shoreline area associated with such floodplain. For the purposes of this section, the 100-year floodplain area shall be as shown on the flood insurance rate map issued under the National Flood Insurance Program administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and boundary or shoreline areas shall be those areas located within twenty-five (25) feet of the 100-year floodplain. 
(2)  Located within a wetland (connected or isolated) and including wetland fringe areas that are essential for maintaining the hydro-period of the wetland. For the purposes of this section, wetlands shall be as established by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Hillsborough County Environmental Protection Commission, whichever established area is more extensive, and fringe areas shall be all areas within twenty-five (25) feet of designated wetlands, unless a specific fringe area is established by either the department of environmental protection or the Hillsborough County Environmental Protection Commission. 
(3)  Located within a wetland or upland habitat for a species listed as either "threatened" or "endangered" by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. For the purposes of this section, the location of habitat areas shall be as established by the fish and wildlife conservation commission based on area-wide studies or studies of individual sites. 
(4)  Located within a known or suspected archaeological site that is eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. For the purposes of this section, a site will be considered eligible if it is listed on the National Register or if it is included on the Master Archaeological Site File maintained by the Bureau of Historic Preservation, Florida Secretary of State. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.5) 
Sec. 12-660. - Authority. 
    This division is adopted pursuant to F.S. chs. 163 and 166 and the adopted comprehensive plan of the city, with specific reference to the conservation element of said plan. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.2) 
Sec. 12-661. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect areas designated in the adopted comprehensive plan of the city as environmentally sensitive through the establishment of land use and development regulations and standards consistent with the need to provide for appropriate balance and growth in the maintenance and development of the community. Concurrently, this division shall protect significant wildlife habitat and prevent net loss of areas essential for the well being and survival of native and endangered wildlife species, particularly in the Hillsborough River corridor. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.3) 
Sec. 12-662. - Intent. 
    It is intended that this division be considered to present minimum standards and be interpreted strictly to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It is further intended, however, that this division shall not be applied so strictly as to deny the reasonable and beneficial use of land by property owners within the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.4) 
Sec. 12-663. - General applicability and exceptions. 
(a)  Effective upon the date set forth herein, the city shall not approve any application for development on any environmentally sensitive land, or on any land elsewhere when such development will create an adverse impact on environmentally sensitive land, except as provided in this division as follows: 
(1)  No final plat under article VIII, division 2 of this LDC and no final site plan under section 12-377 shall be approved except as provided in section 12-664; and 
(2)  No building permit for a single-family residential structure or major addition or change thereto shall be approved except as provided in section 12-666. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any activity by the city or other unit of government, undertaken by that unit or on its behalf and under its direction, which activity is undertaken to address an immediate threat to the public health and safety or to protect and maintain operation of public facilities and services in the face of an immediate threat to the continued proper operation of such facilities. Where the responsible administrative official of the relevant unit of government determines that emergency action is necessary and such emergency action is taken, the director shall subsequently review the effects of such action on areas and features protected by this division and shall recommend to the city council any further corrective action or mitigation appropriate to meet the purpose and intent of the division. The responsible governmental agency shall then undertake such further corrective action or mitigation as may be directed by the city council. 
(c)  Where nonconforming development activity is proceeding under authority of a permit issued prior to the effective date of this division, such activity may be continued subject to the terms of all applicable regulations. No such nonconforming development activity shall continue more than two (2) years beyond the date of the permit unless it is made to conform to the requirements of this division. Where individual phases of a multi-phased project are covered by a single final site plan issued prior to the effective date, the individual phases may be continued for no more than four (4) years beyond the date of final site plan approval. Where a development project is not completed in the two (2) or four (4) year completion period set forth above, the site plan shall be reviewed by the city council and changes shall be required where necessary and practicable to make the approved plan conform to the standards in this section. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.6) 
Sec. 12-664. - Procedure for approval of plats and site plan. 
(a)  Where the director determines that this division applies to land under consideration for site plan or plat approval, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  An application, together with plans, maps and other documents necessary to describe the scope and extent of the land development activity within an environmentally sensitive area or where the land development activity will create an adverse impact on an environmentally sensitive area, shall be made to the director. The number of copies of plans and other documents and the required content of submitted materials shall be as prescribed by the director. For convenience, the application may be incorporated in and be coincident with an application for site plan or plat approval. 
(2)  The director shall review the application for completeness. 
a.  The director shall advise the applicant, in writing, within ten (10) working days only if the application is not complete and ready for processing. 
b.  Determination that the application is complete shall not prevent the director from requesting additional information, nor shall it prevent the applicant from voluntarily submitting additional information at a later stage. 
(3)  The director shall refer copies of the application and supporting documentation to the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission, the Southwest Florida Water Management District, the Environmental Protection Commission of Hillsborough County and such other agencies as may from time to time request to be provided with copies of applications for special permits. The director shall request comments and recommendations, or an indication that there will be no comments, within twenty (20) working days. Failure to respond within the twenty-day period shall be construed as being an indication of no comment. 
(4)  The director shall make a site inspection to determine the boundaries of any environmentally sensitive lands affected, and to determine the effects of the proposed activity on such lands. The director may request the assistance of appropriate agencies in making this inspection, and may request that all or part of the inspection be made by appropriate officials on the director's behalf. The applicant shall be notified of the time and meeting place, at least five (5) working days prior to the inspection. 
(5)  The development review committee shall review the application and supporting materials along with the results of field investigations and reports submitted and shall make its recommendations, including recommendations for appropriate conditions, if any, to be attached to the approval. 
(6)  The director shall prepare a report to the city council containing the reports and recommendations of the various agencies and the report of the development review committee. The report shall be made available to the applicant, interested agencies (including, at a minimum, all agencies who participated in the review of the application), and the general public prior to the city council consideration of the application. 
(b)  Prior to taking action on the application for final site plan or plat approval, the city council shall consider the report and recommendation of the director and all other relevant materials received. 
(c)  In taking action on an application for final site plan or plat approval, the city council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The city council shall consider the standards set forth herein and the necessity for establishing appropriate conditions to ensure the standards are met. Where the city council determines that one or more restrictions would have the effect of depriving the property owner of the reasonable, beneficial use of the land, the city council may consider alternative restrictions, providing that any variation from the standards herein constitute the minimum variation necessary to prevent confiscation of the property. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.7) 
Sec. 12-665. - Standards for and protection of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(a)  Habitat protection. Habitats for threatened or endangered species shall be protected to ensure the viability of the habitat to support the continued functioning of the species. This shall be done by preserving the habitat from change, including reduction in size, destruction of major features or vegetation within the habitat, changes in surface water flow patterns, and/or introduction of pollutants. In addition, land development and land uses in areas near the habitat shall be restricted as needed to prevent adverse impacts. Where development in or near an environmentally sensitive area will substantially reduce the viability of the habitat area, the city council may require mitigation. Mitigation may include such actions as restoration of contiguous or disturbed areas, either on-site or off-site, to a condition that provides satisfactory habitat or relocation of the species to appropriate noncontiguous areas dedicated for permanent use as habitat areas. Mitigation shall be subject to approval by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. The following specific standards shall be applied to protect habitat areas: 
(1)  Where specific management and recovery strategies for key listed species have been developed by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission and/or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, any activity within an environmentally sensitive area shall conform, to the maximum extent feasible, to the strategy. 
(2)  Exotic nuisance vegetation within environmentally sensitive areas and within nearby areas which may affect environmentally sensitive areas shall be removed and replaced with native plant species. Appropriate native vegetation shall be preserved and/or provided along river banks. 
(3)  Significant trees and tree species shall be preserved and protected as provided in division 8 of this article. 
(4)  Examples of upland native plant communities, both within and near environmentally sensitive areas, shall be preserved. 
(5)  Where new planting or landscaping areas are provided in or near environmentally sensitive areas, xeriscape landscaping shall be used to the maximum extent feasible. 
(b)  Water quality and flow. There shall be no reduction in water quality nor shall there be substantial changes in surface water flow characteristics for surface water entering any environmentally sensitive area. Where off-site development drains into such an area, the city council may require the provision of retention and detention basins, sedimentation ponds, and other improvements to ensure that the quality of water remains high and that the natural conditions of environmentally sensitive areas are preserved. The following specific standards shall be applied for protection of environmentally sensitive areas: 
(1)  Surface water management systems shall be designed so as to minimize destruction of natural vegetation. Natural landform, such as swales and depressions, shall be incorporated into drainage systems as much as possible and consistent with water quality strategies. Wherever possible, basins and swales shall consist of vegetated surfaces rather than land surfaced areas. 
(2)  Paved areas, including roadways, drives and parking areas, which discharge surface water to environmentally sensitive lands shall be designed so as to minimize water quality deterioration. 
(3)  Where new drainage outfalls are constructed to the Hillsborough River, or into environmentally sensitive areas, detention basins shall be used to prevent surface water flowing directly into the river or environmentally sensitive areas. 
(4)  New vertical seawalls shall not be permitted along the Hillsborough River. Where practical, existing seawalls will not be repaired. Permitted alternatives shall include riprap and/or native wetlands vegetation on appropriate slopes. 
(5)  Erosion and sedimentation control shall be provided during construction to protect environmentally sensitive areas from the effects of construction or land disturbance activity. Details or erosion and sedimentation control methods shall be reviewed and approved by the director prior to the commencement of construction. Where land is disturbed, but no work is expected to take place within sixty (60) days, or where no work has been undertaken within sixty (60) days, the director may require that action be taken to reduce erosion of the disturbed lands. Such action may include, but is not necessarily limited to, temporary sedimentation barriers or sedimentation ponds, seeding to produce an interim cover crop, mulching and/or grading of stockpiled materials to reduce erosion. The director may require that a bond be posted to ensure completion and satisfactory operation of any interim erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(6)  Wetlands and other natural water bodies shall not be used for sedimentation during development or post-development except where approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and the Environmental Protection Commission of Hillsborough County. 
(c)  Archaeological sites. Archaeological sites that are known or suspected shall be protected. This shall be done by avoiding excavation and disturbance activities in areas known to have sites, and by evaluating suspected areas before disturbance. Where disturbance is proposed for known or suspected archaeological sites, such sites shall be evaluated in terms of state or federal criteria to determine eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. Such evaluation shall be completed before any development or disturbance activity commences. Eligible sites shall be either preserved or excavated and documented prior to destruction. 
(d)  Site design. Development proposed for environmentally sensitive lands or for nearby area lands shall be designed to maximize the ability of the environmentally sensitive area to function in an undisturbed natural condition. The following specific standards shall be applied for the protection of environmentally sensitive areas: 
(1)  Uses and activities within environmentally sensitive areas shall be limited to those uses and activities which, by their nature, must be located within these areas. Uses and activities on other lands that might create an adverse impact on environmentally sensitive areas shall be designed to reduce or eliminate such impacts. The city council may require the rearrangement of uses or activities on a site plan or the rearrangement of lots on a plat in order to minimize the impact of such uses on environmentally sensitive lands. 
(2)  Use of planned unit development design and permitting procedures pursuant to division 10 of this LDC is encouraged for development located within or near environmentally sensitive areas. The city council may require use of this technique if it finds such use necessary to ensure adequate protection of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(3)  All parking lots and other impervious surface areas, loading docks, and service areas located on all property except single-family residential, and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Hillsborough River, shall be screened from the river by planting of native vegetation. 
(e)  Setbacks and conservation easements. 
(1)  The following conservation easements and setbacks shall be required for any development of property that occurs adjacent to the environmentally sensitive areas along the Hillsborough River. For purposes of this division, the required easements and setbacks shall be measured from the normal high water level of the river. 
a.  Conservation easements shall be granted as provided in section 12-667 and shall encompass all areas between the river and the landward boundary of established jurisdictional wetlands, or one hundred fifty (150) feet landward from the river, whichever is greater; 
b.  No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from the landward boundary of the established jurisdictional wetlands, or two hundred (200) feet from the river, whichever is greater; 
c.  No impervious surface shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from the landward boundary of established jurisdictional wetlands, or one hundred fifty (150) feet from the river, whichever is greater; 
d.  Opaque, nonliving buffering, located in rear or side yards of single-family residential property is prohibited within fifty (50) feet of the Hillsborough River; 
e.  Floodplain areas. No activity may be permitted in violation of any applicable local, state, or federal regulation, specifically including, but not limited to, applicable floodplain management regulations. All approvals and conditions thereof shall be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The conservation easement and setback requirements in subsection (e)(1)a-c of this section shall not apply to single-family residential development within a single-family residential zoning district on parcels upon which a residence existed prior to February 1, 1990, provided that: 
a.  No additional riverfront lots are created; 
b.  Any building, impervious surface, and screening are not constructed closer to the river than buildings, impervious surfaces and screening on adjacent parcels and in no event closer than fifty (50) feet from the landward boundary of established jurisdictional wetlands; and 
c.  Any application for development approval for such single-family development shall contain a certification that property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the property have been notified of the development application and proposed river setbacks. (Ord. No. 1000, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 1009, 12-21-1999) 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.8; Ord. No. 1000, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 1009, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 12-666. - Regulations governing single-family structures. 
(a)  This section applies to the review by the director of any application for a building permit for the construction of or any change to a single-family residence or a structure accessory thereto which involves land within an area designated as environmentally sensitive. This section shall not apply to any change which is wholly within a structure or only affects the facade of the structure, or where the director finds that the change does not create additional impacts on environmentally sensitive areas. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to parcels of land platted before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, provided that the building permit is issued within four (4) years after the date of designation of any wetlands boundary line established by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or the Environmental Protection Commission of Hillsborough County, and shown on the recorded plat. Any permit exempted by this section shall otherwise be in compliance with the general conditions of this section and the specific conditions placed on the plat at time of approval. 
(c)  Prior to issuance of any permit by the director, the applicant shall obtain a statement from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or the Environmental Protection Commission of Hillsborough County identifying any wetlands boundary lines affecting the property in question. Such designation shall be considered valid for a period of not more than two (2) years from the date issued. 
(d)  No disturbance of land within any wetland area shall be permitted in connection with any activity under a building permit issued under this division. Where this restriction results in a practical hardship, depriving the property owner of the reasonable use of the land, a variance may be obtained from the board of adjustment pursuant to section 12-72 and provided that any variation from the standards herein constitutes the minimum variation necessary to prevent confiscation of the property. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.9) 
Sec. 12-667. - Conservation easements. 
(a)  Conservation easements shall be established on all environmentally sensitive lands located within jurisdictional wetlands or where practicable within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Hillsborough River, whichever is greater, and shall be dedicated to the city when development or redevelopment occurs. 
(b)  Conservation easements shall be created pursuant to F.S. § 704.06 and shall be made for the appropriate purposes, which may include, but are not necessarily limited to the following: 
(1)  To prevent or limit the construction or placing of buildings, roads, signs, billboards, advertising or other structures on or above the subject property; 
(2)  To prohibit the dumping or placing of soil or other substances or materials, trash, waste, or unsightly or otherwise offensive materials on or under the subject property; 
(3)  To prohibit the removal, damaging or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation on the subject property, except as is specifically provided for the removal of exotic nuisance vegetation; 
(4)  To prohibit the excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock and other materials and substances from the subject property; 
(5)  To prohibit any uses on the property except those approved by the city council as not adversely affecting, jeopardizing, impairing, or otherwise undermining the aesthetic, scientific, educational, and/or ecological value of the property and that will permit land and water areas to remain predominantly in their natural condition; 
(6)  To prohibit any activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion and sedimentation control, or the preservation of fish and wildlife habitat; 
(7)  To establish wildlife preserve areas on the property; and 
(8)  To prohibit any other acts or uses detrimental to the subject property. 
(c)  The rights and limitations established by the easement shall be specified in the agreement, which must be approved by the city council at the same time as final approval of the site plan or plat for the development, or may be approved at a later date pursuant to a development agreement under F.S. ch. 163. 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.10) 
Sec. 12-668. - Environmental impact reports. 
(a)  In cases where a development under review will produce impacts of unusual or unique character or extent, or where the resources affected are of unusual or unique character and importance, the director may recommend and/or the city council may require the preparation of an environmental impact report by the applicant for the development approval. The city council may offer to undertake some or all of the preparation of the environmental impact report. 
(b)  Where the city council has required preparation and submission of a report, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The director shall notify the applicant and the landowner of record that no further action will be taken until an environmental impact report has been prepared and submitted. 
(2)  The applicant shall prepare and submit the report as directed by the city council within six (6) months of the notification by the director. Failure to submit the report or to request an extension of time shall be deemed to be withdrawal of the application. 
(3)  When the report is received by the director, it shall be processed in the same manner as for site plan or plat approvals as provided in section 12-663. 
(c)  The environmental impact report shall include the following information: 
(1)  A description of the environmental significance of site based on criteria and policies contained in the adopted comprehensive plan, this section, and other relevant local, state or federal environmental management regulations; 
(2)  A description of the impacts of the proposed project on the quality and functional viability of environmentally sensitive lands; 
(3)  Identification of conservation measures to minimize or alleviate adverse environmental impacts of the proposed development, including measures to preserve and ensure the long-term viability of environmentally sensitive lands; 
(4)  Where conservation measures are not practicable, identification of mitigation measures; and 
(5)  Identification of the need for public acquisition of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(d)  Prior to taking any action on approval of a site plan or plat for land subject to an environmental impact report, the city council shall hold a public hearing, following public notice as required by F.S. § 166.041(3)(c). The city council shall consider the environmental impact report and the recommendations of the director and other governmental agencies, and may require as a further condition of approval the acceptance by the applicant of a management plan based on the conservation, mitigation, and acquisition findings of the report and the recommendations of others. It is the intent of this section that such management plans shall be embodied in multiparty agreements designed to make the city, the property owner and relevant local, state and federal agencies jointly responsible for the protection, preservation and enhancement of important environmental resources. 
(e)  If the city council determines that acquisition of all or part of the land, or some interest in the land, is necessary to avoid adverse environmental impact, it may defer action on all applications for approval of development on the land for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of the public hearing on the environmental impact report. This deferral shall be for the purpose of arranging for the acquisition of the land or some interest therein. If no such arrangement has been made at the expiration of the twelve-month period, the applicant shall be entitled to all permits subject to meeting all applicable requirements. For the purposes of this division, arrangements for the acquisitions of the land or some interest therein shall include entering into a valid contract for the acquisition and/or the initiation of condemnation procedures. The twelve-month period may be extended by mutual agreement of the city and the property owner. (Ord. No. 733, 5-1-1990) 
(Code 2001, § 25.720.11; Ord. No. 733, 5-1-1990) 
Secs. 12-669-12-694. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions for stormwater management required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(d). 

Sec. 12-695. - Purpose. 
    The city council has determined that the management of stormwater runoff and the preservation of the water resources of the city are critical to the public health, safety and welfare. Uncontrolled stormwater runoff causes erosion, sedimentation and flooding and prevents recharge of the aquifer upon which the public depends for potable, fresh water. The city council finds it necessary to impose reasonable restrictions to control stormwater runoff and conserve the water resources of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.1) 
Sec. 12-696. - Objectives. 
    The requirements hereafter will allow landowners reasonable use of their property while promoting the following objectives: 
(1)  Protect the quantity and quality of groundwaters and surface waters; 
(2)  Prevent the lowering of existing water table elevations to the detriment of these other stated objectives; 
(3)  Perpetuate recharge into the groundwater system; 
(4)  Minimize the production of nuisance and disease vectoring mosquitoes; 
(5)  Discourage reliance on drainage systems which depend on the use of electrical energy or petroleum fuels to move water, remove pollutants or maintain the systems; 
(6)  Reduce wind or water caused erosion loss of valuable top soils and subsequent sedimentation of surface water bodies and damage to adjacent properties; 
(7)  Alleviate downstream flood hazards; 
(8)  Prevent significant loss of life and property due to runoff from any foreseeable rainfall event; 
(9)  Reduce the capital expenditures associated with floodproofing and the installation and maintenance of storm drainage systems; 
(10)  Minimize the adverse impact of development on the water resources of the city; and 
(11)  Maximize protection of Class I waters. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.2) 
Sec. 12-697. - Intent. 
    This division is intended to allow landowners reasonable use of their property, provided stormwater runoff peak rates and volumes and the quality of stormwater retained after development shall approximate existing pre-development conditions, and precautions will be taken to prevent erosion, sedimentation and flooding. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.3) 
Sec. 12-698. - Prohibitions. 
    No person may develop or make any change in the use of land or construct a structure or change the size of a structure, except as exempted in section 12-699, without first meeting the requirements of this division. For the purposes of this division, the following development may potentially alter or disrupt the existing stormwater runoff patterns and, as such, will, unless exempt pursuant to section 12-699, require a permit prior to the commencement of construction: 
(1)  Clearing and/or draining of land as an adjunct to construction; 
(2)  Clearing and/or draining of nonagricultural land for agricultural purposes; 
(3)  Converting agricultural lands to nonagricultural uses; 
(4)  Subdividing land; 
(5)  Replatting recorded subdivisions and the development of recorded and unrecorded subdivisions; 
(6)  Changing the use of land and/or the construction of a structure, or a change in the size of one or more structures; 
(7)  Altering the shoreline or bank of any surface water body; and 
(8)  The permanent (long period) lowering of the water table. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.4) 
Sec. 12-699. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following activities shall be exempt from this division: 
(1)  Single-family and duplex residences and accessory structures; 
(2)  Bona fide agricultural pursuits except where an artificial drainage system will be used to increase the flow of surface water from the applicant's land; 
(3)  Maintenance work performed on existing drainage ditches for the purpose of public health and welfare; 
(4)  Maintenance work on utility or transportation systems, provided such maintenance work does not alter the purpose and intent of the drainage system as constructed; and 
(5)  Any maintenance, alterations, renewal, use or improvement to an existing structure not changing or affecting rate or volume of stormwater runoff. 
(b)  Developments which are subject to subdivision and/or site plan approval pursuant to section 12-377, shall not be required to submit a separate permit application for review pursuant to this section. Compliance herewith shall be included as a part of the review process, pursuant to said section 12-377. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, there shall be no harmful erosion by water of any soil or fill onto any adjacent public or private property. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.5) 
Sec. 12-700. - Performance standards. 
    The performance standards to be followed in the design of the project include: 
(1)  Stormwater runoff shall be subjected to best management practice prior to discharge into natural or artificial drainage systems. Best management practice shall mean a practice or combination of practices determined by the development review committee to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by the project to a level compatible with state water quality standards found in F.A.C. ch. 62-25. 
(2)  a.  No site alteration shall cause siltation of wetlands, pollution of downstream wetlands or reduce the natural retention or filtering capabilities of wetlands. 
b.  No site alteration shall allow water to become a health hazard or contribute to the breeding of mosquitoes. 
c.  All site alteration activities shall provide for such water retention and settling structures and flow attenuation devices as may be necessary to ensure that the foregoing standards and requirements are met. 
(3)  Design of water retention or detention structures and flow attenuation devices shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer pursuant to the standards hereof. Detention structures shall be designed to release runoff to the downstream drainage system over a period of time so as not to exceed the capacity of the existing downstream system. In order to maintain good water quality in stormwater management detention ponds and maximize the provision of fish and wildlife habitat, stormwater management systems with permanently wet detention ponds should be designed, operated and maintained so as to resemble a natural pond to the greatest extent practicable. A natural pond design should include: a littoral zone comprised of native emergent and submersed aquatic macrophytic vegetation; a deep open water limnetic zone free of rooted emergent and submersed vegetation; and where feasible, an upland buffer of native trees, shrubs and under story vegetation. 
(4)  A positive drainage system shall be provided which will not adversely impact downstream owners or adjacent lands. 
(5)  Where possible, natural vegetation shall be used as component of the drainage system. The water table should not be manipulated so as to endanger natural vegetation beneficial to water quality unless natural vegetation can be replanted and survive with a lowered water table condition. 
(6)  Runoff from higher adjacent lands shall be considered and provisions for conveyance of such runoff shall be included in the drainage plan. 
(7)  Runoff shall be treated to remove oil and floatable solids before discharge from the site in a manner approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  Erosion by wind or water shall be prevented by the developer throughout the construction process. 
(9)  Direct discharge to Class I waters is prohibited. A workable filter system must be provided prior to any discharge to Class I waters. 
(10)  For the purpose of this division, it is presumed that the lowering of the water table for the purpose of constructing detention/retention basins and for the purpose of permanently protecting road construction does not conflict with the stated objectives of this division if all of the following are met: 
a.  The development site is not in an area known to the city based on data collected and interpreted by the U.S. Geological Survey, Southwest Florida Water Management District, Department of Environmental Protection and the city, and other professional investigators, as important to recharge or to prevention of discharge of the Floridan Aquifer. 
b.  The proposed lowering of the water table shall be over no more than fifteen (15) percent of the site to a depth of five (5) feet below the surface of the existing undisturbed ground, or an equivalent volume, said area to be measured at the overflow elevation of the retention areas(s). 
c.  If ditches, underdrains or similar devices are used to lower the water table, the lateral volumetric effect will be calculated, and the volume will be deducted from that allowed for retention areas. 
d.  The high water table may be lowered up to two (2) feet below the undisturbed ground in the vicinity of roads for the purpose of protecting the sub-base and base of the roadway and/or for the purpose of preventing mosquito breeding in the roadside swales. 
e.  The lowering of the water table has no adverse effect on wetlands as defined herein. 
f.  The lowering of the water table does not increase flows to the detriment of neighboring lands. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.6) 
Sec. 12-701. - Approvals. 
    All proposed drainage systems are subject to review and approval by other regulatory agencies, including the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD) and the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT). Obtaining these approvals shall be the responsibility of the design engineer. 
(Code 2001, § 25.725.7; Ord. No. 723, 4-17-1990) 
Secs. 12-702-12-730. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WELLFIELD PROTECTION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions for protection of potable water wellfields required, F.S. § 163.3202(2)(c). 

Sec. 12-731. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous substance means any hazardous or toxic substance (including degradation and interaction products) which, because of quality, concentration, or physical, chemical (including ignitability, corrosivity, reactiveness, and toxicity), and/or infectious characteristics, radioactivity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, bioaccumulative effect, persistence (non-degradability) in nature, or any other characteristic relevant to a particular material that may cause significant harm to human health or the environment (including surface water and groundwater, plants, or animals). 
    Regulated hazardous substance or regulated substance means any hazardous substance found in quantities greater than the following: 
(1)  The aggregate sum of all quantities of any one hazardous substance on a single parcel (if stored out of doors) or in a single building (if stored indoors) exceeds one hundred ten (110) gallons if the substance is a liquid, or one thousand one hundred (1,100) pounds if the substance is a solid; or 
(2)  When no single substance exceeds the above-referenced limits but the aggregate of all hazardous substances present on a single parcel or in a single building exceeds one hundred ten (110) gallons if the substance is a liquid, or one thousand one hundred (1,100) pounds if the substance is a solid. 
    Sinkhole means an area of subsidence caused by subsurface geological conditions and which results in increased opportunity for migration of surface water and groundwater from the surficial aquifer to lower aquifers, and as shown on a map entitled "Wellfield Protection Zone Map" adopted pursuant to section 12-735. 
    Wellfield means an area containing one or more wells used, whether on a continuous, intermittent, or occasional basis, for public water supply, and including any area designated for future development of such wells by the city council. 
    Wellfield protection zone means an area surrounding a wellfield, based on measurement of a prescribed distance from the individual well locations within the wellfield, and as shown on a map entitled Wellfield Protection Zone Map adopted pursuant to section 12-735. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.2) 
Sec. 12-732. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to protect wellfields through the establishment of land use and development regulations and standards consistent with the need to provide for appropriate balance and growth in the maintenance and development of the community. 
(b)  It is intended that this section be considered to present minimum standards and be interpreted strictly to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It is further intended, however, that this section shall not be applied so strictly as to deny the reasonable and beneficial use of land by property owners within the community. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.1) 
Sec. 12-733. - Administration and appeals. 
(a)  The principal authority for the administration of this division shall be delegated to the community development department. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(b)  The director shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Review all permit applications for uses and activities within the city to determine if special measures will be required to comply with the provisions of this section. In reviewing land uses and activities and/or specific materials involved in such activities, the director shall utilize the assistance of the waste management program operated by the Hillsborough County Environmental Protection Commission; 
(2)  Review and process applications for operating permits, including compilation of comments and recommendations made by other agencies or by the DRC, and issue or deny such permit applications; 
(3)  Where a decision on the issuance or denial of a permit, or on the nature of permit conditions is appealed, make recommendations to the city council on the consistency of such applications with the provisions of this division and on any conditions or modifications which may be required to ensure compliance with this division; 
(4)  Review and inspect uses and land development activities, including uses of activities which are abandoned, to ensure compliance with the conditions of operating permits and/or the provisions of this division; 
(5)  Maintain the wellfield protection zone map, make interpretations of map boundaries, and process proposed changes to the map; 
(6)  Conduct surveys and other research necessary to identify the location of abandoned wells and cable tooled wells and carry out procedures necessary to ensure compliance with the plugging requirements of this division; and 
(7)  Coordinate with appropriate agencies in meeting the requirements of this division. 
(c)  In performing official duties, the director may request the assistance of the city-county planning commission, the county health department, the county environmental protection commission, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and the Southwest Florida Water Management District. The director may also request the assistance of other city agencies. All city agencies shall be responsible for providing assistance as needed. 
(d)  Any decision of the director may be appealed to the board of adjustment as provided in article III of this LDC. Matters subject to appeal include, but are not necessarily limited to: interpretations of the meaning or provisions of this LDC and interpretations of boundaries shown on the wellfield protection zone map. Decisions in matters which are subject to the jurisdiction of the city council may not be appealed to the board of adjustment. (Ord. No. 738, 5-15-1990) 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.9; Ord. No. 738, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-734. - Applicability and exceptions. 
(a)  Effective upon the date set forth herein, no person shall construct, abandon, or plug any well or undertake any development or operate a use or activity regulated by this division within a wellfield protection zone in the city except as provided herein. 
(b)  This division shall not be construed to prohibit any activity by the city or other unit of government, undertaken by that unit or on its behalf and under its direction, which activity is undertaken to address an immediate threat to the public health and safety or to protect and maintain operation of public services and facilities in the face of an immediate threat to the continued operation of such facilities. Where the responsible administrative official of the relevant unit of government determines that emergency action is necessary and such emergency action is taken, that official shall, subsequent to taking such action, apply for an operating permit pursuant to the provisions of section 12-739, and shall undertake such further action or mitigation as may be directed. 
(c)  Where a public agency proposes to undertake uses or activities which would otherwise be prohibited by this division and where no emergency action is involved, but where the general health, safety and welfare of the public will be benefited by the action taken, and where no reasonable alternative is available, the city council may grant a limited waiver of the provisions of this division, subject to the issuance of an operating permit as provided in section 12-739. 
(d)  Where a property owner can show that the intent and purpose of this section can be accomplished and the standards of this division can be accomplished through the application of technology, but which would otherwise be in conflict with the specific regulations of this division, the director may permit use of such alternative technology in lieu of the restrictions herein, subject to the issuance of an operating permit as provided in section 12-739. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.3) 
Sec. 12-735. - Wellfield protection zone map. 
(a)  The wellfield protection zone map is hereby adopted and made a part of this division. The purpose of the map shall be to depict all areas affected by the provisions of section 12-736. It is the intent of this division that the initial wellfield protection zone map shall identify the following areas for application of this division: 
(1)  All land located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the active wells located within the Whiteway wellfield; 
(2)  All lands located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the active wells located within the Old City Hall wellfield; and 
(3)  All land located within one thousand (1,000) feet of an active sinkhole. 
Where there appears to be a discrepancy between these criteria and the actual areas designated on the wellfield protection zone map, the areas designated on the map shall prevail. 
(b)  The official map shall be maintained by the community development department, and the department may make copies of all or portions of the map available for distribution to the public. For convenience of use, the map may be made a part of the zoning map of the city. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for the interpretation of the boundaries shown on the wellfield protection zone map. In interpreting these boundaries, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Properties located wholly within the wellfield protection zone shall be governed by the restrictions set out in section 12-736. 
(2)  Where a portion of a property is located within the wellfield protection zone, the restrictions of section 12-736 shall be applied only to that portion of the property. 
(3)  Where the boundary of the wellfield protection zone passes through a building or a portion of the property used as a single or unified use area, the entire building or use area shall be subject to the restrictions. 
(d)  The director shall review the boundaries shown on the wellfield protection zone map at least annually and shall report the need for changes in the map to the city council. In doing this, the director shall consult with the county health department, the county environmental protection commission, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the Southwest Florida Water Management District, and such other agencies as the director deems appropriate. In considering the need for changes to the map, consideration shall be given to: the addition of new wells or wellfields, the abandonment of wells or wellfields, changes in pumping volumes at individual wells, changes in the technical knowledge concerning aquifers and groundwater flow characteristics, and the identification of future wellfield sites by the city council. 
(e)  The wellfield protection zone map may be amended from time to time by the city council. The process for amending the map shall be as is set forth in F.S. § 166.041(3)(c). Prior to making any change in the map, the director shall refer copies of the proposed change to the county health department, the county environmental protection commission, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and the Southwest Florida Water Management District. The director shall request that any comments or recommendations, or an indication that there will be no comments or recommendations, be returned within twenty (20) working days. Failure of an agency to respond within the twenty-day period shall be construed as an indication that there are no comments. The director shall provide all comments and recommendations to the development review committee (DRC), who shall make any comments or recommendations of its own. The director shall then make a report to the city council and shall include all comments and recommendations, as well as the director's own recommendations. In taking action on a change in the wellfield protection zone map, the city council shall consider the report of the director and the comments and recommendations of the various agencies. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.4; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-736. - Regulations within wellfield protection zones. 
(a)  The following uses and activities shall be prohibited within wellfield protection zones: 
(1)  The use, handling, production, or storage of regulated hazardous substances, where such activity is not more specifically included under an exempt activity (see subsection (c) of this section) or under a permitted but regulated activity (see subsection (b) of this section). 
(2)  Wastewater effluent disposal, except for land application reuse of treated wastewater, as defined and as subject to the conditions set forth in F.A.C. ch. 62-610, pt. III. 
(3)  Waste disposal, including both liquid and solid wastes. 
(4)  Earth mining as a principal activity (i.e., not including grading of land for development or construction purposes). 
(b)  The following uses and activities shall be permitted within wellfield protection zones, subject to the approval of an operating permit as provided in section 12-739: 
(1)  Storage of regulated hazardous substances in their original, unopened containers for the purpose of storage and/or wholesale distribution, where the use and disposal of the substance does not take place within a wellfield protection zone. 
(2)  Storage and handling of a regulated hazardous substance in connection with the operation of an automobile service station or similar facility, provided that all bulk storage of motor fuel and lubricants shall be in double walled tanks, or tanks installed with other secondary containment and where adequate provisions are made for monitoring both inside and outside the secondary containment zones to detect any contamination. Monitoring shall mean installation of monitoring wells and collection and testing of samples pursuant to requirements of the Florida Department of Environment Protection. 
(c)  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the restrictions in subsections (a) and (b) of this section: 
(1)  Storage of regulated hazardous substances in their original, unopened containers for the purpose of retail sale, where the use and disposal of the substance is not intended to take place within a wellfield protection zone. 
(2)  Transportation of regulated hazardous substances through a wellfield protection zone between origin and destination points outside the zone, subject to all applicable laws and regulations governing the transportation of such substances. This includes transportation by motor vehicle, barge, or pipeline. 
(3)  The use of regulated hazardous substances in motor vehicles or motorized equipment as a motor fuel or lubricant, provided that the operation of a facility to fuel or lubricate a motor vehicle shall not be exempted. 
(4)  Storage and/or use of small quantities of regulated hazardous substances as cleaning agents, lawn or garden fertilizers or pesticides, or for other purposes where such use is a normal activity in connection with a household or business use, and where such activity is conducted in accordance with applicable regulations and manufacturer's guidelines. 
(5)  Approved wastewater reuse systems, such as for irrigation. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.5) 
Sec. 12-737. - Nonconforming uses and activities. 
(a)  Where a prohibited use or activity identified in section 12-736(a) exists within a wellfield protection zone on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, such use or activity shall be discontinued not later than April 1, 1993, and the abandoned site made to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. As an alternative, the owner and operator of the use or activity may apply for and obtain an operating permit pursuant to section 12-739, provided that such operating permit is issued not later than July 1, 1990. Where a prohibited use or activity is abandoned or ceases to operate for more than ninety (90) days, such use shall not be resumed and the abandoned site shall be made to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. No prohibited use or activity shall be expanded or enlarged. 
(b)  Where a regulated use, or activity identified in section 12-736(b) exists within a wellfield protection zone on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, such use or activity shall be discontinued not later than April 1, 1995, and the abandoned site made to comply with the provisions of section 12-738(c). As an alternative, the owner and operator of the use or activity may apply for and obtain an operating permit pursuant to section 12-739, provided that such operating permit is issued not later than October 1, 1990. 
(c)  Where any use or activity identified in section 12-736(a) or (b), whether or not such use or activity was in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, is discontinued or abandoned, the owner and operator shall be responsible for obtaining an operating permit to address the abandonment and closure of the use or activity. An operating permit issued to regulate the closure of an activity or a site shall include conditions necessary, at a minimum, to assure the following: 
(1)  Monitoring of the site to determine that there is no pollution generated by the site after closure, and that the monitoring program is designed and operated under the direction of a professional engineer who shall periodically certify the results of tests to the director; 
(2)  Provisions for cleanup of pollution and pollution sources if the site produces pollution after the closure; 
(3)  Completion of final site grading, final drainage, and establishment of permanent cover vegetation for those areas where new construction is not contemplated; 
(4)  Posting of adequate notices and recording of appropriate documentation in the land records to identify previous uses and location of possible buried hazardous materials; and 
(5)  Availability of funds to adequately support required post-closure activities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.6) 
Sec. 12-738. - Wells. 
(a)  All irrigation wells constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be properly constructed to ensure a tight seal at the point where the well passes from the surficial aquifer into the deep aquifer from which the city's potable water supply is drawn, and shall be grouted to ensure that surface contaminants do not travel down along the outside of the well casing. Construction specifications and inspection standards shall be as established by the city with technical assistance from the Southwest Florida Water Management District, the county health department, and/or other agencies with oversight responsibility for well constructing methods. 
(b)  The city shall conduct a survey to identify all wells located within the wellfield protection zone and to classify each such well as abandoned, in use but deteriorated or improperly constructed, or in use and not presenting a problem. 
(c)  When wells which have been improperly constructed and/or which have deteriorated in such a way as to allow expedited travel of contaminants into the deeper aquifer are identified, the owner of the property on which said well is located shall be notified by certified mail and instructed to abandon and plug the well. Failure to plug the well within sixty (60) days shall be a violation of this division. Prior to plugging such well, any required permits shall be obtained. 
(d)  Any well located within a wellfield protection zone and which is abandoned for a period of two (2) years shall be plugged. When such a well has been identified, the property owner shall be notified by certified mail and instructed to abandon and plug the well. Failure to plug the well within sixty (60) days shall be a violation of this division. Prior to plugging such well, any required permits shall be obtained. 
(e)  All well plugging activities shall be coordinated with the Southwest Florida Water Management District and the county health department, and shall be undertaken under their direction or under the direction of a professional engineer or professional geologist. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.7) 
Sec. 12-739. - Operating permits. 
(a)  Where this division requires the issuance of an operating permit to undertake or to continue a regulated activity or to abandon and close a regulated activity, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  An application, together with plans, maps, and other documents necessary to support the amendment shall be made to the director. The number of copies of plans and other supporting documents and the required content of submitted materials shall be as prescribed by the director. 
(2)  The director shall review the application for completeness and shall advise the applicant in writing within ten (10) working days as to whether or not the application is complete and ready for processing. Determination that the application is complete shall not prevent the director from requesting additional information, nor shall it prevent the applicant from voluntarily submitting additional information at a later stage. 
(3)  The director shall refer copies of the application and supporting documentation to the county health department, the Hillsborough County Environmental Protection Commission, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the Southwest Florida Water Management District and such other agencies as may from time to time request to be provided with copies of applications for operating permits. The director shall request comments and recommendations, or an indication that there will be no comments, within twenty (20) working days. Failure to respond within the twenty-day period shall be construed as being an indication of no comment. 
(4)  The director may make a formal site inspection to gather information relevant to the consideration of the issuance of a permit and/or appropriate permit conditions. If the director makes such a formal inspection, the applicant and all agencies which have received copies of the application for reference shall be advised at least five (5) working days prior to the time and meeting place. These provisions regarding a formal inspection are not intended to prohibit the director from making other inspections, either formal or informal, for data collection or enforcement purposes. 
(5)  The development review committee shall review the application and supporting materials along with the results of field investigations and comments and recommendations received from other agencies and shall make its recommendations regarding the issuance or denial of the application and appropriate conditions which may be attached to the issuance of an operating permit. 
(6)  It is the intent of this division that, where the use or activity under consideration for an operating permit is concurrently subject to consideration for a final site plan or final plat approval, consideration of the application for an operating permit shall be given concurrently with the consideration of the final site plan or final plat by the city council. In these cases, the city council shall, following review of the report by the development review committee and the recommendation of the director, issue or deny the application, and may attach such conditions as are appropriate to fulfill the purposes of this section and to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section. In cases where no application for final site plan or final plat approval is pending before the city council, the director shall review the report of the development review committee and shall issue or deny the application, and may attach such conditions as are appropriate to fulfill the purposes of this LDC and to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(7)  Whenever a decision on any application is made by the director, that decision may be appealed to the city council which shall review the reports and recommendations and take final action. 
(8)  Any operating permit which is approved shall contain a condition giving the date of expiration of the permit, which shall be not later than five (5) years after the date of issuance. 
(b)  The following standards, at a minimum, shall apply to uses and activities for which an operating permit is required: 
(1)  Interior storage locations shall be completely enclosed and designed to prevent any drainage of accidentally spilled materials through surface drainage or floor drains. A berm or curb shall be incorporated into the design of any storage area sufficient to contain the maximum volume of materials handled within the storage area. 
(2)  Exterior storage areas shall be enclosed and secured and shall be designed to prevent any drainage of accidentally spilled materials through surface drainage. A berm or curb shall be incorporated into the design of the storage area sufficient to contain the maximum volume of materials handled within the storage area. 
(3)  Areas where materials are handled or processed shall be designed to prevent any drainage of accidentally spilled materials through surface drainage or floor drains. A berm or curb shall be incorporated into the design of any materials handling area (indoors or out) sufficient to contain spilled materials. 
(4)  Exterior surface drainage areas located where spills might overflow shall be designed with sufficient retention capacity to retain the first one inch of rainfall or the maximum amount of materials handled, whichever is greater. 
An applicant for an operating permit shall provide a certification by a professional engineer that the design for any containment area is adequate to detain any spilled materials and prevent contamination of surface or groundwater. 
(Code 2001, § 25.730.8) 
Secs. 12-740-12-761. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - TREE REMOVAL AND TRIMMING 

Sec. 12-762. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    American National Standards Institute (ANSI) is a private, nonprofit organization that administers and coordinates the standardization and conformity assessment system. For the purposes of this division, ANSI references relate to the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations-Trees, Shrubs and Other Woody Plant Maintenance-Standard Practices (ANSI A300-2001, as amended), which is incorporated herein by reference. 
    Approved trees are those trees listed in Table 1 of section 12-772. 
    Canopy coverage means the combined total area on a parcel of land covered by tree canopy. The canopy coverage for a parcel of land is calculated by adding together the area of each grand tree's and each protected tree's canopy to the drip-line. 
    Cluster of trees means a stand of protected trees, three (3) or more, within a ten-foot radius where at least three (3) of the trees have an individual trunk diameter of fifteen (15) inches or greater at D.B.H. 
    Critical root zone is determined by measuring from the trunk in all directions, one foot for each inch of the diameter of the tree, measured at D.B.H. 
    D.B.H. means a standard for the measurement of the trunk diameter of a tree at breast height or fifty-four (54) inches. 
    Drip-line means the extent of the tree's outer branches. 
    Exempt tree means any tree listed in Table 3 of section 12-772 that may be removed without a permit. 
    Forested native plant communities means those plant communities, including, but not limited to, shrubs and ferns, which naturally occur in the city. 
    Grand tree means any tree listed in Table 1 of section 12-772 with a diameter of twenty-four (24) inches or greater at D.B.H. 
    Non-wooded land means a parcel of land with less than twenty (20) percent canopy coverage, exclusive of wetlands. If forested native plant communities are identified on site, the area encompassing the forested native plant communities may be considered as canopy coverage for the purpose of this definition. 
    Semi-wooded land means a parcel of land with less than thirty-five (35) percent, but with twenty (20) percent or more canopy coverage, exclusive of wetlands. If forested native plant communities are identified on site, the area encompassing the forested native plant communities may be considered as canopy coverage for the purposes of this definition. 
    Topping means the cutting back of tree branches to stubs or lateral branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role. Other names for topping include heading, tipping, hat-racking, lions tailing and rounding over. 
    Wooded land means a parcel of land, with thirty-five (35) percent or more canopy coverage, exclusive of wetlands. If forested native plant communities are identified on site, the area encompassing the forested native plant communities may be considered as canopy coverage for the purpose of this definition. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.2; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.2), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1399, § 4(Exh. D), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-763. - Penalties. 
    In the event a protected tree or grand tree is removed intentionally despite a prohibition to do so, inadvertently removed or must be removed due to damage and/or carelessness during construction, replacement of the tree will be made pursuant to the following: 
(1)  The "additional penalty" formula shall be based on cross-sectional square inches D.B.H. The cross-sectional area of the trunk shall be determined by applying the formula: 
C 2 /4p = additional penalty 
(where C = circumference and p = 3.14, or 22/7) 
after measuring circumference four (4) feet six (6) inches above grade. 
(2)  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the cross-sectional inches required pursuant to this penalty shall be located on the subject site. 
(3)  Additional penalties shall be applied to all tree losses incurred for a period up to one year of the date of completion of construction. 
(4)  When the protected tree or grand tree removed is a pine tree, only fifty (50) percent of the total calculated cross-sectional inches must be replaced. (Ord. No. 856, 12-21-1993) 
(5)  Any replacement trees that die within one year of being planted must be replaced within thirty (30) days of notice from the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.5; Ord. No. 856, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.5), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-764. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division shall be to regulate and control tree removal and tree trimming activities on all real property, public and private, within the city and to require a certain number of trees on all developed parcels. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.1; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.1), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-765. - Bi-annual review. 
    The city council shall review the provisions of this division and the requirements specified herein at least once every two (2) years to confirm that the provisions of this division are adequately meeting the city's goals of tree preservation without unduly prohibiting the beneficial use of land. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.10; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.10), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-766. - Appeals. 
    Any person adversely affected by a decision of the city manager in the enforcement or the interpretation of any of the terms or provisions of this division may appeal such decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof with the city clerk, and no public hearing shall be required. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.9; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.9), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-767. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. Regulation of tree removal shall extend to all real property, public and private, being developed or improved in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Intent. It is not the intent of this division to preclude the beneficial use of land when the terms of this division are inconsistent with the regulations or zoning standards of this LDC. 
(c)  Exemptions. Exemptions to the provisions of this division are: 
(1)  Commercial trees grown for sale are exempt from city regulations under this division. 
(2)  Bona fide commercial agricultural operations are exempt from city regulations under this division. 
(3)  Trees, not including grand trees, irreversibly damaged or destroyed by natural disaster, i.e., fire, wind, lightning, disease, etc., are exempt from city regulations under this division; however, a permit is required to remove any grand tree, whether damaged or not. 
(4)  Tree removal pursuant to an approved development of regional impact (DRI) and its development order is exempt from this division. 
(5)  Species listed under Table 3, Exempt and Invasive Species, which may be amended from time to time by city council, do not require a permit for removal. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.3; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.3), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-768. - Tree removal regulations and standards. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to all land within the city and shall be cumulative to any other regulation provided for in this division. 
(1)  Permit required. No protected tree shall be removed without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(2)  Grand tree. No grand tree or cluster of trees of any species listed in Table 1 of section 12-772 shall be removed without a permit from the city. A permit shall only be issued upon a finding of the following: 
a.  The removal is to the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare, or the existence of the tree presents a clear and present danger. Under these conditions, when removal is authorized, no replacement trees are required. 
b.  The presence of the grand tree or cluster of trees prohibits the property owner from the beneficial use of his property. Under these conditions, when removal is authorized, one replacement shade tree (three-inch D.B.H.) is required (see Table 1 of section 12-772). (Ord. No. 856, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 1044, 5-15-2001) 
(b)  Removal of trees in conjunction with development. In order to remove protected trees on property which is zoned or intended for development of multifamily, commercial, office, institutional or research corporate park uses, a bona fide development plan must be submitted to the city. Removal of protected trees may only be made pursuant to a permit issued by the city and in conformance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Protected trees on wooded land. 
a.  Fifty (50) percent of the protected trees on a site may be removed provided minimum protected tree canopy coverage of twenty-five (25) percent remains. 
1.  If removal of fifty (50) percent of the protected trees would result or does result in a protected tree canopy coverage that is below the twenty-five (25) percent standard provided in subsection (b)(1)a of this section, but remains above seventeen (17) percent, the deficit shall be made up by receiving credit for new trees planted, including those trees planted pursuant to the landscaping regulations contained in the City Code. However, the developer shall only receive fifty (50) percent credit for the tree canopy created by the new plantings, assuming the trees are at a ten-year maturity. 
2.  When a developer is required to make up lost canopy with one-half (1/2 percent) credit for new landscaping at ten-year maturity, he shall not be required to replace more than five (5) percent lost canopy. 
b.  If after removing fifty (50) percent of the protected trees, a parcel still has more than a twenty-five (25) percent protected tree canopy coverage, the developer may remove additional protected trees provided they do not degrade the protected tree canopy coverage below twenty-five (25) percent; however, the additional trees allowed to be removed pursuant to this subsection shall be replaced in accordance with the Tree Equivalency Table (Table 2 of section 12-772) and the excess removal requirements outlined in subsection (b)(1)d of this section. 
c.  Protected tree removal resulting in a protected tree canopy coverage of less than seventeen (17) percent is prohibited. 
d.  Excess removal requirements. Where protected trees are removed from wooded land as provided for in subsection (b)(1)b of this section, either of the following excess removal requirements shall be invoked to compensate for each protected tree removed. 
1.  Replacement. The developer shall be required to replace a protected tree by an equivalent number of approved trees, in accordance with the provisions of Table 2 of section 12-772, elsewhere on the same parcel undergoing development, or on the public right-of-way contiguous to the parcel, upon approval of the city. Replacement trees on the parcel undergoing development shall be maintained in perpetuity by the developer or his assignee. For every five (5) trees required, there shall be a minimum of one species provided, up to a minimum of eight (8) species, when forty (40) or more trees are required. Where more than one species is required, even distribution shall be strived for and subject to city approval through the associated development review process. 
2.  Contribution. The developer shall offset the removal of a protected tree pursuant to the following: Donating the dollar value in accordance with the provision of Table 2 of section 12-772 pursuant to the then current wholesale cost of a three-inch D.B.H. live oak tree, including the cost of transportation and planting as determined by the city manager or designee, to the city's tree and landscape beautification fund. At the time of permitting and prior to tree removal, the developer shall pay into the fund the lump sum dollar amount determined and shall provide proof of this satisfaction. The use of contributed funds shall be limited to the operation of the Adopt-a-Tree program and the planting of trees on public lands shall be at the city administration's sole discretion. This contribution is hereby established to mitigate on-site tree replacement to offset site constraints that may occur during the development process. A protected tree cannot be contributed, unless the maximum possible numbers of protected trees, grand trees or tree equivalents have been incorporated into the site. 
(2)  Protected trees on semi-wooded land. 
a.  Fifty (50) percent of the protected trees on a site may be removed provided a minimum protected tree canopy coverage of twenty-five (25) percent remains. 
b.  If removal of fifty (50) percent of the protected trees would result or does result in a protected tree canopy coverage that is below the twenty-five (25) percent standard, the deficit shall be made up by receiving credit for new trees planted, including those trees planted pursuant to the landscaping regulations contained in the City Code. The developer shall receive one hundred (100) percent credit for the tree canopy created by the new plantings, assuming the trees are at a ten-year maturity. 
c.  Protected tree removal resulting in a protected tree canopy coverage of less than ten (10) percent is prohibited. 
(3)  Protected trees on non-wooded land. 
a.  Thirty (30) percent of the protected trees on a site may be removed; however, the goal of this division is to achieve at least a twenty-five (25) percent canopy coverage subsequent to development. The deficit below the twenty-five (25) percent canopy coverage goal shall be made up by receiving credit for new trees planted, including those trees planted pursuant to the landscaping regulations contained in the City Code. The developer shall receive one hundred (100) percent credit for the tree canopy created by the new plantings, assuming the trees are at a ten-year maturity. 
b.  When a developer is required to provide additional canopy pursuant to subsection (b)(3)a of this section, he shall not be required to provide more than ten (10) percent new canopy. 
(4)  Subdivision. No more than thirty (30) percent of the protected trees (at least five (5) inches in diameter at D.B.H.) shall be removed for infrastructure improvements in conjunction with the development of a single-family subdivision. 
(5)  Phased developments. For phased developments, the regulations contained in this division shall be applicable to the entire development parcel; however, permits will only be issued for the phases under construction. 
(6)  Relocation. The relocation of a protected tree elsewhere on the same parcel undergoing development, or on public right-of-way contiguous to parcel, or on other public lands upon approval of the city, shall not be counted as removed under the provisions of this division. In the event a relocated tree is subsequently removed from the developed parcel for any reason, the replacement or contribution requirement provided for in subsection (b)(1)d of this section shall be imposed. 
(7)  Tree plot plan requirements. A tree plot plan is required to support every application for a building permit for new construction, and shall include the following: 
a.  General location of all protected and invasive trees and identification by type and size (D.B.H.). 
b.  Location of proposed structures, "footprints" and other impervious surfaces. 
c.  Indication of protected trees to be retained and protected trees to be removed, including dead trees. 
d.  The above items shall be field-checked by the department and approval or disapproval (with suggestions) shall be expressed in writing on the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1044, 5-15-2001) 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.4; Ord. No. 856, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 1044, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.4), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-769. - Protection during construction. 
(a)  Prior to construction, the developer shall erect an approved protective barrier around all trees to be preserved. 
(b)  A protective barrier shall be placed such that land disturbance cannot occur closer to the trunk than one-third into the critical root zone. Similarly, at no time shall any construction materials or temporary solid deposits be placed between the protected tree and protective barrier. 
(c)  Except with specific approval from the director, no land clearing or construction activity shall occur within a ten-foot radius from the trunk of any tree to be retained; or within a ten-foot radius from the trunk of any tree within a cluster to be retained; and no land clearing or construction activity shall occur within a twenty-five-foot radius from the trunk of any grand tree. 
(d)  No attachments, wires (other than protective guy wires), signs, or permits may be fastened to any retained or relocated tree during land clearing or construction activity. 
(e)  A tree of the required size and type shall replace any tree that dies within one year from, as applicable, completion of construction of the associated infrastructure improvements. Planting of such tree shall take place within thirty (30) days unless an extension is requested by the applicant and granted by the city. To increase the likelihood of survivability of such tree, it may be located elsewhere on the site if given prior approval. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.6; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.6), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-770. - Final approval and performance bond. 
(a)  Final approval of any development activity involving tree removal will be subject to the satisfactory relocation, replacement, or contribution of trees as required in this division. 
(b)  Prior to commencing any land development activity, developer/builders shall provide the city with an irrevocable letter of credit covering the value of all trees to be relocated, replaced, or contributed prior to commencing the clearing of land or removal of trees. The amount of the letter of credit shall be based on the number and cost of replacement of trees as determined by Table 2 in section 12-772, at the current wholesale cost of said tree, to be determined by the city manager. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.7; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.7), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-771. - Tree trimming/invasive trees. 
(a)  All tree trimming shall be in accordance with standard pruning practices as set forth in the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations-Trees, Shrubs and Other Woody Plant Maintenance-Standard Practices (ANSI A300-2001, as amended). Said standards are incorporated herein by reference. Pruning or trimming a tree inconsistent with ANSI standards is prohibited. 
(b)  No grand tree or any protected tree shall have branches trimmed without a permit when said branches to be trimmed measure ten (10) inches in diameter or greater. 
(c)  Invasive trees. The elimination and removal of invasive trees listed in Table 3 of section 12-772 is required during site development. 
(d)  Topping of any tree is prohibited. 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.8; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(25.735.8), 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 12-772. - Approved trees; tree equivalency table; exempt and invasive trees. 
TABLE 1. APPROVED TREE LIST 
Ash* Fraxinus spp. Bottlebrush Callistemon spp. Camphor* Cinnamomum camphora Chickasaw Plum Prunus angustifolia Chinese Fan Palm Livistona chinesis Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica Cypress* Taxodium spp. Date Palm Phoenix spp. Dogwood* Cornus spp. Elm* Ulmus spp. European Fan Palm Chamoerops humilis Flatwoods Plum Prunus umbellata Golden Rain Tree* Koelreuteria elegans Holly* Ilex spp. Hornbeam Carpinus spp. Indian Rosewood* Dalbergia sissoo Jerusalem Thorn Parkinsonia aculeata Ligustrum Ligustrum spp. Loblolly Bay* Gordonia lasianthus Loquat Eriobotrva japonica Magnolia* Magnolia spp. Maple* Acer spp. Needle Palm Rhapidophyllum hystrix Oak* Quercus spp. Pecan* Carya spp. Pignut Hickory* Carya glabra Pine* Pinus spp. Podocarpus Podocarpus spp. Redbud Cercis canadensis Red Cedar Juniperus spp. River Birch Betula nigra Sabal/Cabbage Palm Sabal palmetto Sycamore* Platanus or Plantus spp. Sugarberry* Celtis laevigata Sweetgum* Liquidambar styraciflua Tulip Poplar* Liriodendron tulipifera Washington Palm Washington robusta Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera Willow Salis or Salix spp.  
* = Shade trees for purposes of section 12-768(a)(2)b. 
TABLE 2. TREE EQUIVALENCY TABLE 
D.B.H. of Protected Tree Equivalent Number of Replacement Trees 3? Diameter 5-7 inches 2 8-12 inches 4 13-19 inches 6 20-23 inches 10  
Grand trees and cluster of trees, except pine, shall be replaced on a two hundred (200) percent actual diameter inch basis (D.B.H.). Pine trees shall be replaced on a fifty (50) percent actual diameter inch basis (d.b.h.). 
Example: 
Grand tree (oak) 24 inches d.b.h. = 48 replacement diameter inches. 
Replace with sixteen (16) three-inch diameter trees. 
TABLE 3. EXEMPT AND INVASIVE TREES 
Australian Pine Casuarina spp. * Black/Wild Cherry Prunus serothina Brazilian Pepper Schun terebinthifolius * Catclaw Mimosa Mimosa pigra * Cherry Laurel Prunus caroliniana Chinaberry Melia azedarach * Chinese Tallow Sapium sebiferum * Citrus Tree Citrus spp. Earleaf Acacia Acacia aurifuliformis * Ear Tree Enterolobium contortisiliquum * Eucalyptus Eucalyptus spp. Indian Rosewood Dalbergia sissoo Lead Tree Leucaena leucocephela * Monkey Puzzle Aauracaria wrightii Mulberry Broussonetia papyrifera * Orchid Tree Bauhinia veriegata * Punk Tree Melaleuca quinquernervia * Queen Palm Arecastrum romanzoffianum Silk Oak Grevillea robusta * Surinam Cherry Eugenia uniflora * Woman's Tongue Albizia lebbek *  
*Denotes invasive trees that must be removed during site development per section 12-771(c). 
(Code 2001, § 25.735.11; Ord. No. 856, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 1044, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 1309, § 2(tables 1-3), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1399, § 4(Exh. D), 7-19-2016 ) 
Secs. 12-773-12-795. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating the subdivision of land required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(a). 

Sec. 12-796. - Minimum improvements required. 
(a)  General. The subdivider shall provide public improvements in the subdivision in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Pavement shall be constructed with curb and gutter per section 12-824. 
(2)  Street markers shall be installed per section 12-831. 
(3)  Reference markers shall be placed per section 12-832. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be constructed per section 12-828. 
(5)  Streetlights shall be provided per section 12-829. 
(6)  Stormwater drainage systems shall be constructed per section 12-834. 
(7)  A water distribution system shall be constructed per section 12-835. 
(8)  Public transit bus stops and shelters shall be provided per section 12-837. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(9)  Nonmotorized transportation facilities shall be provided per section 12-838. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(b)  Clearing of land. It shall be the responsibility of the developer or builder to dispose of building waste and material from land clearing. It shall be unlawful to bury any such material in any land within the subdivision. Land clearing by means of air curtain incineration may be allowed by special permit approved by the fire chief and city manager or designee with special conditions as deemed necessary. 
(c)  Completion of improvements. All required improvements shall be completed within two (2) years from the date the final plat is recorded unless the city council shall, by resolution, grant an extension of time. Completion of the required improvements shall be guaranteed financially as set forth in section 12-797. 
(d)  Building permit. No permit to build on any lot shall be issued unless the lot is served by existing or proposed water and wastewater systems and approved by the city engineer. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all required improvements have been constructed and accepted, including certification of use by regulatory agencies for the water and wastewater systems. 
(Code 2001, § 25.740.1; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
Sec. 12-797. - Financial guarantee. 
(a)  General. Unless all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, an acceptable financial guarantee shall accompany every plat which is to be recorded to ensure the actual satisfactory completion of construction of all required improvements within not more than two (2) years following the date of recording, or one year if sidewalks are the only required improvements to be completed. An acceptable financial guarantee shall be in an amount not less than one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of the improvements, as approved by the city engineer, but may be reduced by the city engineer from time to time in proportion to the work completed, and may take one of the following forms, subject to the approval of the city engineer and city attorney: 
(1)  Cash, to be held in escrow by the city; 
(2)  An irrevocable letter of credit written by a bank chartered by the State of Florida, or the United States government, or any other state of the United States if the bank is authorized to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the finance director. The letter of credit shall include, among other things, an expiration date not earlier than one year from the date of issuance; a provision requiring the issuer of the letter of credit to give at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the city prior to expiration or renewal of the letter, and a provision that the letter is automatically renewed for a period of time equaling its original term if the required notice is not given; or 
(3)  A surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Florida. The surety bond shall include, as a minimum, the provisions required above for letters of credit. 
(b)  Conditions. The financial guarantee posted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall run to the city and shall provide that the subdivider, the subdivider's heirs, or successors and assigns, and their agents and servants, will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of these regulations; will faithfully perform and complete the work of construction and installation of said facilities or improvements in accordance with these regulations, and that the subdivider will save the city from any unnecessary expense incurred through the failure of the subdivider, the subdivider's heirs, successors or assigns, or their agents or servants, to complete the work of said construction and installation as required by these regulations, and from any damage growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform said construction and installation. 
(c)  Duration and release. Financial guarantees posted pursuant to these regulations shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such times as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. Acceptance shall be in writing, accurately identifying the improvements covered. Facilities shall not be accepted unless they conform to the applicable city specifications and requirements. 
(d)  Default. If the construction or installation of any improvements or facilities for which a financial guarantee is posted or deposited is not completed within three (3) months after substantial completion of any buildings or structures for which said improvements or facilities are designed, or within two (2) years after the date of recording of the final plat, whichever is sooner, or if said construction or installation is not in accordance with the applicable city specifications and requirements, and in the case of a corporate bond or an escrow agreement, the obligor on the bonds or the agreement shall be liable for the expense incurred thereby. The default provisions of this division shall not apply when the city council acts to permit the subdivider to remove the subdivision from the land records of the county in accordance with applicable platting regulations. 
(e)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  A combination of financial guarantees shall be held to be in compliance with this section so long as the total is equal to the total required. 
(2)  If, subsequent to posting a financial guarantee under these regulations, it can be established that the amount thereof is more than required because subsequent estimates by the city established that the work can be constructed or installed for a lesser amount than the amount posted, the financial guarantee so posted may be released or repaid proportionately. 
(f)  Guarantee. The subdivider is responsible for the satisfactory performance of the required improvements in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, for a period of one year and is required to post with the city a surety bond which is available to the city in the amount of ten (10) percent of the financial guarantee which was posted for the completion of all the said required improvements. The said bond shall be valid for a period of one year beginning on the date of final acceptance of the said required improvements by the city. If the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten (10) days after receiving notice from the city of the failure of any or all of the improvements required in accordance with these regulations, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond or escrow agreements and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the bond or agreement aforesaid shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of said repairs. 
(Code 2001, § 25.740.2) 
Sec. 12-798. - Waiver of requirements. 
    Following a recommendation by the city engineer, the city council may waive the requirements of these regulations where compliance would be a practical impossibility or would cause unnecessary hardship and/or where the owner proposed an alternative which conforms to the general intent and spirit of these regulations. 
(Code 2001, § 25.740.3) 
Sec. 12-799. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, to transfer, sell, or agree to sell or negotiate to sell any of said land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat or a subdivision before said plat has been approved by the city council and recorded by the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to convey, obtain a building permit for, or improve property by the construction of buildings on parcels of any land, the subdivision of which has not been approved and recorded as provided in this division, except those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. The provisions of this division do not affect vested rights. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to record a subdivision plat or, once recorded, to make any changes thereon whatsoever, which have not been approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2001, § 25.740.4) 
Secs. 12-800-12-821. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 12-822. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish design standards for orderly development within the city, and to secure adequate traffic, transportation, potable water, wastewater, street lighting, drainage, sidewalks and other public improvements and facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745) 
Sec. 12-823. - General. 
(a)  Conformance required. Development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, multifamily and commercial sites within the city, shall conform to the standards and criteria herein. Water and sanitary sewerage systems within the service area in the unincorporated areas of the county shall also conform to these criteria. Development shall: 
(1)  Conform with plan of development. All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the plan of development of the city. 
(2)  Comply with zoning regulations. All proposed development shall comply fully with the existing zoning regulations applicable to the land. No parcel of land shall be created which cannot be properly utilized for a permitted use under the existing zoning regulations. 
(3)  Preserve natural features. To the fullest extent possible, development shall be designed so as to conform to and take advantage of the topographic and other natural features of the land, including the preservation of existing trees and watercourses. It may be required to show a conservation area on the plat. A conservation area shall be drawn superimposed over parts of lots or common areas on the plat, and shall be stated "Conservation Area Dedicated to the City of Temple Terrace" on the plat. 
(b)  Public use requirements. In laying out a proposed subdivision, due consideration shall be given to reservation of land for thoroughfares, collector streets, school sites, parks and recreation areas, and other public open space requirements, as such uses may be shown upon the approved plan of development or otherwise deemed necessary by the city council and/or the reviewing authorities. 
(c)  Public/private utilities. All public and/or private utilities shall be designed to be placed underground, with an exception being limited to certain service structures, connection boxes, and other similar devices or facilities which for reasons of maintenance or access must be readily accessible. In such cases, such structures or devices shall, to the extent possible, be located in such a manner so as to minimize impact on adjoining lots by placing along lot lines where feasible. (Ord. No. 1068, 6-18-2002) 
(d)  Suitability. 
(1)  The land proposed for subdivision shall be suitable for development and shall not be subject to flooding, poor drainage, erosion, or other conditions detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(2)  Development in floodway areas shall conform to the requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(3)  Construction plans. 
a.  Construction plans shall be prepared on Mylar, shall be twenty-two (22) inches by thirty-five (35) inches and shall be at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1? = 50'), except that details shall be at a larger standard scale. 
b.  Record drawings in the form of one set of reproducible tracings and three (3) sets of blue line prints shall be furnished to the city. Acetate reproducibles are unacceptable. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.1; Ord. No. 1068, 6-18-2002) 
Sec. 12-824. - Streets. 
(a)  Access to public streets. 
(1)  Every subdivision shall have adequate access to a street dedicated to public use which has been accepted for maintenance by the city, the county, or the state department of transportation. Where a proposed subdivision does not immediately adjoin such a street, the subdivider shall provide access from the subdivision to a dedicated street in accordance with the requirements set forth within these regulations or as may otherwise be specified by the city. 
(2)  All lots within a proposed subdivision shall abut a street dedicated to public use, or all lots within a proposed subdivision may abut a street privately owned and maintained, provided other improvement facilities are also privately owned and maintained unless otherwise provided for by prior agreement between the city and the subdivider, and other requirements of the subdivision regulations are met. When privately owned and maintained improvement facilities are proposed, the plat shall show improvement facilities rights-of-way as Parcel A and state "improvement facilities rights-of-way shown as Parcel A are not dedicated to public use but are private rights-of-way for the use of lot owners and are to be maintained by the lot owners. Parcel A is dedicated to the lot owners. Each lot owner has an undivided interest in Parcel A." 
(b)  Relation to adjoining and/or proposed street system. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing principal streets from adjoining areas, or for their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided. Where street extensions into adjacent undeveloped land are necessary to ensure a coordinated street system, provision for such future street or streets shall be made. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, it may be required that one or more of the following be provided: marginal access street, screen planting, deeper lots or other such treatment necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of local and through traffic. 
(c)  Interior streets. The interior streets shall be so arranged that their use by through traffic movements will be discouraged. In order to discourage through traffic movements and high traffic speeds, as well as to increase the desirability and stability of the subdivision by preventing monotonous development, straight portions of street and undue length shall be avoided whenever possible by the use of curvatures. 
(d)  Half streets. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the subdivision unless a half street will provide continuity of the existing street system. Where a half street would provide continuity of the existing street system and there is adequate existing half street right-of-way abutting the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall provide half street right-of-way in the proposed subdivision and construct the entire street. Where a half street would provide continuity of the existing street system and there is inadequate existing half street right-of-way abutting the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sufficient additional right-of-way in the proposed subdivision and construct the entire street. 
(e)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets or utility easements shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Street dimensions. The minimum street right-of-way and pavement widths are set forth in the following table. Rights-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line. Pavement widths shall be measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
Street Classification Minimum R/W (Feet) Minimum Pavement Width (Feet) Residential 50 22 Collector 60 33  
The widths of major arterials and minor arterials shall be in keeping with the city plan of development. 
(g)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, cul-de-sacs or courts with one end permanently closed shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length. All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a circular right-of-way having a minimum diameter of one hundred (100) feet and a paved turn-around with minimum outside diameter of eighty (80) feet. Where a street is to be temporarily dead-ended at a property line and is to be continued when adjacent property is subdivided, "T"-type turn-around shall be provided. 
(h)  Right-of-way and pavement radii. Rights-of-way at intersections shall be rounded with a twenty-five-foot radius. The minimum curb radius at intersections shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(i)  Intersections. Streets shall be so arranged as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees. Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet at intersections unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(j)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 
(k)  Grades. All streets shall have a minimum gradient of 0.30 percent. 
(l)  Horizontal curves. Horizontal curves shall be as follows: 
Street Classification Minimum Radii of Centerline Curvature (in feet) Streets less than 600 feet 100 Residential 200 Collector 300  
(m)  Reverse curves. Tangents between curves on all streets shall be at least one hundred (100) feet in length unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(n)  Street names. New streets which are extensions of existing streets shall take the same name as the existing streets. All others shall be named in the following manner: 
Direction Long Short* North and south Streets Places East and west Avenues Courts Diagonal Roads Ways Curving Drives Lanes or circles  
*Less than 1,000 feet 
In no case shall a name for a proposed street duplicate an existing street name, irrespective of whether the street is further described as an avenue, boulevard, way, place or court. 
(o)  Address numbering. The building numbering system, as shown on the map titled "Address Numbering Map," and filed with the community development department, is incorporated by reference herein. Each plat and each amendment to any plat shall be filed with the department, and upon filing thereof, the building numbering system and the address numbering map shall be deemed to have been amended in accordance therewith. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(1)  Administration and assignment of street names and numbers. 
a.  The community development department shall be responsible for coordinating and maintaining the building numbering system and shall assign building numbers in conformity with the building numbering system. The community development department, with the advice and consent of the property owner, shall have the authority to name and number any private way, as necessary. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
b.  Assignment by the community development department of a number to a projected future building shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for any such building. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
c.  The community development department shall record and maintain records of the building numbering system, together with all amendments thereto and all street names and numbers assigned. The community development department shall monitor all projected street name and numbering schemes to ensure that misleading, confusing and duplicate street names and numbers are prevented. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(2)  Posting of street numbers. Whether or not mail is delivered to such building, each building shall have its assigned building number properly displayed in accordance with this section. It shall be the duty of the owners, occupants and property manager of each building to post the assigned building street number on the building as follows: 
a.  The building address number shall be affixed to the building front and additionally can also be posted to a separate structure, such as a mailbox, post, wall, fence or other area. The building address number shall be unobstructed and shall be clearly visible and legible from the public or private way adjacent to the building front. It shall clearly identify the building to which it is assigned. Properties contiguous to the Hillsborough River may affix the address including street names to a dock, seawall or separate structure. 
b.  The numerals shall be of a color contrasting with the immediate background of the building or structure on which such numerals are affixed. 
c.  Numerals shall be made of a durable, weather-resistant material, permanently affixed to their support and shall be plain block, not script, format. 
d.  Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any building constructed after the original effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be withheld until the building address numbers have been constructed and affixed in accordance with this section. 
e.  Apartments, condominiums and commercial complexes. Individual buildings of a condominium, apartment, or commercial complex shall be posted with the designated letter, subnumber or street number, consistent with this section. The designated letter, subnumber or street number shall also be affixed to the rear access or delivery door of each unit in a commercial complex. A master directory map/board shall be lighted and maintained at the main entrance(s) to the complex and shall clearly indicate the location of all buildings and individual units. 
(3)  Annexation. Whenever a parcel of land, a subdivision, or any part thereof, becomes annexed into the city, it shall be the responsibility of the community development department to review the address numbers of such property and to obtain conformance with the building numbering system in the posting and numbering for such annexed area. Upon determination that the street names and numbers conform to said system, the city building numbering system shall be amended to include said annexed land. The owner, occupant and property manager for a building annexed into the city shall be responsible for compliance with this section. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
(p)  Improvements within rights-of-way. No walls, gates, signs or other obstructions shall be constructed or placed within the public right-of-way. Subject to the approval of the city, certain trees may be allowed to remain within the right-of-way. 
(q)  Minimum standards. Streets shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  All streets shall have a standard curb and gutter or Miami curb when authorized by the city engineer. 
(2)  All pavements shall be either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete on properly prepared base and subgrade in accordance with DOT requirements. 
(3)  Base course for asphaltic concrete pavement shall be limerock, shell or soil cement unless other materials are authorized by the city engineer. 
(4)  Asphaltic concrete surface shall be Type I or Type II, DOT specifications, and shall have a minimum thickness of one inch. 
(5)  Concrete curb and concrete valley gutter shall meet DOT requirements, including wheelchair ramps at all intersections. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(6)  A minimum strip of sod five (5) feet in width shall be placed behind curb to control erosion and damage to pavement and drainage system. 
(7)  Safe pedestrian crossings, using pavement marking, textured or colored paving materials, warning signs, crossing signals, pedestrian activated or otherwise, and/or speed bumps/humps as appropriate, as recommended by DOT Green Book standards. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.2; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1355, § 3(exh. B), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-825. - Blocks. 
(a)  Residential block sizes. Residential blocks shall not be less than four hundred (400) feet nor more than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet in length. The width of a residential block shall be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except where lots abut directly upon an expressway, major arterial, lake, waterway, or a land use other than residential. In the latter case, consideration shall be given in the subdivision design to the proper buffering of the residential lots. 
(b)  Crosswalks. In blocks over one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length or where otherwise deemed necessary to give pedestrian access to schools, local shopping centers and parks, rights-of-way and pavement for pedestrian crosswalks may be required. Right-of-way for crosswalks shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
(c)  Nonresidential block sizes. Blocks laid out for other than residential use shall be of a shape and size as may be suitable for their prospective use. Adequate provisions shall be made to provide areas for off-street parking, loading and unloading, and other service activities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.3) 
Sec. 12-826. - Lots. 
(a)  General arrangement. Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  Frontage. All lots shall front on a public street or contain adequate provision for access to an abutting street, provided such alternative access is provided for by prior agreement between the city and the subdivider. Lots having double frontage shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from railroad or arterial rights-of-way. In such cases, provisions shall be made either for marginal access streets or for lots backing onto said rights-of-way. Lots facing upon such rights-of-way shall have additional depth so that buffering may be provided. (Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005) 
(c)  Lot sizes. Lot sizes shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code of the city. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a width at least ten (10) percent larger than the width of interior lots along both adjacent streets so as to permit the location of buildings in conformance with the setback lines of both streets. 
(e)  Butt lots. Residential lots in such a position shall have a width of ten (10) percent greater than the width of interior lots. 
(f)  Lot lines. Whenever possible, lot lines shall intersect streets and each other at right angles, and in no case shall a lot have an interior angle of less than thirty (30) degrees. 
(g)  Remnants. All odd or left over pieces of land shall be included within adjoining full lots. 
(h)  Lot numbers. All lots shall be numbered by progressive numbers and, if in blocks, then progressively numbered in each block and the blocks shall be progressively numbered or lettered. Blocks in numbered additions to a plat previously recorded and bearing the same name may be numbered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
(i)  Municipal limits and lot lines. Lots shall be designed so as not to be divided by municipal boundary lines, except where unavoidable and upon approval of the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.4; Ord. No. 1154, 10-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-827. - Easements. 
(a)  Drainage. Where a proposed subdivision is transversed by a watercourse, drainageway, canal or stream, appropriate dedication of suitable easement provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Said dedication or easement shall conform substantially with the lines of said watercourse and be of sufficient width or construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose including maintenance thereof. 
(b)  Utilities. Utility easements shall be provided on rear, front and side lot lines. Easements along front property lines shall be five (5) feet. Easements along rear and side lot lines shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width, and seven and one-half (71/2) feet on either side of the lot line. Where utility easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision boundary, the full width necessary shall be provided within the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.5) 
Sec. 12-828. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets except that upon recommendation of the city engineer, the city council may waive these sidewalk requirements in areas where, due to peculiar environmental or topographic conditions, sidewalks are deemed inappropriate. Prior to the acceptance of the subdivision and as an express condition thereof, the developer shall install all required sidewalks in accordance with city criteria and specifications, or in the alternate, deposit with the city a cash sum equal to the cost to install the required sidewalks as calculated by the city engineer, guaranteeing the construction of sidewalks in conjunction with individual lot development or two (2) years from the date of acceptance of the subdivision, whichever is earlier. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Where heavier volumes of pedestrian traffic are expected, width requirements may be increased upon recommendation by the city engineer. The provision of a system of sidewalks serving the interior of a site shall not relieve the developer of the requirement to furnish sidewalks along all public street frontages. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.6; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
Sec. 12-829. - Street lights. 
(a)  The subdivider shall provide for street lights in rights-of-way (public) and on private roadways in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  All street lights shall be high-pressure sodium vapor type, and shall be placed on prestressed concrete or metal poles, unless specifically otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  For street lights on rights-of-way (public), the city will assume responsibility for maintenance and electric power. The subdivider shall pay to the city for said street lights, service and maintenance, an amount not to exceed one-fourth (1/4) of an estimated twenty-year cost, based on the charges the city is paying to Tampa Electric Company for such street lights, service and maintenance. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.7) 
Sec. 12-830. - Parking lot and area lighting illumination standards. 
    The objective of parking lot and area lighting is to provide effective lighting for pedestrians and vehicular traffic. All parking lot and area lighting systems shall be designed and certified to meet at a minimum the standards developed by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for area lighting. For purposes of implementation of this section, lighting design standards provided by the IESNA Handbook, Tenth Edition, shall be deemed to comply with this section. These standards apply to all properties with the exception of parcels used for single-family-detached dwellings. 
(1)  IES area classifications. The IES has established specific design criteria for the footcandle level and the uniformity ratio for parking lot and area lighting. Proper lighting designs require that the designer be familiar with the area classifications recommended by IES. The classifications are based on the use of the area (vehicle use only or general parking and pedestrian area) and the area's activity level (low, medium, or high). Definitions of the use and activity level classifications for parking and area lighting are as follows: 
a.  Use definitions. 
1.  The term "general parking and pedestrian area" means areas where there may be a mixture of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, such as businesses that may occasionally experience activity after dark and local or regional shopping centers. 
2.  The term "vehicular use area only" means areas where conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians are not likely to occur, such as service areas and access roads. 
b.  Activity level definitions. 
1.  The term "low activity level" means areas where there are limited night activities, such as outdoor storage areas, and office building parking lots normally closed at night. 
2.  The term "medium activity level" means areas normally used nightly, such as fast food facilities, area shopping centers, hospital parking areas, transportation parking, cultural and civic events, residential complex parking, and community colleges. 
3.  The term "high activity level" means areas where unusually high pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic is expected, such as major league athletic events, major cultural or civic events, and major regional shopping centers. 
(2)  Recommended illuminance and uniformity. The following table shows both minimum and average maintained illuminance values recommended by IES based on the area's activity level and use classification. The minimum values shown are the lowest acceptable light levels at any location for the surface of the area during the life of the lighting system. 
This is the major distinction between roadway and parking area lighting IES values. IES roadway specifications state the average maintained footcandle value to be obtained with a specific uniformity. IES parking area specifications state the minimum maintained footcandle level allowed in the parking area with a specific uniformity. In roadway lighting, the focus is on the average footcandle and uniformity specifications because roadway lighting deals with vehicles traveling at speeds that make average light levels and uniformity the critical issues. Parking lot lighting is task related, in that it deals with pedestrians walking to and unlocking their vehicles. The critical issues in parking lot lighting are minimum light levels and uniformity. 
Parking Area Maintained Light Level (fc) and Watts-per-Square Foot (W/ft 2 ) 
AREA USE: GENERAL PARKING AND PEDESTRIAN AREAS 
Activity Level Minimum fc Average fc Uniformity W/sq. ft. Low 0.2 0.8 4 to 1 0.023 Medium 0.6 2.4 4 to 1 0.065 High 0.9 3.6 4 to 1 0.1  
AREA USE: VEHICLE USE AREA ONLY 
Activity Level Minimum fc Average fc Uniformity W/sq. ft. Low 0.125 0.5 4 to 1 0.015 Medium 0.33 1 .03 to 1 0.029 High 0.66 2 .03 to 1 0.055  
The average maintained footcandles are derived from the following equation: 
Uniformity  =  Average Footcandle  
Minimum Footcandle  
If more than one classification can be applied to any single area, always use the classification that requires the greatest light level. (Ord. No. 1045, 5-15-2001) 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.75; Ord. No. 1045, 5-15-2001) 
Sec. 12-831. - Street name signs. 
    The subdivider shall provide and install street name signs in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.8) 
Sec. 12-832. - Reference markers. 
    The subdivider shall provide permanent reference monuments, at least four (4) in number, no more than eight hundred (800) feet apart, which shall be placed within the tract or on the exterior boundaries thereof, so as to provide definite reference points from which may be located any points, lines, or lots set forth on said plat. All points of curvature, points of reverse curvature, points of tangency and at least two (2) points in the exterior of each block, shall be permanently marked with such monuments. The location of such points, as are inaccessible, may be established by ties. All monuments so placed shall be of metal not less than three (3) inches in diameter or shall be square and not less than three (3) inches on a side. If smaller, metal markers shall be encased in a solid block of concrete not less than four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) inches on a side if square, having the reference point marked thereon. Monuments shall be twenty-four (24) inches in length. The top of the monuments shall be set flush with the finished grade at their respective locations. They shall have their position in reference to each other indicated by distances and angles and not less than one of said monuments shall have its location indicated on the plat in reference to the nearest government corner or section corner. The position of said monuments shall be indicated on the plat by a small circle and shall be marked "Permanent Reference Monument" or the initials "P.R.M." to designate the same. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.9) 
Sec. 12-833. - Excavation. 
(a)  Permits. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in control of any lot, parcel or tract of land within the city to alter, excavate, fill or remove any of the land or its surface within the limits of the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Submission of plans. 
(1)  Permits to alter, excavate, fill or remove land or its surface within the limits of the city shall not be issued by the city manager or designee without first obtaining the approval of the city engineer. The city engineer shall not be required to give approval unless and until the applicant for such permit shall have submitted to the city manager or designee plans and specifications covering the project and a description of the intended result. The city engineer shall have the right and privilege of disapproving the application or permit, if in the engineer's judgment the work intended to be done shall cause a substantial difference in the appearance of the lands immediately adjacent thereto or shall create a drainage problem, or shall create or cause a hazard to the health and safety of the citizens. 
(2)  Should said application for a permit be disapproved, the applicant shall have a right of appeal to the mayor and city council at the first regular meeting following the date of denial and the decision of the mayor and city council in this respect shall be final. It shall be the duty of the city manager or designee to advise any refused applicant of the right to appeal at the time of such refusal or disapproval. 
(c)  Violations and notice to correct. 
(1)  The city manager or designee shall from time to time ascertain whether there exists any alteration, excavation, filling or removal of land or its surface within the limits of the city, which condition has been created without a duly authorized permit from the city, and should the city manager or designee find such a condition existing in violation of this section, then it shall be the duty of the city manager or designee to give notice as hereafter provided to the owner, occupant or person in control of such lot, parcel or tract, to correct the condition by restoration of the land or its surface to the condition which existed prior to the violation, or as nearly as possible to do so and within fifteen (15) days after the service of such notice. 
(2)  Notice by the city manager or designee shall be in writing to the owner, if the owner's address can be ascertained by reasonable diligence, or to the person in control of occupying the premises. If the owner's address cannot be ascertained, and in the event that neither can be ascertained, then by the posting of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, giving fifteen (15) days notice and reciting that should the work not be done by the owner, person in control of, or occupant, that the work will be done by the city and the costs assessed against the property. 
(d)  Failure of owner to comply and correction by city. 
(1)  Upon the failure of the owner, occupant or person in control of such premises to remedy the conditions existing in violation of the requirements hereof within fifteen (15) days after service of such notice to do so, then the city manager or designee shall proceed to have the conditions remedied either by direct labor of city employees, or by contract, or by a combination of both methods, and immediately thereafter report same to the city council. 
(2)  The city council by appropriate ordinance may authorize the assessment of the costs of such work against the particular lots, parcels or tracts, and upon the passage of such ordinance, the costs thereafter shall become a lien upon the particular premises and the city shall have the right and privileges granted to municipalities by the Florida Statutes for the enforcement of liens for special assessment and with the same new penalties and same rights of collection, foreclosure, sale and forfeiture as obtained for special assessment liens, and such liens shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent from the date of the assessment. The amounts due thereunder shall be payable thirty (30) days after publication of the notice of assessment. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.10(a)-(d)) 
Sec. 12-834. - Drainage systems. 
(a)  Plan submittal. The following plans and information, prepared by a Florida-registered engineer shall be submitted for the proposed drainage system: 
(1)  Five (5) sets of drawings including: 
a.  A detailed site plan including a general location map and the location of all existing and proposed pavement and structures. 
b.  Construction plans of sufficient detail to indicate compliance with this section and to enable construction with minimal interpretations by a contractor. Data should include existing and proposed conduits, inlets, manholes, pipe sizes and slopes, invert elevations, and retention/detention basins. 
c.  Established drainage areas, acreage and boundaries of proposed drainage areas, and sufficient elevations to delineate said drainage areas. 
(2)  Two (2) sets of supplemental data including: 
a.  Topographic maps of the site and all adjacent contributing areas before and after the proposed alterations. 
b.  Information regarding the types of soils and groundwater conditions existing on the site. 
c.  General vegetation maps of the site before development and a plan showing the landscaping to be performed as part of the project. 
d.  Design calculations, percolation test results, and seasonal high water determination. 
e.  Additional information necessary for determining compliance with this division as the city engineer may require. 
(b)  Design criteria. Drainage designs shall be based on the following design criteria unless conditions dictate that such criteria may be modified, or unless more strict requirements are set by other regulatory agencies. Drainage calculations shall be furnished to support proposed drainage features. 
(1)  Water quality. The drainage system shall provide treatment equivalent to retention, or detention with filtration, or the runoff from the first one inch of rainfall; or as an option for projects with drainage areas less than one hundred (100) acres, the first one-half (1/2) inch of runoff. Facilities which discharge to Class I waters shall be provided with an approved, workable filter system. 
(2)  Design method. For drainage areas less than two hundred (200) acres, the drainage system shall be designed by the rational method. 
(3)  Design frequency. Rainfall data is to be obtained using Florida DOT Zone 6 Rainfall Curves. The design frequency shall be: 
Facility Design Frequency Ditches, cross-drains, storm sewers for external subdivision drainage 25 year Ditches, cross-drains, storm sewers within subdivisions 10 year Retention basins (no outlet) 100 year 24-hour rainfall  
(4)  Coefficient of runoff. 
Type Development Runoff Coefficient Unimproved areas 0.20 Single-family residential 0.40 Multifamily including apartments 0.60 Commercial 0.90 Paved areas 0.90  
(5)  Coefficient of roughness (Manning's coefficient). 
Type Coefficient Reinforced concrete pipe 0.012 Concrete box culvert 0.012 Corrugated metal pipe 0.024 Bare earthy ditches  Maintained 0.03  Not maintained 0.08 Others To be approved by the city engineer  
(6)  Inlets. 
a.  The flow time to the first inlet shall be determined by standard practice, but shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) minutes. 
b.  Desirable inlet spacing shall be from four hundred (400) feet to six hundred (600) feet. 
c.  Other than at intersections, inlets shall be placed as near as possible to common property line. 
d.  Where city standard details are not available, inlets shall conform to state DOT standards. 
(7)  Manholes. 
a.  Shall be placed at all grade changes and at changes in alignment. 
b.  Maximum distance between manholes shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
c.  Where city standard details are not available, manholes shall conform to state DOT standards. 
d.  Conflict manhole. Where it is necessary to allow a sanitary line or other utility to pass through a manhole, inlet or junction box because of no reasonable alternative, the utility shall be ductile iron and shall be located in the upper half of the sewer opening. 
(8)  Conduits (storm sewers). 
a.  Shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in diameter. 
b.  Shall have a minimum velocity of two and one-half (21/2) feet per second, and a maximum velocity of ten (10) feet per second. 
c.  Minimum clearance between top of pipe bell and bottom of roadway subgrade shall be one-half (1/2) foot. 
d.  Minimum clearance between outside of crossing conduits shall be one-half (1/2) foot. 
e.  Pipe material shall be reinforced concrete, ABS, or corrugated aluminum pipe. 
(9)  Pavement elevation relative to drainage components. 
a.  The bottom of street subgrade shall be at least six (6) inches above seasonal high groundwater elevation. 
b.  The low edge of street pavement shall be at least one foot above the design high water elevation of the applicable design year storm. 
c.  The low edge of street pavement near a retention and/or detention basin shall be at least one foot above the design high water elevation of said retention and/or detention basin. 
(10)  Retention and detention basins. 
a.  Retention basins shall be designed to retain a twenty-four (24) hour, one hundred (100) year frequency rainfall. 
b.  Detention basins shall be designed so that the instantaneous peak discharge from the developed site due to a twenty-five (25) year rainfall shall not exceed the instantaneous peak discharge from the undeveloped site due to a ten-year rainfall. 
c.  Recovery time for basins shall be a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours. 
d.  An infiltration rate test shall be performed for each one-half (1/2) acre of basin bottom. The test shall be the Standard Double Ring Infiltration Test. A safety factor of 2 shall be used in using the infiltration rate so determined. 
e.  A soil boring shall be taken for each one-half (1/2) acre of basin bottom, and shall include soil classification and a determination of current water level and seasonal high water table. The soil report shall be included with the drainage calculations. 
f.  Minimum freeboard for basins shall be one foot between design high water and top of bank. 
g.  Side slopes of both wet and dry ponds shall be no steeper than four-to-one (4:1) to a point where the depth is two (2) feet below the control elevation. Where these slopes are present, no fencing (or wall) is required. Where slopes are steeper than four-to-one (4:1), the requirements of section 12-1053 shall apply. 
h.  Retention and/or detention ponds having vertical walls must also be provided with one or more means of ingress and egress for purposes of maintenance and safety. Specific plans for this requirement must be approved by the city engineer. 
i.  Landscaping and buffering shall be provided as set forth in section 12-1053. 
j.  Conditions downstream of the outlet control structure shall be such that will enable said outlet control to function as shown on the design calculations. 
k.  The basin shall be provided with an emergency overflow spillway to control discharge in the event the basin overflows. 
l.  Inlet-outlet structures shall be designed to prevent silting, erosion and maintenance problems. (Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
(11)  Underdrains. 
a.  Underdrains may be required by the city engineer to facilitate groundwater control during construction and may be left in place. When the use of underdrains is required, the road drainage plans shall include all details necessary to clearly indicate the underdrain construction. 
b.  Underdrains are considered to be a permanent control of the groundwater table. The design of the roadway may be based on long-term groundwater level control through the use of underdrains. 
c.  A filter fabric envelope shall be used with underdrains and shall be an approved strong, porous nylon, polyester, polypropylene or other fabric approved by the city engineer, which completely covers the underdrain surface in such a way as to prevent infiltration of surrounding material. The filter envelope shall weigh a minimum of two and one-half (21/2) ounces per square yard, shall retain soil particles larger than two hundred twelve (212) microns (no. 70 sieve) and shall pass particles finer than twenty-five (25) microns. When tested in accordance with ASTM D1682, the grab strength (wet) of the filter fabric shall not be less than one hundred (100) pounds and the grab elongation shall not be less than sixty (60) percent. Storage and handling of the filter fabric shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Torn or punctured filter fabric shall not be used. The filter fabric shall not be exposed to sunlight for periods exceeding the manufacturer's recommendations or six (6) weeks, whichever is shorter. 
d.  Underdrain pipe shall be of sufficient size to effectively control the flow. Underdrain pipe shall be concrete, corrugated aluminum, polyvinyl-chloride, corrugated polyethylene or other material approved by the city engineer. Concrete, corrugated aluminum and polyvinyl-chloride underdrain shall be in accordance with the state DOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.11; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992) 
Sec. 12-835. - Water distribution system. 
(a)  All water distribution systems, water main extensions and all appurtenant items shall be designed in accordance with applicable regulations of the city, the county health department, and the standards herein. 
(b)  Fire protection systems connected to the city system are subject to city review and inspection. 
(c)  The city shall own and maintain all portions of the water system up to and including the water meter. 
(d)  Valves shall be provided for all branch connections, loop ends, fire hydrant stubs or other locations, as required to facilitate operation of the distribution system. Valves shall be placed so that the maximum allowable length of water main required to shut down for repair work shall not be more than five hundred (500) feet in commercial, multifamily, and residential districts, or one thousand (1,000) feet in other areas. A sufficient number of valves shall be installed so that a break or other failure will not affect more than one-fourth (1/4) mile of arterial mains, five hundred (500) feet of mains in commercial districts, or eight hundred (800) feet of mains in residential districts. If construction is to be phased, valves must be installed at the end of each line that is to be continued. Valves shall meet the requirements of the city's technical manual. 
(e)  Air release valves should be specified where the water main profile is such that air pockets or entrapment could occur, resulting in flow blockage. 
(f)  All water distribution system piping shall be ductile iron or C-900 PVC, SDR 18. Water service lines shall be Type K copper tubing or polyethylene tubing, ASTM D-2239, SDR 9 and PE 3306. Minimum cover shall be thirty-six (36) inches. 
(g)  Fire hydrants. 
(1)  The water distribution system and/or water main extensions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the fire protection requirements of the insurance services office (National Board of Fire Underwriters), as stated in their publication Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow. 
(2)  Fire hydrants will be required on all water distribution systems and extensions thereof as follows: 
a.  Residential areas. Fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet, measured along the edge of pavement. In addition, on dead-end streets (permanent or temporary), a fire hydrant shall be within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the farthest corner of each building. Each hydrant shall be designed to deliver a minimum flow of five hundred (500) GPM at a residual pressure of twenty (20) psi. 
b.  Commercial and apartment areas four (4) stories or less. Fire hydrants shall be so located that they are not over five hundred (500) feet apart along the pavement with a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet to the last unit. The system shall be designed to deliver a minimum flow of either five hundred (500) GPM each from two (2) hydrants at the same time or one thousand (1,000) GPM from one hydrant, at a residual pressure of twenty (20) psi. 
c.  Commercial and apartments over four (4) stories. Fire hydrants shall be so located that they are not over five hundred (500) feet apart along the pavement with a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet to the last unit. The system shall be designed to deliver a minimum flow of one thousand (1,000) GPM from each of two (2) hydrants at the same time, with a residual pressure of twenty (20) psi. 
(3)  Minimum water main size for feeding a fire hydrant shall be six (6) inches. 
(4)  Fire hydrants shall have one four-and-one-half-inch pumper connection and two (2) two-and-one-half-inch hose connections. 
(h)  All PVC distribution system piping shall have an acceptable magnetic locator tape buried over it per city specifications. 
(i)  A hydrostatic test as set forth in F.A.C. ch. 62-555 or F.A.C. ch. 62-604 shall be applied to the whole or individual valved-off sections of the mains and hydrant leads. The pressure during the test shall be maintained at one hundred fifty (150) psi, and the duration of the test shall be two (2) hours. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.12) 
Sec. 12-836. - Wastewater system. 
(a)  All sanitary sewers, sewage force mains, lift stations, and appurtenances thereto shall be designed in accordance with applicable regulations of the city, the county health department, and the standards herein. 
(b)  No wastewater collection system or wastewater transmission system, or any part thereof, which is to become the property and sole responsibility of the city will be designed or constructed outside of any public right-of-way and/or easement which may be used for said purpose. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  Except where required for conflicts or for force mains, sewer pipes shall be PVC, meeting extra strength requirements of ASTM D3034, SDR 35. 
(2)  Where ductile iron pipe is required, it shall meet ANSI A21.50 and A21.51, Class 50 for push-on joints and Class 53 for flange joints. The exterior shall have standard bituminous coating, one mil thickness, on the exterior, and a forty (40) mil lining of polyethylene, fusion applied, on the inside. 
(3)  Manholes shall be precast concrete or brick, and shall conform to the city's standard construction drawings. The city engineer may require fiberglass manholes at certain locations. 
(d)  Minimum size of public gravity sewers shall be eight (8) inches; minimum size of sewer laterals within rights-of-way shall be six (6) inches. 
(e)  Gravity sewers shall have a minimum velocity of 2.0 fps. 
(f)  Testing. 
(1)  Force mains shall be tested hydrostatically for at least two (2) hours at a pressure of one hundred (100) psi. 
(2)  Gravity sewers. 
a.  Gravity sewers shall be tested by infiltration or ex-filtration, as determined by the field conditions, so as not to exceed maximum allowable leakage of one hundred twenty-five (125) gallons per inch diameter per mile of pipe per day; or 
b.  Gravity sewers shall be air tested per accepted industry procedures; 
c.  Gravity sewers shall be light tested to show a vertical axis in full pipe diameter and a horizontal axis in at least seventy-five (75) percent pipe diameter. 
(3)  PVC pipe shall be subjected to a deflection test; maximum deflection shall not exceed five (5) percent. 
(4)  Televising of sewers may be required by the city engineer in certain instances. 
(g)  Separation of water and wastewater lines. Water and wastewater lines including services, shall have a minimum lateral separation of ten (10) feet, and in the case of crossings, a minimum vertical separation of eighteen (18) inches shall be maintained. Where this is impossible, the sewer will be twenty (20) feet of either ductile pipe or six-inch-thick concrete encasement, centered at the point of crossing. 
(h)  Identification. 
(1)  Where ductile iron pipe is used for sanitary sewage, it shall be spirally wrapped with two-inch dark green vinyl tape per city specifications. 
(2)  All PVC pipe shall have an acceptable magnetic locator tape buried over it per city specifications. 
(i)  Air release valves. Air release valves shall be installed at all high points in force mains or as directed by the city. 
(j)  Pumping stations. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Pumping stations will be used only when conditions preclude the utilization of existing gravity sewer lines as a method of connecting to the existing city system. 
b.  All pumping stations shall have a minimum of two (2) pumps, each which must be capable of pumping two hundred fifty (250) percent of the average design flow. 
c.  Pumps and motors shall be designed to meet the applicable discharge, head, horsepower and RPM requirements. Pumps shall be capable of handling raw, unscreened sewage. All openings and passages shall be large enough to permit the passage of three-inch spheres. Pump suction and discharge openings shall be at least four (4) inches in diameter. The pumps shall be of the nonclog type, and shall have double mechanical seals with filters, and shall be oil lubricated. They shall have a cast iron impeller, and a flexible, nonlubricated coupling to the motor. The motors shall be NEMA Design B, Code F, 230/460 volt, 3-phase, 60 cycle, with a service factor of 1.15 and "F" class insulation. 
(2)  Wet pit design. 
a.  The pumping station shall be wet pit type and shall consist of two (2) submersible type pumps by Flygt or an approved equal, located within the wet well. 
b.  The pumps shall be of the type that can be removed without entering the wet well. The guide rail, guide rail brackets, cable holder, and all support bolts and hardware shall be stainless steel. 
c.  All pump discharge piping and fittings shall be 125# flanged ductile iron pipe, Class 53. 
d.  All valves shall be placed in a poured-in-place concrete vault per city standard drawing. 
e.  Wet well access covers (one for each pump) shall be constructed of aluminum, and shall be suitable for easy removal and replacement of the pumps. 
f.  The station shall have a weatherproof receptacle mounted on the exterior of the control panel for an emergency generator connection of a type compatible with city generators. 
g.  Positive odor and noise control provisions shall be included in the pumping station design. 
h.  An auxiliary bypass shall be provided between the wet well and the discharge force main. The connections shall be Kamlock or approved equal. 
(3)  Pumping station controls. 
a.  The pump manufacturer shall furnish electric controls, floats and float switches compatible with the equipment. 
b.  The pump control center shall contain a main circuit breaker, an emergency circuit breaker, motor starter, with thermal overload protection for each pump motor, hand-off-automatic switch for each pump motor, an automatic alternator relay, elapsed time meter for each pump motor, and any other circuitry as required for related equipment. 
c.  All pumping stations shall have a high water level alarm light and alarm horn with silencer button remotely mounted on a separate aluminum Nema 4 Enclosure, six (6) inches by six (6) inches by six (6) inches in size. Pumping stations shall also be equipped for and connected with the city telemetering system. The necessity for telemetering, whether immediate connection is to be accomplished or controls provided for future accommodation, shall be reviewed with the city's public works department. 
(4)  Wet wells. 
a.  General. Wet wells shall be constructed of reinforced concrete manhole riser sections conforming to ASTM Standard C478. The wet wells shall be constructed with reinforced concrete top and base slabs and shall have suitable access covers. 
b.  Wet wells shall have a maximum of one influent line. When two (2) or more sewers converge at the pump station site, a manhole shall be provided for these lines, and a single discharge line shall be run from a manhole to the wet well. 
c.  The interior and exterior of each wet well shall be painted with two (2) coats of Koppers "Bitumastic 300-M" or an approved equal, applied in accordance with the manufacturer's directions. 
d.  When the wet well is completed, a frame cover, and top slab shall be completed to the grade shown on the plans. 
(5)  Site paving, fencing, landscaping. 
a.  Pumping station site shall be paved with four-inch minimum three thousand (3,000) psi concrete, reinforced with six (6) by 6-10/10 wire mesh. Discharge piping, water service and conduits shall be located beneath the slab. 
b.  The site shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high chainlink fence, and shall be buffered as specified in division 17 of this article. 
(k)  Low pressure systems. 
(1)  Conditions for use. Low pressure systems may be used as an alternative to conventional sewerage systems under the following conditions: 
a.  Where total costs of a conventional sewerage system would be excessive because of: 
1.  High groundwater table; 
2.  Unstable soil conditions; 
3.  Multiple lift stations; or 
4.  Excessive depth of excavation due to nature of terrain; or 
b.  Costs of providing conventional sewage collection would be excessive in areas characterized by low flows or slow and unpredictable growth; 
c.  To provide environmentally acceptable centralized sewerage collection systems in recreational areas where conventional sewerage systems are unfeasible; or 
d.  To provide immediate relief to failing on-site sewage disposal systems. 
(2)  Design standards. 
a.  All low pressure force main manifolds shall be located wholly within the rights-of-way or in public easements contiguous thereto. All pumps and appurtenances thereto shall be located wholly within the property they serve. 
b.  The pump unit shall be designed for handling wastewater, paper and other material normally found in sewage and shall be designed to handle two-inch solids. It shall be of the type specified by the city engineer and shall be complete with pump, level control, check valve, piping, and duplex control box. 
c.  The pump shall be installed in a fiberglass basin specifically designed for said pump. The basin shall have a cast iron cover. 
d.  Pressure pipe two (2) inches and larger shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC), SDR 21, ASTM D-2241. 
e.  The influent gravity sewer shall be PVC, PSM, D-3034. 
(3)  Operational standards. 
a.  The city shall own and maintain all force main manifolds within public rights-of-way and all public easements dedicated for same. 
b.  The pump unit and appurtenances thereto shall be owned and maintained by the property owner. 
c.  The city shall make, or contract with a third party for, routine inspections of the pump unit, emergency repairs, all at the expense of the property owner. 
d.  The city council shall adopt fees to cover the cost of the periodic inspections and emergency services. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.13; Ord. No. 86, 9-16-1961; Ord. No. 249, 10-5-1971; Ord. No. 728, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 759, 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 12-837. - Public transit bus stops. 
(a)  Bus routes shall be established by the Hillsborough Area Regional Transportation Authority (HART). All developments on existing or future bus routes shall make provision for either a transit stop and/or ensure pedestrian access to transit stops. All residential developments containing more than two hundred (200) dwelling units, and all nonresidential developments of five (5) or more acres of land area shall propose a transit stop or access to a transit stop as part of their development application. The city and HART will determine the timing and location for installation of the transit stop. Such facilities, when built in accordance with the provisions of this division, shall be counted as part of the project's total open space. 
(1)  The transit stop shall be in a high activity area and well lighted. 
(2)  Stops should be located on collector and arterial roads near the center of population of residential or employment areas. In retail areas, locations near the anchor tenants are preferred. Where access to a transit stop is provided on private property, an agreement for easement shall be provided to HART. 
(b)  All transit stop facilities shall be designed to ensure the safe movement of pedestrians and to be accessible to persons with disabilities. 
(c)  Transit stops shall be designed as follows, unless otherwise determined by the city and HART: 
(1)  Each stop shall have seating, landscaping, lighting, signage, and route and schedule information. 
(2)  Shelters shall be located and designed according to HART standards. Stops with more than one bus likely at a time may need additional shelters as required by HART. 
(3)  Shelter design should be coordinated with surrounding development. The requirement for a separate shelter may be eliminated where the architecture provides for similarly protected space that includes suitable seating out of inclement weather, as approved by the city and HART. 
(4)  Seating shall be provided both within the shelter and/or with suitable street furniture outside the shelter. 
(5)  Landscaping shall be provided in the form of planters or other appropriate landscaping devices and shall include an area with trees suitable so that seating areas can be shaded. 
(6)  All such stops shall be designed with coordinated street furniture including lighting, architecture of the shelter, seating, and waste disposal containers. 
(7)  Access and internal road geometrics with a development which provides a bus stop, shall accommodate a one hundred two-inch-wide by forty-five-foot-long advance design coach. 
(8)  Sidewalks, curb cuts, wheelchair ramps, and pedestrian paths shall be designed to move transit users to their final destinations on pedestrian walks or precincts that are well-lighted and pleasant. 
(9)  Where transit stops are located adjacent to arterial and collector roadways, the developer shall provide bus pullout bays, designed in accordance with the standards of the city, County, HART, and FDOT, where appropriate. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.14; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
Sec. 12-838. - Nonmotorized transportation facilities. 
(a)  Off-street paths and/or public easements for bicycle and pedestrian travel between structures or linking internal and external circulation systems shall be provided by the developer where such facilities would significantly shorten nonmotorized travel distances. 
(b)  Bollards, gates, or other barriers to vehicles shall be incorporated into the design of off-street paths. 
(c)  Bicycle-friendly road design of collector and arterial roads shall be required during road resurfacing, widening, or new construction provided by the developer. This requirement may be met with outside lane widths of fourteen (14) feet or greater, paved shoulders, or marked bicycle lanes, as recommended in the Bicycle Facilities Planning and Design Manual (FDOT 1982, or subsequent editions). 
(d)  When a residential development is planned contiguous to a school site, another residential area, or a commercial area, nonmotorized access shall be provided, if not otherwise available through use of local streets. Easements shall be required for the development of future bicycle/pedestrian paths when future adjacent land use is unknown. (Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.15; Ord. No. 794, 11-19-1991) 
Sec. 12-839. - Regulation of newsracks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertising circular means any publication that is predominantly advertising and containing minimal or no news reports. 
    Base means a concrete pad installed or used to support a newsrack. 
    Modular newsrack means a connected grouping of two (2) to fourteen (14) compartments within a single structure, with all coin-operated newsracks having a coin mechanism for each compartment, which may be placed on a mount or pedestal bolted to a base surface or be bolted directly to the paved surface, which is installed or used for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers, advertising circulars or similar publications. For purposes of these regulations, the term "newsrack" means "modular newsrack." 
    Mount means a pedestal or other structure holding a newsrack and attached to a base. 
    Newspaper means any publication that is predominantly comprised of news reports or other non-commercial articles or information. 
    Newsrack compartment means each compartment within a newsrack designed to contain the newspapers, advertising circulars or similar publications being sold or distributed from that newsrack. 
    On-street parking area means those portions of the roadway directly adjacent to a curb or sidewalk where motorized vehicular parking is permitted. 
    Owner means the particular person or legal entity who is responsible for installing and/or maintaining a newsrack, or the owner or one who distributes newspapers, periodicals, advertising circulars or other publications from the newsrack. 
    Private property means all property other than public property, including private rights-of-way. 
    Public property means parks, rights-of-way, easements and any and all other real property owned by the public, any governmental agency, or the city. 
    Public right-of-way means land dedicated or deeded to the public, occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, highway, sidewalk, pedestrian path, parkway, bicycle path or alley. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Sidewalk means any surface within a right-of-way provided for the exclusive or primary use of pedestrians. 
    Visibility triangle means: 
(1)  At street intersections, an area bounded by the first thirty (30) feet along the intersecting edges of the rights-of-way, projected where rounded, and a diagonal line extending across the property and connecting the ends of such thirty-foot lines. 
(2)  At intersections of driveways with streets, an area bounded by the first ten (10) feet along the intersecting edges of the right-of-way and the driveway, projected where rounded, and a diagonal line extending across the property and connecting the ends of such ten-foot lines. 
(b)  Installation and maintenance. 
(1)  Obstruction prohibited. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public or private street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway, including medians. 
(2)  Design/placement. Newsracks shall be placed and maintained in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  Modular newsracks constructed of metal shall be the only type of newsracks allowed to be installed and maintained in the city, except that newsracks installed inside of an enclosed building may be of any type allowed by the owner of the property. 
b.  Newsracks allowed by the owner of a property shall be placed parallel to and not more than six (6) inches from the wall of the principle permanent structure located thereon. 
c.  No more than two (2) single-compartment metal newsracks may be installed and maintained in any location. Where there exists a need or demand for three (3) or more compartments, the single-compartment newsrack(s) must be removed to accommodate the placement of a multiple-compartment newsrack. 
d.  Newsrack mounts; pedestals, frames and boxes shall be hunter green or equivalent. 
e.  Newsracks shall not exceed fifty-four (54) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches in depth. 
f.  Newsracks shall not be chained, attached or otherwise secured to utility poles, signs, benches or other fixtures within public right-of-way or property. 
g.  Newsracks shall contain no advertising except the name of the publication being distributed. 
h.  Newsracks shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition, and in good repair at all times. Each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
1.  It is free of graffiti; 
2.  It is free of dirt and grease; 
3.  It is free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof; 
4.  It is free of rust and corrosion in the visible metal areas thereof; 
5.  The clear plastic or glass parts thereon, if any, through which the publications are viewed, are unbroken and free of cracks, dirt, blemishes and discoloration; 
6.  The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are free of tears, peeling or fading; 
7.  The structured parts are not broken or unduly misshapen; 
8.  The surrounding area upon which the newsrack is placed will also be maintained in a neat and orderly condition; and 
9.  The advertising circular or newspaper publication content shall be current and not out-of-date, so that it will have timely value to its intended consumer or user. 
i.  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the newsrack in such a manner as to be readily visible and readable to a prospective customer. 
j.  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within a visibility triangle. 
2.  Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or other emergency facility, traffic sign or signal, bus bench, bus shelter or building entrance. 
3.  Within ten (10) feet of any marked crosswalk. 
4.  Within ten (10) feet of the point where any driveway intersects with a public or private street. 
5.  Within five (5) feet ahead of, and fifteen (15) feet of the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop, measured along the edge of the pavement. 
6.  At any location that does not provide a clear width of continuous passage of at least thirty-six (36) inches for pedestrians and wheelchairs. 
7.  In a designated parking space or driveway. 
8.  At any location in such a manner as to block any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
(c)  Nonconforming newsracks. All newsracks within the city must be in compliance with the terms of these regulations within one year of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Any newsrack found to be in violation at the end of the applicable period or at any time thereafter, shall be brought into compliance or removed by the owner within forty-five (45) days after written notification. Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified by such order shall result in the matter being referred to the municipal code enforcement board for hearing. 
(d)  Abandonment. In the event fifty-one (51) percent of the total newsrack compartments in a modular newsrack remain empty for fourteen (14) continuous days, it shall be deemed abandoned and the city shall notify the owner to remove the newsrack or replace it with a smaller newsrack. For purposes of enforcing this provision, a compartment shall be considered abandoned if the content of the publication therein is not current and is out-of-date, so that it is of little or no value to its intended user or consumer. 
(e)  Newsrack mounting standards. 
(1)  Solid base. Newsracks shall be installed level and plumb on a hard surface. Every newsrack on a single pedestal or a multiple post shall be securely bolted to a level, concrete base set in the ground. 
(2)  Damage to property. Any damage to public property or public right-of-way at the time of installation or removal of a newsrack shall be the responsibility of the owner. Upon removal of the newsrack, the owner shall be responsible for restoring the property surface to its pre-installation condition, subject to reasonable wear and tear. 
(Code 2001, § 25.745.16; Ord. No. 1085, 2-4-2003) 
Secs. 12-840-12-856. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION STANDARDS 

Sec. 12-857. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide reasonable standards and regulations to assure the preservation of quality residential neighborhoods in the city, and provide standards and regulations for the following: 
(1)  Commercial vehicles in residential zoning districts; 
(2)  Recreational vehicles and boats in residential zoning districts; 
(3)  Material and equipment storage; 
(4)  Fences, walls and hedges; 
(5)  Home occupations; 
(6)  Adult bookstores and theaters; 
(7)  Manufactured homes; and 
(8)  Historical and architectural preservation. 
(Code 2001, § 25.750.1) 
Sec. 12-858. - Commercial vehicles in residential zoning districts. 
    There shall be compliance with section 12-922. 
(Code 2001, § 25.750.2; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 12-859. - Recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers in residential zoning districts. 
    Recreational vehicles, boats (as defined in article II of this LDC) and all noncommercial trailers less than fifteen (15) feet in length may be parked in a residential zoning district (street or lot) only under the following conditions, otherwise, they are prohibited from residential zoning districts: 
(1)  The recreational vehicles or boats may not be occupied for living purposes except in licensed parks and campgrounds, or by special event permit. 
(2)  The recreational vehicles and boats (including boat trailers) must be parked in a rear or side yard no closer than five (5) feet to any property line and screened from view by a fence or landscaped buffer with at least eighty (80) percent opacity not to exceed seven (7) feet in height but are not subject to parking requirements provided in section 12-921; or parked within a garage or carport. 
(3)  All noncommercial trailers must be parked in a rear or side yard no closer than five (5) feet to any property line and screened from view by a buffer not to exceed seven (7) feet in height; or parked within an enclosed garage. 
(4)  The recreational vehicles and boats may be parked in the front yard on a temporary basis, as follows: 
a.  For a period of up to two (2) days for purposes of loading, unloading, and cleaning; 
b.  For a period of up to seven (7) days when owned by visitors or house guests of the subject property. 
(5)  The recreational vehicles and boats, (including boat trailers), are parked or stored in areas specifically designated for storage and/or parking where said areas have been approved by plat, site plan or otherwise approved by city council. 
(6)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding anything written above, the following recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section: vans, mini-vans, trucks, and other similar motorized vehicles having a length of twenty (20) feet or less, or a height of nine (9) feet or less and designed for the purpose of transporting passengers, cargo, or both; but which have been modified inside for camping or other recreational purposes. (Note: Commercial vehicles are regulated under section 12-858.) 
(Code 2001, § 25.750.3; Ord. No. 780, 8-6-1991; Ord. No. 1087, 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 1355, § 4(exh. C), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-860. - Material and equipment storage in residential zoning districts; outdoor storage of home appliances and inoperative vehicles. 
(a)  The storage of materials, supplies, appliances or equipment including but not limited to those used or designed for commercial or industrial use, and the outdoor storage of home appliances or interior furnishings and inoperative vehicles is hereby prohibited in any residential zoning district. As used in this section, the term "inoperative vehicle" means and includes: 
(1)  Any vehicle from which parts, including, but not limited to, the chassis, engine, wheels or tires have been removed; 
(2)  Any vehicle without a valid, current registration and displayed tag; or 
(3)  Any vehicle on jacks, blocks, lifts, with flat tire(s) or which is otherwise incapable of movement under its own power and will remain so unless major repair or reconstruction occurs. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the storage of building materials on a lot if said building materials are being actively used for construction of a building on said lot in possession of building permit(s) when required and in conformity with the terms of this LDC and this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the restoration of vehicles within an enclosed garage. (Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990) 
(Code 2001, § 25.750.4; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 1355, § 5(exh. D), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-861. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
(a)  Application. A survey showing the location of easements and the proposed fence or wall with respect to the existing structure and property lines, shall be submitted with a permit application, along with a sketch or description of the proposed materials to be used and the proposed height. All fences, wall and required landscaping shall be located within the boundaries of the parcel as identified in the survey. 
(b)  Visibility. It is the intent of this section that nothing shall obstruct the line of sight so as to prevent the visibility of an approaching vehicle within the defined visibility triangle. 
(c)  Planned development (PD) zonings. To the extent that standards for fences, wall, and hedges are not included in the PD zoning conditions of approval or final site plan, the requirements of this section shall apply at the time of permitting. Standards of this section shall apply in accordance to the use(s) within the PD zoning. 
(d)  Nothing in this section changes the requirements or standards for fencing or safety barriers included in section 12-900, pertaining to swimming pools, or solid, wood fence, or landscape buffers as may be required in division 17 of this article or other requirements elsewhere in this Code. 
(e)  Except as may be provided above or elsewhere in this LDC, or by an approved subdivision plat or site plan, a fence or wall shall be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Height. The maximum height of any such fence or wall shall be as follows: 
a.  Seven (7) feet when in any side or rear yard of single family districts. 
b.  Six (6) feet, including a chain link fence with landscaping, when in a front yard having a front setback depth of seventy-five (75) feet or more in single family districts (see graphic). 

c.  Three (3) feet when the fence or wall is "decorative" and located in the front yard of single family districts. 
d.  Three (3) feet when the fence or wall is within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of two (2) street right-of-way lines or the intersection of said lines extended. 
e.  Six (6) feet on the perimeter and all yards of the property for multi-family, nonresidential, and agricultural uses as required elsewhere in this Code. 
f.  Eight (8) feet for masonry, stucco, or cement block walls with perimeter landscaping, so that it is on the exterior of the wall and visible from the street or residentially zoned properties, or when the purpose is to screen outdoor storage area from view of the street or residentially zoned properties in the Light Industrial (LI) zoning district. 
g.  The maximum height of any section of a fence or wall shall be allowed to deviate when the wall is "stepped" to accommodate sloping ground by no more than an additional eight (8) inches or by averaging the fence height when the sloping ground is significant. 
h.  The height of a gate or fence and respective posts, columns, or caps shall not exceed one foot above the maximum height of the fence or wall. 
(2)  Measuring height. Vertical calculation of "height" of a fence shall be made by vertical measurements along the length of the outside face when measured from final, finished grade. 
(3)  Orientation. The finished side of any such wall or fence shall face out. 
(4)  Design and appearance. 
a.  Decorative fence material. A "decorative" fence or wall may not be constructed of chain link, board-on-board, solid brick, solid masonry, or material similar in appearance. (Examples of acceptable decorative fences or walls are split rail, corral, picket, wrought iron; or, low brick or stucco walls constructed alternately of brick or masonry, and sections of wrought iron, aluminum, or material similar in appearance.) 
b.  No roofing, beams, lattice work, barbed wire, razor wire, sharp objects, or other like material or structure shall be attached to or placed upon such wall or fence. 
c.  Barb wire is limited to industrial uses within the Light Industrial (LI) and agricultural uses within the Agricultural Urban (A-U) zoning districts. 
d.  The fence or wall shall be uniform in material, design, and appearance, such that the overall design is visibly apparent from public view, but this does not preclude architectural variations that may be incorporated into the fence or wall design. This requirement shall prohibit the use of a random pattern or consistent use of alternating materials or combinations, such that sections of PVC, wrought iron, wood, steel, chain link, other various materials, multiple colors, or random, varying height, etc., would occur within a portion or entire length of a property line. 
(5)  Structural integrity. All fence posts shall adequately support attached sections of fence and there shall be no gaps or interruptions in fence continuity, except for spacing as occurs in picket, wrought iron, or other fencing as part of the uniform design of the fence or wall. 
(6)  Maintenance. All fences, walls and hedges shall be continuous, regularly maintained to continue their structural integrity, and/or to provide a neat and clean appearance and to preserve the aesthetic character of the neighborhood. In the case of exterior subdivision walls, the homeowner's association or condominium association shall be jointly and severally responsible with the home/unit owner for the maintenance of said exterior wall as well as the grass or landscaped area between the wall and paved surface of the adjoining roadway. The fabrication of fences and walls shall follow good construction methods. Walls shall have longitudinal footer and bond beam reinforcing steel as well as vertical reinforcing steel at no more than four (4) feet on center. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping planted in front of a fence or wall in the front, corner, or other yard that faces any public right-of-way shall have the following minimum setback if landscaping is planted in front of the fence or wall as follows: 
1.  Single-family residential-At least a three-foot setback. 
2.  Multi-family residential, nonresidential, or agricultural-At least a five-foot setback or in accordance to other portions of this Code, whichever is more restrictive. 
3.  If no landscaping is planted adjacent to the fence facing any public right-of-way, then the fence or wall shall be permitted to be on the property line. 
4.  Planting of landscaping or trees or installation of irrigation systems within the public or private right-of-way is prohibited, unless the owner of the right-of-way has provided written approval to allow improvements in said right-of-way. Such approval shall be submitted with the building permit for the fence or wall. 
b.  Single-family residential. Where a chain link fence is visible from a street, and is located in a front, rear, or side yard of a single family zoning district, and the fence is between the house and the street, or, the fence is forward of the front of an adjacent residence, said fence shall be landscaped by self-supporting plant material in such a manner so as to attain screening of the fence with eighty (80) percent opacity within two (2) years of planting, except chain link fences along the side or rear property lines when any part of the side or rear yard fence is forward of the front of an adjacent house need not be landscaped unless the lot is a corner lot and facing any public right-of-way, effective May 5, 1991. 
c.  Multi-family residential, nonresidential, and agricultural. A chain link fence shall also be permitted for multi-family and nonresidential uses when landscaping is provided on the exterior of the fence, when the fence is located adjacent to right-of-way, single family residential zoning districts, or lesser intense zoning district or use (i.e., industrial next to commercial, multi-family next to single family residential, etc.). Like zoning districts or uses adjacent to each other shall not be required to provide landscaping, except to address outdoor storage screening or other requirements of this Code. Agricultural uses or uses abutting agricultural uses shall not be required to provide landscaping with a required fence or wall. 
(8)  Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) may be utilized as part of staff review and evaluation on an as needed basis when the placement of a fence, wall, hedge, or landscaping, due the design and angle of the adjacent structure(s), may create a hidden space that blocks clear sight lines or visibility that may result in unsafe conditions. 
(9)  Nonconforming fences and walls shall be subject to the provisions of nonconformities contained in article V of this Code. 
(f)  Exceptions. Fences and walls may be located on the property as shown in the graphics in this subsection: 
(1)  Irregular or standard lots with similar or varying building setbacks. 
(2)  Corner lots. 
a.  For purposes of this section, the corner yard(s), shall be considered a side yard(s) whereby a fence or wall shall not extend beyond the build-to-line of the home into the front yard, except as described in (f)(1) of this section. 
b.  In order to make a determination on yards for a property consistent the intent of this Code, criteria for consideration shall include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  The property address and orientation of the home with respect to homes on the immediate adjacent or facing block(s) or blockfaces; 
2.  The number, shape(s) and location(s) of driveway(s) to be used to access the property, including driveways that run through the entire property; 
3.  Prior approvals granted by the city on the property and other unique factors that may be applicable to the subject property or adjacent surrounding area. 
(3)  The requirements of this section may be exceeded as a result of approval of a variance or waiver by the board of adjustment or city council, respectively, as allowed by this Code. 
Example of Standard and Corner Lots

Example of Irregular and Irregular Corner Lots

(Code 2001, § 25.750.5; Ord. No. 164, 7-19-1966; Ord. No. 223, 1-6-1970; Ord. No. 419, 3-3-1981; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 786, 9-3-1991; Ord. No. 812, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 1065, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 1355, § 6(exh. E), 1-7-14; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-862. - Radio, TV antennae; satellite dishes; communication towers. 
    To the extent not superseded by federal law or regulation, radio and television antennae and dishes shall be considered accessory structures subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
(1)  Single-family residential zoning districts. 
a.  Roof-mounted satellite dishes are not permitted in single-family residential zoning districts unless eighty (80) percent of the antenna can be screened from view from all side property lines. 
b.  Despite height allowances otherwise permitted for accessory structures, radio and television receiving antennae shall not exceed the maximum height limit specified for the zoning district, and ground-mounted satellite dishes shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height when fully extended. 
c.  Ground-mounted radio and television receiving antennae and dishes shall comply with accessory structure setbacks, or shall be set back a distance equal to fifty (50) percent of the maximum antenna or dish height (fully extended) whichever is greater. Height includes pole or mast support. If on a corner lot, no antenna or dish may be located closer to the side street than the principal structure. 
d.  All ground-mounted antennae and dishes including supports shall be erected and maintained within the rear yard and shall be prohibited in any public easement or right-of-way. 
e.  No more than one antenna or dish shall be allowed on a single-family residential lot. 
f.  No advertising material shall be allowed on any antenna or dish. 
g.  Satellite dishes shall be of a color which blends with the surroundings. 
h.  All ground-mounted dishes shall be screened from view from surrounding properties and any right-of-way by a fence, wall or hedge a minimum of seven (7) feet in height. The screen must be eighty (80) percent opaque. However, at time of planting, hedges may be a minimum of three (3) feet in height, but must be capable of reaching seven (7) feet within three (3) years of installation. 
(2)  Multifamily residential zoning districts. 
a.  Despite height allowances otherwise permitted for accessory structures, radio and television receiving antennae shall not exceed the maximum height specified within the zoning district. Roof-mounted satellite dishes shall not be permitted on buildings having a height of thirty (30) feet or less unless eighty (80) percent of the dish is screened from surrounding properties and any public right-of-way. 
b.  Above thirty (30) feet, roof-mounted antennae and dishes are permitted up to the maximum height specified for the zoning district and shall be located in such a manner as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. 
c.  Ground-mounted satellite dishes shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height when fully extended and shall be screened from view from surrounding properties and any public right-of-way by a fence, wall or hedge a minimum of seven (7) feet in height. The screen must be eighty (80) percent opaque. However, at time of planting, hedges may be a minimum of three (3) feet in height, but must be capable of reaching seven (7) feet within three (3) years of installation. 
d.  Ground-mounted radio and television receiving antennae and dishes shall comply with accessory structure setbacks, or shall be set back a distance equal to fifty (50) percent of the maximum antenna or dish height (fully extended) whichever is greater. If on a corner lot, no antenna or dish may be located closer to the side street than the principal structure. 
e.  No antenna or satellite dish may be located on any part of a zoning lot forward of the rear edge of the building. All antennae and satellite dishes must be set back from any property line a distance equal to the distance required for the principal structure. 
f.  No installation, including supports, shall be located in any required yard(s) or in any public easement or right-of-way. 
g.  Radio and television receiving antennae that are ground-mounted shall be located and designed to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from any public right-of-way. 
h.  Satellite dishes shall be of a color which blends with the surroundings. 
i.  No advertising is allowed on any antenna or dish. 
j.  No more than two (2) antennae or dishes are allowed per zoning lot. 
(3)  Commercial and institutional/professional zoning districts. 
a.  Despite height allowances otherwise permitted for accessory structures, radio and television receiving and transmitting antennae and satellite dishes shall not exceed the maximum height specified within the zoning district, and roof-mounted satellite dishes shall not be permitted on buildings having a height of thirty (30) feet or less, unless eighty (80) percent of the dish is screened from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. 
b.  No screening is required for a roof-mounted antenna or satellite dish on a building that exceeds thirty (30) feet in height so long as the antenna or satellite dish does not exceed the maximum height specified for the zoning district and is located in such a manner as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding property and public right-of-way. 
c.  Ground-mounted dishes shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall be screened from view from surrounding properties and any public rights-of-way by a fence, wall or hedge a minimum of seven (7) feet in height. The screen must be eighty (80) percent opaque. However, at time of planting, hedges may be a minimum of three (3) feet in height, but must be capable of reaching seven (7) feet within three (3) years of installation. 
d.  Approved solid, wood fences, or landscape buffers along the property lines may also serve as satellite dish screens, provided they meet the standards and objectives cited herein. 
e.  Ground-mounted radio and television antennae and dishes must be located to the rear of the building and shall be set back from all property lines a distance of at least fifty (50) percent of the height of the antennae or dish. If on a corner lot, the antenna or dish may be located no closer to the side property line than the building. 
f.  No installation, including supports, shall be located in any public easement or right-of-way. 
g.  Satellite dishes shall be of a color which blends into the surroundings. 
h.  No advertising material shall be allowed on any antenna or dish. 
i.  No more than two (2) antennae or dishes shall be allowed per zoning lot. 
(4)  Communication towers and communication antennae. City towers and antennae with public safety systems or equipment which may be used in conjunction with public/private facility co-location or privately owned towers, which accommodate city public safety systems or equipment, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. No. 1129, 10-19-2004) 
a.  Minimum height. Communication towers and communication antennae must locate on existing towers or buildings which are at least thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
1.  When located on top of buildings, communication towers shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the buildings (water towers shall not be considered to be buildings subject to this setback requirement); 
2.  Communication towers and communication antennae shall not exceed greater than forty (40) percent over the building height. 
b.  Exceptions. Utility poles and transmission towers shall not be considered towers or buildings upon which antennae and/or towers are permitted to be located pursuant to this section. 
c.  Waiver required. New freestanding communication towers/communication antennae shall not be allowed unless the applicant secures a waiver showing: 
1.  That existing towers and buildings do not technologically afford the applicant the ability to provide service to the service area of the applicant or service provider; and 
2.  That the geographical boundaries of the proposed service area cannot technologically be bifurcated to avoid the necessity for a freestanding tower/antenna. 
d.  Structural design. New communication towers/antennae and modifications to existing structures including, without limitation, the addition of height, antennae or providers, shall be constructed in accordance with all city building codes. 
e.  Setbacks. Communication tower/antenna setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower/antenna, or protruding building structure at the base of the tower, whichever is closest to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. In addition, where there is a principal building housing a principal use located on the site, the communication tower/antenna and accessory structures to the tower/antenna shall be located behind the main building line. 
f.  Separation from off-site uses. 
1.  Communication tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the closest point of off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified below. For purposes of this requirement, Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates for the center of the tower(s) may be used. 
2.  Separation requirements for communication towers from residentially zoned and used lands or residential uses shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Tower Type Separation Distance Monopole or camouflaged One foot for each foot of tower height Lattice Not permitted  
g.  Separation distances between communication towers. 
1.  Separation distances between communication towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and those towers that are existing and/or have received land use or building permit approval from the city or adjoining jurisdictions. 
2.  The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. For purposes of this requirement, GPS coordinates for the tower(s) may be used. 
3.  The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as follows: 
EXISTING TOWERS-TYPES 
(Including Extra-Jurisdictional Area) 
Proposed Tower Types Monopole 75 feet in Height or Greater Monopole Less Than 75 feet in Height Camouflaged or monopole 75 feet in height or greater 2,000 1,500 Camouflaged or monopole less than 75 feet in height 1,500 1,500 Lattice 2,000 1,500  
h.  Fencing. A chainlink fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each communication tower. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. 
i.  Landscaping. The visual impacts of a communication tower shall be mitigated for nearby viewers through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures. The following landscaping and buffering of communication towers shall be required around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, the use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute of or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements: 
1.  A row of trees a minimum of eight (8) feet tall and a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence; and 
2.  A continuous hedge at least thirty (30) inches high at planting capable of growing to at least thirty-six (36) inches in height within eighteen (18) months shall be planted in front of the tree line referenced above; and 
3.  All landscaping shall be of the evergreen variety. 
j.  Height. 
1.  No freestanding communication tower/antenna shall exceed one hundred ten (110) feet in height from ground level except that a ten (10) percent increase in tower height may be permitted where it can be established that said increase will afford opportunity for co-location. Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, under no circumstances shall a communication tower exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height without approval from city council. (Ord. No. 1129, 10-19-2004) 
2.  Where installed on top of a building, no communication tower/antenna shall extend greater than forty (40) percent over the building height. 
3.  An existing communication tower may be modified to a taller height not to exceed ten (10) percent of the tower's existing height to accommodate the co-location of an additional communication antenna. 
(i)  The height change referred to in this subsection may only occur one time per communication tower. 
(ii)  The height change referred to in this subsection shall not occur prior to twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance of the initial permit for tower construction. 
(iii)  The additional height referred to in this subsection shall not require an additional distance separation. The communication towers pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations. 
k.  Type of construction. Communication towers shall be of a monopole construction, provided, however, camouflaged construction may be approved by the city council subject to conditional use approval, upon consideration of the following factors: 
1.  Compatibility with adjacent properties; 
2.  Architectural consistency with adjacent properties; 
3.  Visual impact on adjacent properties, including visual access of adjacent properties to sunlight; and 
4.  Design of accessory structures in order to be architecturally consistent with the existing structures on the site. A waiver from the fencing and landscaping requirements of this section may be requested for such accessory structures. 
l.  Development criteria. Communication towers/antennae shall comply with the minimum development criteria of the district in which they are located, pertaining to minimum lot size and open space. 
m.  Illumination. Communication towers/antennae shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
n.  Co-location. 
1.  Monopole communication towers shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of one additional communication service provider. 
2.  Camouflaged communication towers may be engineered and constructed without accommodating additional communication service providers. 
3.  Communication towers located within electrical substations may be engineered and constructed without accommodating additional communication service providers. Such towers shall be monopole construction and shall be subject to all of the requirements of this section. 
4.  Proposed communication antennae may, and are encouraged, to co-locate onto existing communication towers and shall not necessitate additional conditional review. 
5.  If determined by the city that the proposed tower is situated in a location which will benefit the city's telecommunication systems, then the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate the additional telecommunication equipment beneficial to the public system at a cost to the city no greater than the actual expense of the provider in so engineering and constructing the tower to meet the city's needs. 
6.  On-site location. A communication tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional communication antenna may be moved on-site within fifty (50) feet of its existing location, however, the antenna shall meet setback requirements. After the communication tower is rebuilt to accommodate the co-location, only one tower may remain on the site. 
7.  A relocated on-site communication tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers. The on-site relocation of a communication tower shall maintain separation distances to residentially zoned or used lands. 
o.  Noninterference. No communication tower or antenna shall interfere with public safety communication. Frequency coordination is required to ensure noninterference with public safety system and/or public safety entities. 
p.  Documentation. Documentation to demonstrate conformance with all requirements of these provisions shall be submitted by the applicant with all requests to construct, locate or modify a communication tower/antenna. A statement by the applicant as to how construction of the communication tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennae for future users shall be included with the documentation. 
q.  Abandonment. 
1.  In the event the use of any communication tower has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional one hundred eighty (180) days within which to: 
(i)  Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower; or 
(ii)  Dismantle and remove the tower. 
2.  The owner of the real property shall be ultimately responsible for all costs of dismantling and removal, and in the event the tower is not removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of abandonment, the city may proceed to do so and assess the costs against the real property. The lien of such assessment shall bear interest, have priority and be collectable at the same rate and in like manner as provided for special assessments by state law. At the earlier of one hundred eighty-one (181) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any special exception, waiver and/or variance approval for the tower shall automatically expire. 
r.  Finished color. Communication towers not requiring FAA painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or be painted a noncontrasting blue or gray finish. The color should be selected so as to minimize the equipment's visibility. (Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996) 
(5)  Exceptions. 
a.  Radio and television antennae and dishes installed for use by military and emergency personnel including, but not limited to, civil defense, police and fire personnel and agencies, may be erected and operated in any location and shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything previously written above, radio and television receiving and transmitting antennae and dishes in conjunction with churches, synagogues, and educational institutions may be permitted. 
c.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the erection and operation of ham radio transmitting antennae and dishes which comply with subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
d.  For purposes of these regulations, mast- or pole-mounted satellite dish antennae fastened to the wall of the building shall be considered roof mounted. 
(6)  Variance. Property owners who are unable to meet the above standards may apply for a variance pursuant to the requirements of article VI of this LDC. 
(7)  Nonconformance. Radio and television antennae and satellite dishes which are made nonconforming by the adoption of these regulations shall be governed by section 12-116. (Ord. No. 588, 8-19-1966; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 791, 10-1-1991) 
(Code 2001, § 25.750.6; Ord. No. 588, 8-19-1966; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 791, 10-1-1991; Ord. No. 938, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1129, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 12-863. - Provisions for home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish criteria enabling certain occupations to occur as an accessory use within dwelling units, providing that the occupation will have no adverse effect or impact on the residential environs. 
(b)  Local business tax receipt required. Any person who conducts an occupation within a residential dwelling in accordance with these regulations shall be required to obtain a local business tax receipt from the city. (Ord. No. 1054, 10-16-2001) 
(c)  Standards. The conduct of an occupation within a residential dwelling shall conform to the standards enumerated hereunder. 
(1)  No sale or trading in merchandise shall be carried on from the property where the occupation is located. 
(2)  No persons other than family members residing within the dwelling unit shall be engaged in the occupation. 
(3)  All material, equipment or supplies used in the conduct of the occupation shall be kept entirely within the residential dwelling. 
(4)  No occupation shall be conducted on the property outside the dwelling unit. 
(5)  Traffic generated by the conduct of the occupation shall be no greater in volume than would normally be expected at a similar residence where no home occupation is conducted. 
(6)  The occupation shall not involve the use of a commercial vehicle for delivery to or from the premises except third party common/parcel carrier/delivery service not to exceed two (2) trips per day. 
(7)  No marked vehicle or equipment used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be parked on the property or contiguous street right-of-way that would identify, advertise, or otherwise attract attention to the occupation. 
(8)  No occupation shall be conducted or equipment or process associated with such occupation shall be used that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust, smoke, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses at the lot line or beyond the lot line if the occupation is conducted in a detached single-family dwelling, or beyond the exterior of any common walls in a joined or multiple-family dwelling. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the premises. 
(9)  No display of projects, operations, signs, or name plates shall be visible from outside the dwelling. 
(d)  Prohibited home occupations. The following occupations conducted in residential dwellings are expressly prohibited and presumed to be public nuisances in residential neighborhoods: 
(1)  Barbershop, beauty shop. 
(2)  Public dining facility. 
(3)  Photographic studio. 
(4)  Film developing or processing. 
(5)  Repair shop, except watches and jewelry. 
(6)  Laboratory, involving the conduct of experiments entailing the use of chemicals or matter or energy that creates, or causes to be created, noise, noxious odors, or hazards dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 2001, § 25.750.7; Ord. No. 164, 7-9-1966; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 1054, 10-16-2001) 
Sec. 12-864. - Adult bookstores, adult theaters and special cabarets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films, newspapers, photographs, paintings, drawings, or other publications, or graphic media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this division, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
    Adult theater means an enclosed building or an enclosed space within a building used for presenting either filmed or live plays, dances, or other performances either by individuals or groups, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered - human genitals or pubic region; buttock; female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy, whether actual or simulated; 
(3)  Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
    Special cabaret means any bar, dance hall, or other place of business at which food or beverages, alcoholic or nonalcoholic, are served which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any such establishment with advertising for, or a sign or signs identifying which, uses the words, "adult," "topless," "nude," or other words of similar import. 
(b)  Location standards. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to locate any adult bookstore, adult theater, or special cabaret within five hundred (500) feet of any residentially zoned area in the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to locate any adult bookstore, adult theater, or special cabaret within one thousand (1,000) feet of any church, synagogue, or other place of worship, school, library, public recreation (community) center, or city hall. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to locate any adult bookstore, adult theater, or special cabaret within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other such regulated use. 
(4)  Distances shall be measured from property line to property line, along the shortest distance between property lines, without regard to the route of normal travel. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the operation of any business or the performance of any activity prohibited under any other section of this Code. 
(c)  Annexed lands. No adult bookstore, adult theater, or special cabaret may be established upon any property annexed into the municipal limits of the city until such time as the city has established valid zoning regulations for the annexed property. After the zoning of the property, the provisions of this section shall govern the establishment of adult bookstores, adult theaters, or special cabarets. 
(Code 2001, § 25.750; Ord. No. 346, 8-16-1977; Ord. No. 726, 4-17-1990) 
State Law reference- Location restrictions for adult entertainment establishment near schools, F.S. § 847.0134. 
Secs. 12-865-12-891. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 12-892. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, unless the context otherwise indicates, the term "swimming pool" means any structure that is intended for swimming or recreational bathing and contains water over twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) deep, including, but not limited to, in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools, hot tubs, and non-portable spas. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.1) 
Sec. 12-893. - General requirements. 
    No swimming pool shall hereafter be built or constructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the Florida Building Code. Swimming pools already in existence, or in the process of being constructed, shall conform to the health and safety requirements hereafter set forth under the penalties hereafter provided. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.2) 
Sec. 12-894. - Inlets and drains. 
    Inlets and drains to pools shall be arranged so as to get effective and uniform circulation of the incoming water throughout the pool. A main drain shall be provided at the deepest end of the pool. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.3) 
Sec. 12-895. - Scum gutter. 
(a)  All residential swimming pools shall have a minimum requirement of a scum gutter or skimmer at one end or side. A minimum length of ten (10) feet shall be required for any scum gutter, and it shall have a smooth hand finish, or tile. 
(b)  A two-inch drainpipe shall be employed for every scum gutter drain. Drains shall be spaced at intervals of not less than eleven (11) feet and shall have a pitch of one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch per foot. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.4) 
Sec. 12-896. - Mechanical equipment. 
    Electric motor driven pumps shall be well ventilated. Pumps may be installed aboveground or may be installed in a pit on condition that the pit is provided with appropriate drain line to adequate absorption pit, storm sewers, Hillsborough River or other positive outfall facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.5) 
Sec. 12-897. - Supply and disposal of water. 
(a)  No swimming pools are to be drained into a disposal well unless such well has been approved by the state and constructed in accordance with the state's requirements. A well permit must be obtained from both the state and the city. 
(b)  Drainage of swimming pools may be into the Hillsborough River, storm sewers, an absorption pit or other positive outfall facilities. Facility for pool drainage shall be subject to approval of the building inspector. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.6) 
Sec. 12-898. - Structural requirements. 
(a)  All swimming pools shall be designed and constructed in accordance with accepted engineering structural principles taking into account all soil and groundwater conditions of the site on which the pool is to be located. 
(b)  Design and sanitation requirements shall meet the requirements of, and be approved by, the city for a permit. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.7) 
Sec. 12-899. - Setbacks and ground (lot) coverage. 
    Except as otherwise may be provided as zoning standards in other parts of this LDC: 
(1)  Swimming pools, patios, decks and other outdoor living areas, including screened enclosures, not having a roof impervious to weather, may be located within a rear yard; provided that no such allowed uses shall be located nearer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
(2)  An additional setback from the lot line of one foot shall be required for each one foot of enclosure height not having a roof impervious to weather that exceeds eleven (11) feet. See section 12-508, "Accessory uses, buildings, or structures" for additional information. (Ord. No. 770, 3-5-1991) 
(3)  The total ground coverage of all principal and accessory structures shall not exceed forty-seven and one-half (471/2) percent of the lot or lots' area. Ground coverage calculations shall include all structures, pools, decks, driveways, walkways and pads for recreational or decorative use. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.8; Ord. No. 770, 3-5-1991) 
Sec. 12-900. - Fencing or safety barrier. 
    Any pool shall have a safety barrier as hereafter provided: 
(1)  The safety barrier shall take the form of a screened-in patio, a wooden fence, a wire fence, a rock wall, a concrete block wall or other materials, so as to enable the owner to blend the same with the style of architecture planned or in existence on the property. 
(2)  The minimum height of the safety barrier shall not be less than four (4) feet. 
(3)  The safety barrier shall be erected either around the swimming pool or around the premises on which the swimming pool is erected; in either event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area; excepting that those premises abutting on a waterway shall not require a barrier along that side which is parallel with the waterway. 
(4)  Gates shall be of the spring lock type, so that they shall automatically be in a closed position at all times. 
(5)  Gates shall also be equipped with an adequate lock and shall be locked when the swimming pool is not in use. 
(6)  If the wooden type fence, the boards, pickets, louvers or other such members shall be spaced, constructed and erected so as to make the fence nonclimbable and impenetrable. 
(7)  Walls, whether of the rock or block type, shall be so erected as to make them non-climbable. 
(8)  Wire fences shall be the two-inch chainlink or diamond weave nonclimbable type, or of an approved equal with top rail. They shall be of a heavy, galvanized material. 
(9)  It shall be within the discretion of the building inspector of the city to refuse approval of any barrier which, in the inspector's opinion, does not furnish the safety requirements of this regulation; i.e., that it is high enough and so constructed to keep the children of preschool age from getting over or through it. 
(10)  The erection or construction of a safety barrier shall not apply to those pools which are fillable to no greater depth than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm). 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.9) 
Sec. 12-901. - Hazards of swimming pools and their control. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or custodian of a swimming pool to maintain it, and the safety barrier, in proper and safe condition. If at any time it shall be determined by the building inspector, city manager, or other person who may hereafter have the responsibility of supervising swimming pools, that a swimming pool in the city is so operated and maintained as to constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, or that the safety barrier had not been so maintained as to serve its purpose, the city manager, building inspector or other appropriate official, by direct personal delivery or certified mail of a citation, shall call to the attention of the owner or custodian of the pool the nature of the hazard or health menace, calling upon and requiring correction of the same within three (3) days from the receipt date of said notice. Should such owner or custodian fail to obey such directions, the penalties for violation of this chapter as hereafter specified shall be invoked. If an owner or custodian of the swimming pool creating a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare cannot be located, or if such swimming pool appears abandoned or is located in conjunction with an uninhabited residence, the agents or employees of the city shall have the right of immediate entry upon the real property upon which such swimming pool is located to remove, terminate, or abate a hazard or health menace and such agents or employees shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for trespass upon such real property upon which swimming pool is located while in the discharge of their duties in removing, terminating or abating a hazard or health menace, and paying the reasonable cost thereof shall constitute a lien against the real property upon which such swimming pool is located. 
(Code 2001, § 25.755.10; Ord. No. 860, 2-15-1994) 
Secs. 12-902-12-920. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - VEHICULAR PARKING 

Sec. 12-921. - Off-street parking and driveway requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in sections 12-859 and 12-923, all noncommercial vehicles may be parked only under the following conditions; otherwise, they are prohibited from residentially zoned districts. 
(b)  All vehicles shall be parked on a permanent driveway. All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the effective date of this section shall require a building permit and shall meet the following requirements. Vehicles shall be parked on a permanent, durable, stabilized and dustless surface meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Driveway materials. 
a.  A hard, all-weather-surfaced driveway which shall consist of concrete, asphalt, brick, paving stones, block pavers such as turf block or comparable material or other similar hard surface material contained by a uniform border material to create a neat and orderly appearance. 
b.  If recycled or crushed asphalt, or other loose material is used, it shall be bordered, packed in and rolled for compaction and stabilization. If gravel or shells is used it shall be bordered to avoid overflow into the right-of-way. In addition, the border must be raised, decorative and heavy duty so as to be anchored and fixed in place. Landscaping may be an exception to the uniform border requirement as long as it secures the driveway. 
(2)  Driveway standards. 
a.  Driveway additions must be adjoined to an existing driveway that provides access to a garage, carport or other approved parking area. 
b.  Driveways must remain clear and unobstructed by any structural elements or vegetation. 
c.  Failure to adequately maintain driveways, resulting in a nuisance or unsafe condition for pedestrians, cyclists or motor vehicles, shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
d.  Driveway apron design between the property line and edge of pavement in the right-of-way requires the following: 
1.  Ninety-eight (98) percent compaction. 
2.  Three thousand (3,000) PSI concrete. 
3.  Wire mesh (six (6) by six (6) to ten (10) by ten (10)) or concrete fiber in apron. 
4.  Driveway to have four-inch thickness at sidewalk. 
5.  Driveway to have six-inch thickness in right-of-way and apron. 
6.  Sidewalk will have a 1":50' slope to comply with ADA requirements. 
7.  Apron will have one-half inch per foot slope low side adjacent to curb and edge of pavement and will call across driveway. 
8.  Maximum 2:1 slope to existing ground from the property line to the sidewalk or first five (5) as measured from the property line to edge of pavement of the street. 

Source: City of Temple Terrace Driveway Detail Sheet, Building Department
(3)  Driveway access. 
a.  A driveway access point shall be located as far from an intersection as the lot size permits when the property abuts an intersection of rights-of way. 
b.  Driveways shall be located no closer than three (3) feet from the property line, except where the driveway meets the right-of-way. 
c.  All driveways shall be designed and maintained to provide for adequate sight lines so as to permit safe access to and from the properties served. The sight lines must remain clear and unobstructed by any structural elements or vegetation. 
d.  The minimum driveway width on properties shall be ten (10) feet. 
e.  In single family zoning districts, the maximum width of a driveway between the front property line and the street curb shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width for purposes of allowing a greater area for on-street parking and reducing the distance pedestrians have to cross on the sidewalk. The driveway may become wider once it is on the property. 
(4)  Alternative driveway design. Alternative driveway designs, standards, and administrative waivers of this section may be approved by the city manager or designee in unique circumstances due to existing nonconformities or in cases where another government entity has different design standards for the driveway and/or connection to a county or state street. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.2; Ord. No. 1034, 12-5-2000; Ord. No. 1087, 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1454 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 12-922. - Commercial vehicle restrictions in residential districts. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all commercial vehicles, including self-propelled vehicles with or without trailers, having a weight class of one ton or more individually, or combined, and all commercial trailers, are prohibited from parking in any residential zoning district (street or lot). 
(b)  The parking of a commercial vehicle in a residential zoning district (street or lot), is permitted, provided that: 
(1)  Said commercial vehicle is standing on a temporary basis for the purpose of loading or unloading; 
(2)  Said commercial vehicle is providing other services common to residential areas; 
(3)  Said commercial vehicle, or combination of vehicle and trailer, does not exceed a weight class of one ton; or 
(4)  Said commercial vehicle is parked within a fully enclosed structure and such parking is approved by the city council, after notification is given to adjacent residents and a public hearing is held. (Ord. No. 855, 12-7-1993) 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.10; Ord. No. 855, 12-7-1993) 
Sec. 12-923. - Use of residentially zoned property for parking, access or drainage facilities. 
    Any property zoned R-10, R-9, R-7.5, R-7, or R-MF may be used for off-street parking to serve multi-family residential and nonresidential uses, except industrial, for location of a driveway, walkway, access, or drainage facilities adjacent to any land that is not zoned R-10, R-9, R-7.5, R-7, or R-MF; provided that the city manager or designee has reviewed and approved a site plan which shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The property to be utilized for off-street parking shall be immediately contiguous to the nonresidential use it is intended to serve, which use shall be located wholly within a nonresidential, planned development (PD), or multi-family residential zoning district, and shall be a permitted use within said zoning district. The off-street parking facility shall not extend further than one hundred (100) feet as measured along the street on which it fronts, exclusive of footage utilized for landscaping and screening purposes, from the nonresidential, planned development, or multi-family residential zoning district, nor beyond an intervening public street right-of-way. No such parking facility shall be permitted which, by its establishment, will leave additional land or property in nonconformance or further nonconformance with the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located; 
(2)  Property utilized for off-street parking facilities serving the business or professional use within the adjacent nonresidential, planned development, or multi-family residential zoning district shall not itself be used for any other business purpose and no outside storage of any type shall be permitted on said property; 
(3)  No improvements shall be placed on said property other than paving or an approved access, surfacing for parking purposes, drainage facilities, appropriate landscaping and buffering improvements and access and parking lot lighting; 
(4)  No vehicle other than passenger cars or pickup trucks shall be permitted to park on said property and no overnight storage of vehicles shall be permitted; 
(5)  All access driveways and parking areas shall be of an approved surface; 
(6)  Vehicle ingress and egress to the parking area and any associated drainage facilities shall be through the related property within the nonresidential, planned development, or multi-family residential zoning district; 
(7)  The off-street parking area and any associated drainage facilities shall be fully screened at its boundary from all adjacent lines abutting property used for residential purposes in a single or multi-family residential zoning district, by a solid buffer or landscaped buffer, except that this provision shall not apply to a boundary line immediately adjoining an area utilized for off-street parking in accordance with this division. Land between the building line and the property line bordering the street right-of-way shall be landscaped and continuously and properly maintained with an adequate, functional, automatic sprinkler system. The proposed solid buffer or landscape buffer shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with site specific procedures. In addition to the other criteria, city council or the city manager or his designee shall consider compatibility of the proposed buffer with the development for which buffer is required and the surrounding area; 
(8)  Any lights used to illuminate such off-street parking areas shall face directly toward the business and away from adjoining single and multi-family residential zoning district property; 
(9)  No signs above six (6) feet shall be erected within any such area. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.11; Ord. No. 420, 4-8-1981; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 734, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 943, 7-15-1997; Ord. No. 1197, 1-17-2007; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-924. - Inoperative vehicles prohibited. 
    The outdoor storage of inoperative vehicles is hereby expressly prohibited in any residential zoning district. (See also section 12-860, regarding inoperative vehicles.) 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.12) 
Sec. 12-925. - Travel trailers restrictions and standards. 
    See division 11 of this article, Neighborhood Preservation Standards, regarding travel trailers. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.13; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 734, 5-1-1990) 
Secs. 12-926-12-953. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES, ROADWAYS AND DRIVE-UP FACILITIES 

Sec. 12-954. - Access and circulation. 
(a)  All off-street vehicular facilities shall be designed to have adequate access to a street or alley and in the case of parking facilities shall have adequate access to interior maneuvering areas. New parking facilities shall be arranged so that no vehicle shall be required to back from such facilities directly onto a public street. All driveways and curb cuts shall conform to the standards and specifications established by the city. 
(b)  In addition to the applicable city ordinances and standards, whenever vehicular entrances and exists connect to a state or federal road, the number, size and distance between entrances and exits and the specified design thereof shall comply with the established standards and requirements of the State of Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT). Approval of curb cuts from FDOT shall be obtained prior to submittal of final site plans when curb cuts are planned connecting developments to a state operated and maintained road. 
(c)  Dead end drive aisles within parking lots shall be provided with "T" type turn-around facilities. 
(d)  Parking spaces shall not be located so that vehicles backing out interfere with vehicles entering from roadways causing off-site stacking, unless a separate off-site turn lane is provided. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.4) 
Sec. 12-955. - Provisions for off-street loading facilities. 
(a)  Provisions for every nonresidential structure or use hereafter erected or created. There shall be provided and maintained adequate space for loading and unloading of materials, goods or things and for delivery and shipping, so that vehicles for these services may use this space without encroaching on or interfering with the public use of sidewalks, parking lots, streets and alleys. 
(b)  Effects of expanding existing businesses. Where any nonresidential structure is enlarged or any use is extended so that the size of the resulting occupancy comes within the scope of this division, the full amount of off-street loading space shall be supplied and maintained for the structure or use in its enlarged or extended size. Where the use of a structure or land, or any part thereof, is changed to a use requiring off-street loading space under this division, the full amount of off-street loading space shall be supplied and maintained to comply with this LDC. 
(c)  Design standards. For the purpose of this division, the term "off-street loading space" means an area at grade level at least ten (10) feet wide by twenty-five (25) feet long with fourteen (14) feet of vertical clearance. Each off-street loading space shall be directly accessible from a street or alley without crossing or entering any other required off-street loading space, and arranged for convenient and safe ingress and egress by motor truck and/or trailer combination. Such loading space shall be accessible from the interior of any building it is intended to serve. 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  For each store, market, restaurant, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning establishment or similar use which has an aggregate gross floor area of: 
Area No. of Spaces Over 5,000 sq. ft., but not over 25,000 sq. ft. 1 Over 25,000 sq. ft., but not over 60,000 sq. ft. 2 Over 60,000 sq. ft., but not over 120,000 sq. ft. 3 Over 120,000 sq. ft., but not over 290,000 sq. ft. 4 Plus for each additional 90,000 sq. ft. over 290,000 sq. ft. or major fraction thereof 1  
b.  For each auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, museum, motel, office building, welfare institution or similar use which has an aggregate, gross floor area of over ten thousand (10,000) square feet but not over forty thousand (40,000) square feet, one space; plus one space for each additional sixty thousand (60,000) square feet over forty thousand (40,000) square feet or major fraction thereof; 
c.  For any use not specifically mentioned in this division, the requirements for off-street loading for a use which is mentioned and to which the unmentioned use is similar, shall apply. 
(2)  Off-street loading facilities supplied to meet the needs of one use shall not be considered as meeting the off-street loading needs of any other use. 
(3)  No area or facilities supplied to meet the required off-street parking facilities for a use shall be utilized for, or be deemed to meet, the requirements of this division for off-street loading facilities. 
(4)  It is encouraged that joint or combined provisions of off-street facilities for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided that such off-street loading facilities are equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the several buildings or uses and are so located and arranged as to be usable thereby. 
(5)  Plans for buildings or uses requiring off-street loading facilities under the provisions of this division shall clearly indicate the location, dimensions, clearances and access of all such required off-street loading facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.5) 
Sec. 12-956. - Off-street parking required. 
(a)  Every building, use or structure, instituted or erected after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be provided with off-street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions set forth herein for the use of occupants, employees, visitors or patrons. 
(b)  Such off-street parking facilities shall be maintained and continued as an accessory use as long as the principal use is continued. 
(c)  Grandfathering provisions. See article V, Nonconformities, of this LDC. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of any building, structure or use affected by this section to discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance or reduction of the required parking facilities apart from the discontinuance, sale or transfer of such structure or use, without establishing alternative vehicle parking facilities which meet the requirements of this division. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to utilize such building, structure, or use without providing the off-street parking facilities required by this division. 
(e)  Collective provisions for, or joint use of, off-street parking facilities for two (2) or more uses or buildings, or for two (2) or more uses within a single building or business, or by two (2) or more owners or operators shall be encouraged; provided, that the total of such parking spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the several individual uses computed separately in accordance with this division; and further provided that no part of an off-street parking area required for any building or use shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use. 
(f)  Off-street parking facilities supplied by the owner or operator to meet the requirements of this division shall not be used by commercial vehicles over one and one-half (11/2) tons owned, operated and used in the business of such owner or operator during regular hours of business. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.6) 
Sec. 12-957. - Design and construction standards for parking lots. 
(a)  General. This section shall establish the minimum requirements for off-street vehicular parking facilities, including, but not limited to, those for automobiles, trucks, boats or heavy construction equipment, self-propelled or not, and for all other property which is used primarily for vehicles to traverse as a function of the primary use (hereinafter referred to as "other vehicular uses"), including, but not limited to, "drive-thru" facilities. This shall apply to all uses and properties, with some exceptions for single-family residential homes. 
(b)  Off-street parking standards. 
(1)  All off-street parking areas shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  They shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable, stabilized and dustless surface. 
b.  They shall be graded and designed to dispose of surface water. 
c.  They shall be subject to city inspection and design approval. 
d.  No off-street parking area shall be placed in a dedicated or official right-of-way. 
e.  Off-street parking areas shall have individual spaces marked, except for single-family residences. 
f.  Off-street parking areas shall be designed with wheel stops, guards or similar devices properly anchored or secured to prevent vehicles from overhanging into public rights-of-way, sidewalks or planting areas, except for single-family residences. 
g.  All off-street parking areas shall be used for vehicular parking only and not for sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind, unless otherwise permitted by this Code. The required off-street parking areas in the various districts shall be in addition to the loading spaces normally required for the business or office served. 
h.  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, off-street vehicular parking shall be provided on the same lot or premises, with the residence, multi-family residential use, business or office to which it is appurtenant. 
i.  In no case will extension of the vehicle, when parked, be permitted to overhang into the sidewalk. 
(2)  Standard parking space. Each standard off-street parking space shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of eighteen (18) feet. 
(3)  Spaces for persons with disabilities. Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Florida Accessibility Code for Building Construction. (Ord. No. 1007, 11-2-1999) 
(4)  Compact parking space. 
a.  Space dimensions. Where compact car spaces are permitted, they shall be a minimum width of eight (8) feet and a minimum length of sixteen (16) feet. 
b.  Standard-compact ratio. In any parking area of ten (10) or more spaces under common ownership, the percentage of compact car spaces shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the required number of spaces, except in the planned research office facilities (PROF) zoning district, which allows up to forty (40) percent. 
c.  Compacts defined. For the purpose of this section, compact car shall mean an automobile which has a width of seventy-two (72) inches and a length of one hundred eighty-six (186) inches or less. Said compact car spaces shall be clearly designated for "compact cars only" with signs or painted lettering in each compact parking space. 
d.  Compact space design. The placement of compact car spaces within a parking area shall be designed in accordance with city parking design standards. 
(5)  Minimum required off-street parking spaces (listed alphabetically). 
Use 2, 4 Minimum Required Off-Street Parking Bowling alleys 4 per lane and 1 per employee 1 Daycare/childcare center 3 per 1,000 sq ft and 1 per employee 1 Dwelling: Single-family, condominium, or townhome 2 per unit (=3 bedrooms), 
5 per unit (4-6 bedrooms), and 
1 per bedroom (=7 bedrooms) 3 Dwelling: Multi-family and student housing 1 per 1 bedroom unit; 
2 per 2 bedroom unit, 
2.25 per 3 bedroom unit, and 
2.75 per 4+ bedroom unit Funeral home or undertaking establishment 1 per 4 seats and 1 per employee 1 Gas station 1 per fuel dispenser/nozzle Hospital and free standing emergency room 1.25 per bed and 1 per employee 1 Hotels/motels 1 per guest room and 0.5 per employee Industrial uses 1 per 1,000 sq ft or 1 per employee 1 , whichever is greater, and 1 per semi-tractor trailer or other delivery vehicle, unless such parking is provide at each loading bay Offices: Business, professional, financial, or government 2.25 per 1,000 sq ft Offices: Medical, dental, doctor, health clinic 4 per doctor or 1 per 300 sq ft, whichever is greater Places of public assembly (assembly, exhibition, convention, billiard, dance halls; skating rinks, sports arenas, community and recreation centers, libraries, and museums) 1 per 5 seats or 1 per 200 sq ft, whichever is greater Religious institutions: Church, synagogue, mosque, etc. 1 per 4 seats in auditorium or chapel area Residential and related health care facilities:  - Adult day care center 3 per 1,000 sq ft and 1 per employee 1  - Adult family care home 2 per facility/home and 1 per employee 1  - Assisted living facility (ALF) 1 per employee 1 , 1 per facility vehicle, and 0.35 per bed  - Community residential home (CRH) 2 per facility/home and 1 per employee 1  - Foster care facility or home 2 per facility/home  - Group home 1 per bed and 1 per employee 1  - Nursing home facility or home 1 per employee 1 and 0.35 per bed  - Transitional living facility 1 per unit and 1 per employee 1 Restaurants, lounges, or bars. 1 per 4 seats in rooms for customer service (indoor and outdoor seating) and one-half (0.5) per employee 1 Retail stores, personal services, or repair shops (other than vehicles) 3 per 1,000 sq ft Schools, colleges, or universities: Public, private, or parochial 1 per classroom, 
One-half (0.5) per room used for public assembly, 1 per employee 1 , and 0.1 per student Service stations or vehicle repair shop Parking in each bay and 2 per vehicle repair bay  
NOTES: 
1  The number of employee parking space requirements will be based on the shift with the maximum number of employees working at one time. 
2  Uses not specifically mentioned. The requirements for off-street parking for any uses not specifically mentioned in this section shall be the same as provided in this section for the use most similar to the one sought. 
3  Number of off-street parking spaces calculated based on the following methodology: 
a. Carports or garages: 1-car = 1 space, 2-car = 2 spaces, etc. 
b. Driveways (excluding sidewalks and portion of driveway within right-of-way): 1 vehicle per standard parking space (9 feet by 18 feet). 
4  If there are multiple uses, off-street parking shall be calculated for each use to determine the total required parking. 
_____ 
(6)  Parking stall and aisle dimensions. Parking stall and aisle dimensions shall conform to the following "minimum parking dimensions." 
a.  Regular car off-street parking stall layout: 
Dimension Diagram 0 45 60 75 90 Stall width, parallel to aisle A 9.0 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0 Stall length of line B 24.0 24.5 21.4 19.5 18.0 Stall depth to wall C 9.0 17.0 18.5 19.0 18.0 Aisle width between stall lines D 12.0 12.0 16.0 22.0 24.0 Stall depth, interlock E 9.0 14.8 17.0 18.3 18.0 Module, wall to interlock F 30.0 43.8 51.5 59.3 60.0 Module, interlocking G 30.0 41.6 50.0 58.6 60.0 Module, interlocking to curb face H 30.0 41.8 49.4 56.9 58.0 Bumper overhang (typical) I 0.0 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 Offset J - 6.3 2.7 0.5 0.0 Setback K 24.0 11.0 8.3 5.0 0.0 Cross aisle, one-way L 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 Cross aisle, two-way - 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0  
*See minimum parking dimensions diagram. 
b.  Compact car parking stall layout: 
Dimension Diagram 0 45 60 75 90 Stall width, parallel to aisle A 8.0 11.3 9.2 8.3 8.0 Stall length of line B 22.0 24.0 20.5 18.2 16.0 Stall depth to wall C 8.0 17.0 17.8 17.6 16.0 Aisle width between stall lines D 12.0 12.0 16.0 22.0 24.0 Stall depth, interlock E 8.0 11.7 14.3 16.0 16.0 Module, wall to interlock F 28.0 43.2 48.1 53.3 56.0 Module, interlocking G 28.0 43.2 48.1 53.3 56.0 Module, interlocking to curb face H 28.0 43.2 48.1 53.3 56.0 Bumper overhang (typical) I 0.0 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 Offset J 0.0 5.7 2.3 0.6 0.0 Setback K 22.0 11.3 8.0 4.1 0.0 Cross aisle, one-way L 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 Cross aisle, two-way - 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0  
*See minimum parking dimensions diagram. 
Minimum Parking Dimensions

(7)  Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be required for all uses, excluding single-family residential lots, at a minimum of ten (10) percent of the total number of required parking spaces or residential units (rounded up), whichever is greater. Bicycle racks and design details shall be shown on the final site plan and shall be centrally located as follows: 
a.  By clubhouses, community centers, recreation or common area(s), and/or entrances of single or multiple family residential buildings. 
b.  By the building entrance(s) or common areas of all nonresidential development, with bicycle racks provided at each building if there are multiple buildings. 
(8)  On-street parking. On-street parking may be allowed only on privately owned right-of-way and shown on a final site plan and/or plat for development applications that are allowed to be reviewed and approved administratively by the city manager or designee and other development applications reviewed and approved by city council, in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.7; Ord. No. 1007, 11-2-1999; Ord. No. 1104, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1399, § 3(Exh. C), 7-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-958. - Required landscaping in off-street parking areas. 
    (See "Landscaping and Buffering" section of this article.) 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.8) 
Sec. 12-959. - Standards for drive-up facilities. 
(a)  In recognition of the unique character of drive-thru facilities and the increased frequency of vehicular movement onto and from the site which said uses are designed to generate, it shall be the objective of this section to guide the location and development of said uses in a manner best deemed to serve public safety and welfare. To this end, the following additional requirements shall be applied in reviewing any proper use having drive-thru facilities. 
(b)  No drive-thru facility shall be permitted in the following cases: 
(1)  When the proposed property does not have direct access to a major arterial street. 
(2)  When the straight-line distance between any point on the proposed property and any point on the property occupied by a church, public school, or public library having its primary access to the same street, is five hundred (500) feet or less, unless no undue vehicular traffic is reasonably likely to occur as a result of the approval of the proposed use. 
(3)  Driveways (curb cuts). There shall be no more than one driveway for each one hundred (100) feet, or major fraction thereof, or lot frontage on any street. Driveways shall be separated by at least fifty (50) feet where they occur or a single property or on adjacent properties shared by adjacent properties. Driveway cuts shall not be over forty-two (42) feet in width at the street line. Measured along the street line, driveways shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the side or rear property line. On a corner lot, all driveways shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines or from the intersection of said lines extended. Driveway access to a minor street providing access primarily to a residential area shall be permitted only if such driveway access may be provided without creating vehicular traffic congestion or a hazard to pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Where deemed desirable, a proposed drive-thru facility shall be required to coordinate the location and design of its driveways and curb cuts in accordance with the intent and objectives of this division. 
(5)  Drive-thru facilities defined. Any building, structure or portion thereof designed or used with a window or other opening in the wall of a principal or accessory structure through which goods or services are provided directly to customers who remain in motor vehicles thereby eliminating the need for such customers to exit the vehicle. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, drive-thru restaurants, banks, laundry or dry cleaning establishments and other uses of a similar nature; they shall also include facilities known as "take-out." 
(Code 2001, § 25.760.9; Ord. No. 532, 12-4-1984; Ord. No. 734, 5-1-1990) 
Sec. 12-960. - Design guidelines and standards for on-site roadway design. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Guidelines are not precise mandates. However, the principles, concepts, parameters, or policies embodied therein shall not be ignored in traffic circulation design where site size and building setbacks permit their employment. As the size of development increases, the internal circulation system will require an increasing range of hierarchical facilities including: local parking aisles, building perimeter roads, collectors, access roads and ring road arterials. 
(2)  Standards provided herein are considered minimums and must be met or exceeded in all new site plan designs. 
(3)  When existing nonconforming developments undergo major modifications, reorganizations, or renovation, these guidelines and standards must be adopted and/or incorporated into all existing parking lots, parking areas, and on-site roadways to the maximum extent practical, consistent with maintaining an adequate number of parking spaces and physical constraints. 
(4)  All new developments and significantly modified existing developments are subject to site plan review and approval by the city council. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, and to facilitate understanding and planning adequate traffic circulation, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Community shopping centers means moderately sized developments of approximately two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) square feet GLA on about twenty-four (24) acres. Building perimeter roads are usually present. 
    Large developments means developments with building GLA of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet or more on sites exceeding forty (40) acres where the ratio of building footprint to total site area is approximately one to three (1:3). The full range of traffic circulation elements is usually present. 
    Neighborhood shopping centers means shopping centers of approximately one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet GLA. 
    Small shopping areas means shopping areas with one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet GLA or less. 
    Small traffic generators. "Neighborhood shopping centers," "strip commercial" sites and "small shopping areas" usually qualify for direct access to collector roadways, but not arterials. An intermediate collector road, service road, or cross access/cross parking agreement should be used to combine the traffic flows from several commercial developments to justify an intersection with an arterial street. 
    Strip commercial means commercial sites with depths of one hundred ten (110) feet or less and building setbacks usually seventy (70) to eighty (80) feet. 
    Very large developments means sites consisting of office parks, apartment complexes, or regional shopping malls containing eighty (80) acres or more (3.5M square feet) with building gross leasable area (GLA) of 1.2M square feet and the remainder of the site devoted to open space, roadways, parking and landscaping. These developments usually include the full range of circulation elements. Driveways are the functional equivalent of an arterial street. Signalized intersection with an arterial street is justified. 
    Very small generators means small stand-alone facilities, such as a convenience store or a bank, which have on-site circulation systems equivalent to a local access street; the driveway is the equivalent of nothing more than a collector. 
(c)  Guidelines. 
(1)  A concept of hierarchical circulation shall be designed into the internal circulation system of the site similar to the function hierarchy of public roads: refer to schematic. 
a.  As the size of a development increases, the internal circulation system will require an increasing range from the hierarchy facilities. A large commercial or industrial development will incorporate the entire spectrum of functional facilities. Smaller developments will include a more limited range of functional facilities. For example, the aisles leading to individual parking spaces (vehicle terminal) become the equivalent of the local access streets. Some parallels between public streets and on-site circulation are: 
Classification of Public Street Comparable Internal Circulation Local Aisle within parking lot Minor collector Circulation aisles at end of parking rows Access drive of small stand-alone business Major collector Circulation road connecting parking spaces within a large development Access drive of a moderate-size development such as a community shopping center Minor arterial Access drive of a large development Major arterial Access drive to a very large mixed-use development or a regional/super-regional shopping center  
b.  The design standards for on-site circulation roadways should be similar to those of public streets for the same operating speeds. However, operating speeds on the on-site facilities generally will be lower than the comparable class of public street. 
(2)  Large commercial, office, retail and industrial sites should incorporate a major collector/distributor roadway which interconnects the access drives with the individual parking areas. 
(3)  Ring roads should be used on large and very large developments to provide primary on-site circulation, and to discourage use of the building perimeter roadway for movement from one part of the site to another. 
(4)  Traffic circulation and pedestrian patterns should be such that all customers cross the building perimeter road as pedestrians, moving between the parking stalls and the buildings. 
(5)  Tangent or long radius sections of building perimeter roads should be less than four hundred (400) feet. 
(6)  Minimum inside radii on building perimeter roads (measured back of curb) should be between thirty (30) and fifty (50) feet. 
(7)  All building perimeter roadways should be designated as fire lanes so that no-stopping/no-parking rules can be enforced, emergency vehicles have direct access to the building, and so that parked cars do not interfere with the visibility of pedestrians about to cross the perimeter roadway. 
(8)  Landscaping, not curb height, should be used for the delineation of on-site circulation features and to discourage drivers from traversing designated areas. Therefore, four-inch, or other low profile curbs, may be used on ring and perimeter roads and other on-site circulation treatment. Six-inch curbing will be used only when essential for surface drainage. 
(9)  Tee (three-way) intersections should be used for on-site design in order to minimize conflicts and simplify maneuver areas. 
(10)  In neighborhood centers and other small traffic generators, the size of the site commonly requires that the parking bays be parallel to the building. 
(11)  Over-the-sidewalk delivery should be used only as an auxiliary method. 
(12)  Where large developments are involved, one of two (2) basic layouts should be used: 
a.  Locate the buildings at least five hundred (500) feet back from the street. This will provide a throat length of two hundred fifty (250) feet, which is necessary for a high capacity access drive and adequate parking bay lengths between the ring road and the building face. 
b.  Orient the long dimension of linear developments perpendicular to the arterial. This will provide for long signalized access spacing and good on-site circulation. 
(13)  Parking and circulation considerations for drive-thru facilities include: 
a.  Separation of the drive-thru traffic from the other site traffic and parking. 
b.  Clear identification and delineation between the drive-thru and parking lot circulation. 
c.  Provision for adequate queue storage that prevents queue interference with pedestrian or other vehicular movement. 
d.  Provision of an "escape" route. 
e.  For fast food restaurants, the distance between the order board and the pickup window should be sufficient to store four (4) cars, not including cars at the board and window. 
(d)  Standards. 
(1)  Access locations and design standards including throat width, curb return radii, and median channelizations shall be in accordance with Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) standards, as supplemented by standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) when there is no conflict. 
(2)  Roadways along the perimeters of buildings shall be limited to circulation at the end of parking rows or bays, customer pickup and drop-off, and emergency access to the building. 
(3)  Roadways adjacent to the building shall have an uninterrupted length of no more than four hundred (400) feet to discourage high vehicular speeds and volumes, and pedestrian-vehicular conflicts. 
(4)  The installation of speed bumps or speed humps is prohibited. 
(5)  Minimum width of the perimeter roadway shall be twenty-seven (27) feet between the face of the curb on the sidewalk adjacent to the building and the face of end island curbs. The maximum width shall not exceed twenty-nine (29) feet to discourage stopping and parking. 
(6)  In large developments, the primary parking shall be oriented with the parking bays perpendicular to the building face. Where building setbacks permit, moderate size developments shall also incorporate this standard. 
(7)  Parking adjacent to the building is prohibited except on small generator parking lots, where parking turnover is very low, and for parking for persons with disabilities. 
(8)  Parking aisles should not exceed three hundred (300) feet without a break in circulation. This facilitates customer utilization and helps to eliminate high speeds. 
(9)  End islands shall be used to delineate the on-site circulation roadway at the edge of the parking lots or bays and to protect autos parked at the end of each row or bay from turning vehicles. 
(10)  End Islands shall be curbed and landscaped. 
(11)  Curbs which serve as wheel stops shall not exceed four (4) inches in height. 
(12)  Paved overhangs of two and one-half (21/2) feet shall be constructed in connection with curbing at the closed end of parking stalls when landscaping is present and individual bumper stops are not used. This avoids trampled and burned-out landscaping. 
(13)  Ring roads, perimeter roads, and access drives shall be curbed. 
(14)  Parking lot separators shall be curbed and landscaped. 
(15)  On-site parking facilities containing twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces shall install and maintain traffic control devices in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the department of transportation pursuant to F.S. § 316.0745. 

(Code 2001, § 25.760.14; Ord. No. 863, 3-15-1994) 
Secs. 12-961-12-978. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions regulating signage required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(f). 

Sec. 12-979. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  Permits required. 
(1)  No person shall erect, demolish, structurally alter, rebuild, enlarge, extend, relocate, attach to or support by a building or structure any sign unless a permit for such sign has been issued by the department, or unless such sign is specifically exempted from permit requirements as outlined in this division. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of a sign permit. 
(3)  If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance, said permit shall become null and void and there shall be no refund of any fee required by this division. 
(4)  Electrical permits, in addition to sign permits, shall be required for any sign embodying any electrical equipment and such signs shall be inspected and approved by the city's electrical inspector. 
(b)  Signs requiring erector vehicle; permit and insurance required. 
(1)  Application for permit shall be accompanied by such drawings and information necessary to fully acquaint the director with the location, construction, weight, materials, wind stress calculations, method of securing and manner of illuminating such sign, and the drawings shall bear the certification of approval of a duly licensed structural design engineer registered in the State of Florida. Permission of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located shall be indicated either by letter or by signature on the drawings, and such letter or signed drawing shall be filed as may be required by the director. Proof of public liability insurance coverage may be required by the director. 
(2)  Sign identification data: All signs installed by sign erectors or sign contractors shall carry the name of the sign manufacturer, the name of the firm or person erecting the sign, and the permit number issued by the city for such sign. 
(c)  Permit fees. See section 12-11 for information regarding permit fees. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.7; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh. A), 8-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-980. - Purpose. 
(a)  It shall be the purpose and general intent of this division to regulate signs and similar structures within the city; to provide for their appropriate use and location in a manner which will not adversely affect property values, compatibility of land use, community appearance and identity, and to otherwise promote the general welfare, public safety, convenience and order of the city; to supplement and further accomplish the purposes of the zoning code and building code of the city; to provide for the revocation of sign permits, the annual inspection of signs, identification of signs, the responsibility for maintenance of signs, and procedures to be followed for the removal of any sign which is in violation of, or nonconforming with, the intent and purpose of this LDC, and to provide for the abatement of any nuisance attributed to any sign within the city. 
(b)  This division, together with future amendments thereof, shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Sign Ordinance." 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.1; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-981. - Calculating area of a sign. 
    The area of a sign shall be computed to include the entire area within a sign, whether such sign is a parallelogram, triangle, circle or semi-circle, including all of the display area of one side and any part of the surface of any cornice, hood, awning, wall or similar ornamental or structural feature that blends with the sign in such a manner as to appear to be the background of the sign, and including all of the elements of the matter displayed, regardless of the angle at which such sign is placed in relationship to the building frontage; provided, however, that the area of a wall sign shall be computed to include only the area in which characters, letters, illustrations, insignia or logos are depicted, together with all of the area encompassed by an imaginary border extending in all directions around said characters, letters, illustrations, insignia or logos for a distance equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the size of the largest of said characters, letters, illustrations, insignia or logos. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.2; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-982. - Signs not requiring permits. 
    No permit is required for the following types of signs; however, said signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this division: 
(1)  A non-illuminated, non-activated nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and attached flat against a building, providing only the name, address and occupation of the building tenant or owner. 
(2)  Flags and insignias of any governments. Flags of the same government must be at least one hundred (100) feet apart, on the same plot. 
(3)  Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs erected by government agencies or in compliance with their regulations. 
(4)  Informational signs placed on single-family residential property not exceeding one square foot each. 
(5)  No more than two (2) non-illuminated, non-activated directional signs which do not exceed four (4) square feet each and which bear no advertising other than a logo of the property owner or business owner or business for which a local business tax has been paid to the city and a receipt obtained for posting at the location. 
(6)  Non-illuminated, nonreflective memorial signs or signs bearing the name of the building and date of erection, provided that said signs do not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and either carved into, embossed on or permanently embedded in masonry, bronze or other noncombustible materials, in such a way that they are an architectural detail of a building. 
(7)  No more than two (2) non-illuminated, non-activated signs of eight (8) square feet or less each, located on buildings or property owned or leased by public, charitable or religious institutions. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Signs and required regulatory information which are an integral part of, and not simply attached to, gasoline pumps or other similar dispensing or servicing devices. 
(10)  Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet which advertise that the business for which an occupational license has been issued at the location accepts credit cards; provided that such signs are attached to the commercial building. 
(11)  Time or temperature signs which contain no advertising and do not exceed eight (8) square feet. 
(12)  Window signs conforming to the provisions of the section related to window signs. 
(13)  Reserved. 
(14)  Hanging identification signs placed in the near proximity and associated with a business entrance, affixed to the underside of a covered walkway and not primarily viewable from a street right-of-way, not exceeding four (4) square feet in size. 
(15)  Vinyl or plastic lettering affixed to any awning or canopy, and conforming to the provisions of the section related to awning/canopy type signs. (Note: installation of awning and/or canopy structure does require a building permit.) 
(16)  Changeable copy lettering within any approved changeable copy sign area, and conforming to the provisions of the section related to changeable copy type signs. 
(17)  Replacement of "panels" within existing wall signs and/or directory panel signs, and conforming to the provisions of the section related to wall and/or directory panel type signs. 
(18)  Temporary signs. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.3; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh.), 8-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-983. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs classified by location, type and content are prohibited: 
(1)  Location. 
a.  By zoning districts. Any sign not specifically permitted within a zoning district shall be prohibited within such zoning district. 
b.  On public property. 
1.  No sign shall be permitted to extend into, above or be placed in or on any portion of a public street, avenue or alley, nor shall any sign be painted, pasted, posted, printed or nailed to or on any curb, sidewalk, tree, light standard, utility pole, hydrant or bridge, or in any manner displayed within the public property or public right-of-way lines of any street, avenue or alley within the city, except upon the written approval of the city manager or designee. Said written permission shall be filed in the office of the director. 
2.  No temporary sign shall be posted in any public right-of-way, in any public park or on any other public property. The prohibition contained in this subsection shall in no way apply to signs posted by the city, supervisor of elections or other local, state, or federal government agency. 
c.  Obstructing egress. No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening intended as a means of egress, nor shall any sign be placed in such a manner as to interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
d.  Encroaching onto public lands. Any private sign located on or over public land or public right-of-way, unless authorized by the city council, shall be considered unlawful and shall be subject to immediate removal by the department of public works at the direction of the city manager or designee and at the sign owner's cost. 
e.  Blocking utilities and drainage. Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and non-interference with all surface and underground utilities. Furthermore, placement shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage or surface or underground water. 
f.  Hillsborough River. Unless otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful to erect, relocate, maintain or use any sign in or upon the Hillsborough River, or other body of water within the limits of the city. 
g.  Hazardous or dangerous. No permit shall be issued for the erection, construction, display or use of any sign which, in the opinion of the city manager or designee is hazardous or dangerous or a potential impediment to rescue personnel in the event of an emergency, or which constitutes a public nuisance. 
h.  Roof signs. Roof signs shall not be permitted except for those placed on mansard roofs. 
i.  Ground-mounted roof signs. Ground-mounted signs which extend above and encroach over the surface of a roof are not permitted. 
j.  Signs which advertise a business. Signs which advertise a business and are located on a building facade, mansard roof, parapet wall or awning which faces and is contiguous to property zoned and used for single-family residential purposes. 
(2)  Type. 
a.  Billboards. No billboard signs shall be permitted in the city. 
b.  Portable and vehicular signs. Except as may be otherwise expressly provided within this division, no portable sign, sandwich sign, or snipe sign shall be permitted within the city, and no motorized vehicle or trailer shall be parked upon public or private property within the city for the obvious purpose of advertising; provided that commercial vehicles may be identified only by business name, type of business, business address, business telephone number, and contractor's state/county license number when required. 
c.  Motion pictures. No sign shall be permitted which employs motion picture projection or has moving parts or gives the illusion of motion except as permitted by this division. 
d.  Certain illuminated signs. No signs with externally directed or flashing lights shall be permitted. Signs with exposed neon are also prohibited, except as may be conditionally permitted elsewhere in this LDC. 
e.  Nuisance. No sign shall be permitted which emits audible sound, vapor, smoke, odor particles or gaseous matter. 
f.  Interference with communications prohibited. No sign shall be permitted which may cause radio, television or other communication interference. 
g.  Certain painted signs. Painted wall signs in excess of fifty (50) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the building facade, whichever is less. Painted wall signs are those in which the painted lettering or graphics are applied directly to the exterior surface of the building or facade. This prohibition shall only apply to wall signs. 
(3)  Content. 
a.  Obscene matter. No person shall display upon any sign or other advertising structure an obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
b.  Traffic safety. No sign shall be erected or continued in use within the city, which: 
1.  Obstructs the sight distance in a straight line approach along a public or private right-of-way. 
2.  Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," and "danger," which might be confused with traffic direction signs. 
3.  Would, by its location, color or nature, tend to be confused with or obstruct sight of traffic signs or traffic signals by motorists or pedestrians, or which would otherwise constitute a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles, or would create a condition which might endanger the safety of persons. 
c.  Corporate or commercial flags, including flags containing logos. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.5; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh.), 8-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-984. - Permitted signs. 
(a)  Signs permitted under the provisions of this division are itemized on matrices according to zoning districts. The matrices indicate whether the sign is "permitted conditionally" or "not permitted" in those districts. The matrices also include significant characteristics or attributes of each sign by type and are further cross-referenced to a series of "footnotes." This format attempts to present all information pertinent to a particular sign under investigation or review without extensive need to cross-reference or resort to excessive repetition. However, the administrative provisions in section 12-979 and certain general sign location and installation standards in section 12-985 may also be applicable. Additional regulatory provisions and standards relative to temporary signs are found in sections 12-988 and 12-989. 
(b)  The following matrices with qualifying footnotes are included herein: 
(1)  Matrix #1. Signs in R-7, R-7.5, R-9, R-10, PRS and PD-R zoning districts. 
(2)  Matrix #2. Signs in R-MF and R-MFA zoning districts. 
(3)  Matrix #3. Signs in C-O, P/QP and E-I zoning districts. 
(4)  Matrix #4. Signs in PROF zoning districts. 
(5)  Matrix #5. Signs in C-G, LI and A-U zoning districts. 
(6)  Matrix #6. Signs in shopping centers. 
(c)  The following legend pertains to sign characteristics or attributes as found on each matrix; sign types are further defined in article II (Definitions and Rules of Construction) of this LDC: 
LEGEND 
Cond Permitted conditions. See referenced footnotes and characteristics for specific conditions. Not Perm Not permitted. Max Sign Area Maximum sign area for each individual sign. Setback From Intersection The distance along right-of-way lines when measured from the intersection of two public right-of-way lines or from the intersection of an access way with a public right-of-way line. The lines mentioned form two sides of a triangle with the side being a line connecting the ends of the two sides. The triangles thus formed are "visibility triangles" at corners within which signs are not permitted if cross visibility is obstructed between the heights of three and six feet. Setback to Residence Minimum setback distance of sign from any residentially zoned property. Max # Signs Maximum number of signs allowed. Max # Days Maximum number of days sign is allowed to be displayed. Max Height Maximum height - measured from ground to top of sign or any appurtenances. Setback to Property Line Distance from any vertically projected point on sign and any property line.  
MATRIX #1 
Signs in R-7, R-7.5, R-9, R-10, PRS and PD-R Zoning Districts 
Type Cond. Not perm. Max. Sign 
Area (sq. ft.) Setback from 
Intersection Setback to 
Residence Max. # Signs Max. # Days Max. Height Setback to 
Property Line Activated * Animated * Awning/Canopy * Beacon/Spotlight * Billboard * Changeable Copy CC,U Clock/Temperature * Directional EE 4 Directory Panel * Flat E 12 1 Freestanding E 1 15' 5' Government C Ground E,CC,N, O,P,S 125 25' 1 15' 5' Hanging ID EE 4 1 Illum. FF Inform. E,P 12 1 Mansard Roof * Motion Picture Project * Neon/Flashing * Painted L Portable/Snipe * Projecting * Pylon * Roof * Rotating * Vehicular Q Wall E 12 1 Window *  
MATRIX #2 
Signs in R-MF and R-MFA Zoning Districts 
Type Cond. Not perm. Max. Sign 
Area (sq. ft.) Setback from 
Intersection Setback to 
Residence Max. # Signs Max. # Days Max. Height Setback to 
Property Line Activated * Animated * Awning/Canopy G,H,R 1 5' Beacon/Spotlight * Billboard * Changeable Copy CC,R,U Clock/Temperature G,R 25' 5' Directional 4 Directory Panel J Flat E,G,H,R 1 Freestanding H,P,S 100 25' 1 25' 5' Government C Ground H,N,P,S 125 25' 25' 1 15' 5' Hanging ID 4 1 Illum. Inform. E,P 12 1 Mansard Roof DD,G, 
R,H 1 Motion Picture Project. * Neon/Flashing AA,GG, 
I,R Painted L Portable/Snipe * Projecting * Pylon E,H,R,S 100 25' 1 25' 5' Roof * Rotating * Vehicular Q Wall E,G,H,R 1 Window AA,H, 
I,R 1  
MATRIX #3 
Signs in C-O, P/QP and E-I Zoning Districts 
Type Cond. Not perm. Max. Sign 
Area (sq. ft.) Setback from 
Intersection Setback to 
Residence Max. # Signs Max. # Days Max. Height Setback to 
Property Line Activated * Animated * Awning/Canopy * Beacon/Spotlight * Billboard * Changeable Copy CC,U Clock/Temperature * Directional 4 Directory Panel J Flat G,H 12 1 Freestanding E 1 15' 5' Government C Ground H,N,P,S 125 25' 1 15' 5' Hanging ID 4 1 Illum. Inform. E,P 12 1 Mansard Roof * Motion Picture Project. * Neon/Flashing AA,GG,I Painted L Portable/Snipe * Projecting * Pylon * Roof * Rotating * Vehicular Q Wall G,H 12 1 Window AA 6 1  
MATRIX #4 
Signs in PROF Zoning Districts 
Type Cond. Not perm. Max. Sign 
Area (sq. ft.) Setback from 
Intersection Setback to 
Residence Max. # Signs Max. # Days Max. Height Setback to 
Property Line Activated * Animated * Awning/Canopy G,H,R 1 5' Beacon/Spotlight * Billboard * Changeable Copy CC,R,U Clock/Temperature G 25' 5' Directional 4 Directory Panel J Flat G,H 1 Freestanding E 1 15' 5' Government C Ground H,N,P,S 125 25' 1 15' 5' Hanging ID 4 1 Illum. Inform. E,P 12 1 Mansard Roof DD,G,H 1 Motion Picture Project. * Neon/Flashing AA,GG,I Painted L Portable/Snipe * Projecting * Pylon * Roof * Rotating * Vehicular Q Wall G,H 1 Window AA 6 1  
MATRIX #5 
Signs in C-G, LI and A-U Zoning Districts 
Type Cond. Not perm. Max. Sign 
Area (sq. ft.) Setback from 
Intersection Setback to 
Residence Max. # Signs Max. # Days Max. Height Setback to 
Property Line Activated * Animated * Awning/Canopy G,H 1 5' Beacon/Spotlight * Billboard * Changeable Copy U Clock/Temperature G 25' 5' Directional 4 Directory Panel J Flat G,H 1 Freestanding S, T 100 25' 1 25' 5' Government C Ground N,S,T 125 25' 25' 1 15' 5' Hanging ID 4 1 Illum. Inform. E,P 12 1 Mansard Roof DD,G,H 1 Motion Picture Project. * Neon/Flashing AA,GG,I Painted L Portable/Snipe * Projecting * Pylon S,T 100 25' 1 25' 5' Roof * Rotating * Vehicular Q Wall G,H 1 Window AA,H,I 1  
MATRIX #6 
Signs in Shopping Centers 
Type Cond. Not perm. Max. Sign 
Area (sq. ft.) Setback from 
Intersection Setback to 
Residence Max. # Signs Max. # Days Max. Height Setback to 
Property Line Activated * Animated * Awning/Canopy G,H 1 5' Beacon/Spotlight * Billboard * Changeable Copy U Clock/Temperature G 25' 5' Directional 4 Directory Panel J Flat G,H,V 1 Freestanding S,T,W 100 25' 1 25' 5' Government C Ground N,S,T,W 125 25' 25' 1 15' 5' Hanging ID 4 1 Illum. Inform. E,P 12 1 Mansard Roof DD,G,H 1 Motion Picture Project. * Neon/Flashing AA,GG,I Painted L,V Portable/Snipe * Projecting * Pylon S,T,W 100 25' 1 25' 5' Roof * Rotating * Vehicular Q Wall G,H 1 Window AA,H,I 1  
FOOTNOTES TO MATRICES-ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Such governmental sign erected by the city in conjunction with a city building or facility shall comply with the requirements applicable to the zoning district in which such sign is located. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Informational signs are permitted in connection with a nonprofit, community or neighborhood center, public building, church building, private school or hospital up to a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet for each building or facility. In addition to the foregoing uses, all other land uses in any zoning district other than single-family residential are permitted one such informational sign of twelve (12) square feet per building or facility. Informational signs on single-family (residentially zoned and used) property are limited to one square foot. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  On single and multi-tenant buildings of one or two (2) stories, a sign advertising the business occupying the building, or each or any tenancy within the building, may be attached to a building facade, awning, mansard roof or parapet wall, in locations to be determined by the building owner, as long as the total square footage of all signs on that building facade does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the square footage for that building facade (unless otherwise limited, restricted or prohibited within a zoning district). 
On single and multitenant buildings of three (3) stories or more, signs are limited to one sign attached to a building facade, awning, mansard roof or parapet wall, on each building side covering not greater than one and seven-tenths (1.7) square feet for each linear horizontal foot of the building side covering not greater than one and seven-tenths (1.7) square feet for each linear horizontal foot of the building frontage on which it is to be located (unless otherwise limited within a zoning district). Said signs must be uniform in content, type, color and design and shall designate either the name of the building or the name or corporate logo of the principal tenant of the building. In addition, one sign advertising each of the businesses occupying the first floor of the building may be placed on the building facade, awning or mansard roof, at a height not to exceed fifteen (15) feet up to a maximum of fifty (50) square feet, per sign. 
H.  Ground, pylon, flat, wall, mansard roof, awning/canopy, and permanent window signs shall consist of only the name, corporate logo, corporate slogan, a single special service feature and the name of the profession, service or business being conducted at the site, center or complex and paying the occupational license fee at the site. 
I.  Window signs shall be limited in total area to twenty-five (25) percent of the total window display area on each side of the building; provided, however, that in no case shall such signs collectively exceed twenty (20) percent of any building facade or side. 
J.  Directory signs shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  They shall be framed as an integral part of the ground, freestanding or pylon sign. 
2.  The total area shall not exceed the total allowable area on the ground, freestanding or pylon signs. (Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995) 
3.  They shall have no flashing or moving parts. 
4.  Directory panels shall be allowed on a ground, freestanding or pylon sign when two (2) or more separate businesses paying separate occupational licenses are operated on a single site, center or complex. (Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995) 
5.  Each individual directory panel shall be uniform in construction, materials and style. 
6.  No more than two (2) sizes of directory panels shall be permitted on each sign. 
7.  Any logos pertaining to the businesses for which occupational licenses have been issued and which are located in the complex may be included on the individual directory panels. (Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995) 
8.  No business may have more than one directory panel on the directory sign. 
K.  Reserved. 
L.  Painted wall signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the building facade, whichever is less. 
M.  Reserved. 
N.  Ground signs shall be architecturally designed and landscaped. Such signs shall be constructed of materials capable of withstanding the elements for a reasonable period of time. All plantings and landscaping around any such ground sign shall be regularly watered, maintained and replaced if necessary, and an adequate automatic irrigation system shall be installed to assure regular watering. 
O.  Such signs shall be permitted only as follows: 
1.  Those signs associated with a platted subdivision shall denote only the approved name of the subdivision; only one ground sign is permitted at each entrance to the subdivision. 
2.  Those signs associated with a nonprofit, community or neighborhood center, public building, church building, private school or hospital, provided that such sign shall be used only to identify the institution or facility for which an occupational license has been issued or its location. 
P.  On corner lots, two (2) such signs, located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet apart, one facing each roadway may be permitted. No more than one sign may be erected at each major entrance. 
Q.  Any person, firm or corporation in legal possession of a valid license and engaged in the business of contracting in the city may display a permanent sign on motor vehicles used in the operation of the business. Such sign shall state the name of the firm or corporation and state license number or number assigned by the county building department. Such letters shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height and numbers shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in height. 
R.  Such signs shall only be permitted for an approved hotel, motel, or hotel/restaurant complex or a motel/restaurant complex which is being treated as a unified whole; provided, however, that no more than one pylon or freestanding sign may be constructed to advertise the hotel or motel or components of the hotel/motel/restaurant complex. 
S.  Such sign shall only be permitted upon compliance with all of the following conditions: 
1.  The sign permit application shall include a full legal description of the property involved, together with evidence of the applicant's ownership of said property; 
2.  All structures upon the property shall be completely detached and separated from the structures upon adjacent property; 
3.  The property involved shall abut a public street and shall have separate, direct access therefrom; and 
4.  Except with regard to an outparcel, the property involved shall have separate off-street parking and service facilities in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
T.  Except signs located in C-O zoning districts, any shopping center or parcel of commercially-zoned land under single ownership shall have no more than one ground, freestanding or pylon sign on each side of said parcel which abuts a street, and such sign may bear only the following: name, corporate logo, corporate slogan, a single special service feature and nature of the profession, service or business being conducted at the site, center or complex; provided, however, that an outparcel may have one ground sign in addition to the ground, freestanding or pylon sign for the shopping center. Where more than one ground, freestanding or pylon sign is erected on a single site, such signs must be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet apart. 
U.  Changeable copy signs shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  They shall be an integral part of the freestanding, ground or pylon sign. 
2.  They shall not comprise more than twenty (20) percent of the total sign area of the freestanding, ground or pylon sign. 
3.  They shall have no flashing or moving parts. 
4.  Each line shall be uniform in height. 
V.  Wall, flat and facade signs located within a shopping center are not required to be uniform in color or type. 
W.  A shopping center with more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building area is permitted a ground, freestanding or pylon sign on each side facing a street abutting the shopping center. Lettering on any ground, freestanding or pylon sign shall indicate only the name of the shopping center, corporate logo, corporate slogan, a single, special service feature and the nature of the profession(s), service(s), or business(es) being conducted and paying the occupational license fees at the site, center or complex; provided, however, that either a directory panel or changeable copy portion of a sign, but not both, may be affixed to a freestanding, pylon or ground sign and, further provided that in no case shall the total area of all such combined signs exceed one hundred (100) square feet on the freestanding or pylon signs, or one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet on the ground signs. 
X.  Reserved. 
AA.  Neon signs located in, on or behind a window are permitted under the following conditions: 
1.  One sign on each building facade for single tenant buildings. 
2.  One sign per business per multitenant buildings. 
3.  Each sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
4.  Each sign is limited to no more than three (3) different colors. 
5.  Content of each sign limited to one subject. 
6.  Sign is nonflashing. 
BB.  Reserved. 
CC.  Such signs shall be permitted only in connection with a nonprofit, community or neighborhood center, public building, church building, private school or hospital. 
DD.  Mansard roof signs shall not extend vertically above the highest portion of the lower roof section and may not project more than twelve (12) inches from the surface of the lower roof. (See note G for additional dimensional limitations.) 
EE.  Directional and hanging identification signs of not more than four (4) square feet are permitted in connection with a nonprofit, community or neighborhood center, public building, church building, private school or hospital. 
FF.  Illuminated signs in single-family residential zoning districts are permissible only when the parcel served by the sign is not also used for residential purposes. 
GG.  Neon signs located in or on freestanding, ground, pylon, wall or mansard roof signs shall be completely enclosed and encased. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.6; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1399, § 2(Exh. B), 7-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh. A), 8-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-985. - Sign location and installation standards. 
(a)  Sign lighting. 
(1)  No light provided in conjunction with a sign shall cause glare which impairs visibility for vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon any private or public property or right-of-way located within one hundred (100) feet of said sign or on any pedestrian traffic land located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of said sign. 
(2)  Business or commercial lighting which illuminates residentially-zoned property during hours when the business or commercial activity has ceased shall be prohibited when and if any residential property owner whose property is illuminated by such lighting shall file a complaint with the department and said complaint is determined to be valid. 
(b)  Signs near electrical conductor. No sign shall be erected closer than five (5) feet to any overhead electrical conductor, where the difference in potential between any two (2) conductors or between any one conductor and ground exceeds seven hundred fifty (750) volts. 
(c)  Structural requirements. All signs shall comply with all structural and construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(d)  Height clearances. 
(1)  The bottom of any sign which extends over an area designed for or utilized for pedestrian traffic shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet from ground level. The bottom of any sign which extends over an area designed for or utilized for vehicular traffic shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet from ground level. Unless otherwise authorized by city council, no sign shall encroach upon or extend over any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Any "freestanding" sign which does not meet the applicable minimum height requirements set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section, shall be located in a grassed or landscaped area. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.8; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-986. - Maintenance requirements and standards. 
    All signs shall be made in a professional and workmanlike manner and be maintained in good repair, clean and neat, and shall not obstruct visibility from the road. The premises under and within ten (10) feet in all directions of any sign shall be kept clear of all litter, rubbish, trash, weeds, refuse and waste material. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.9; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-987. - Unsafe signs. 
    If the director finds that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is dangerous, hazardous, unsafe or insecure, or is a public nuisance, the director shall send a written notice thereof by certified mail to the owner of such sign. If the owner fails to remove or alter the structure to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days after such notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner. The director may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.10; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010) 
Sec. 12-988. - Advertising. 
(a)  Posting advertisements on unoccupied buildings or temporary structures. No sign or other advertisement shall be posted, erected, displayed or constructed on any unoccupied building or temporary structure within the city, except as may be otherwise specifically permitted in this section. 
(b)  Advertising leaflets; restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter upon any street of the city leaflets, posters, bills or other loose sheets of paper constituting advertising matter, or to affix such leaflets, posters, bills or other loose sheets of paper on any public place along or on the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city so that the same may be scattered by the wind. 
(c)  Advertising material, placing in or on automobiles. 
(1)  No owner of private property within the city, which is utilized by the general public for parking, shall permit any vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, mopeds, boats, trailers, trucks, campers, mobile homes, recreational vehicles and other conveyances, (hereinafter "vehicle") with a temporary sign to be parked abutting, adjacent to, or facing any street, right-of-way, sidewalk or public property. Owners of private property may erect one or more signs that comply with the requirements of F.S. § 715.07. Both the owner of the real property on which the vehicle is parked and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be liable for violation of this subsection; provided, however, that the owner shall have a complete defense in any action to enforce this section and the vehicle owner shall be solely liable for the violation, upon proof by the owner of the real property that the owner: 
a.  Has erected signs in compliance with F.S. § 715.07; and 
b.  Has made good faith attempts to enforce said signs. 
(2)  Owners of vehicles shall not be permitted to park said vehicles with temporary signs on any publicly owned property abutting, adjacent to, or facing any street, right-of-way or sidewalk, except while conducting business or visiting said public facility. 
(Code 2001, § 25.765.11; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh. A), 8-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-989. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Scope. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the city's land development code or in any other ordinance or code provisions of the city, the provisions of this section shall govern the regulation of temporary signs, and take precedence over any other provisions that pertain to temporary signs unless specifically exempted or excepted herein. 
(b)  Findings of fact. The city council finds that the location and maintenance of temporary signs affects the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of this community, and that in order to preserve and enhance the city as a desirable community in which to live and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The city council further finds that the regulation of temporary signs within the city is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end, and that uncontrolled and unlimited temporary signs would degrade the aesthetic attractiveness of the natural and manmade attributes of the community and thereby undermine the economic value of tourism, visitation and permanent growth. 
(c)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through reasonable, consistent and non-discriminatory standards for temporary signs. The temporary sign regulations in this section are not intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate the secondary effects of speech, and especially insofar as those secondary effects may adversely affect aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. It is the intent of the city council that the temporary sign regulations shall provide uniform sign criteria which regulate the size, height, number and placement of signs in a manner that is compatible with the character of the city, and which minimizes possible restrictions on personal liberties, property rights, commerce, and the free exercise of Constitutional rights while achieving the city's goal of creating a healthy, safe and attractive environment that does not contain excessive clutter and visual distraction in rights-of-way, adjacent properties, the commercial district and residential neighborhoods. These sign regulations have been adopted with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of the city and promoting its continued well-being regarding the regulation of temporary signage, and are further intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; 
(2)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  Minimize the possible adverse impact of temporary signs on nearby public and private property; 
(5)  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of temporary signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(6)  Allow temporary signs that are compatible with their surroundings, while precluding the placement of temporary signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land use or signs; 
(7)  Encourage and allow temporary signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located; 
(8)  Regulate temporary signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(9)  Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all zoning districts of the city; 
(10)  Protect property values by precluding to the maximum extent possible temporary signs that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; and 
(11)  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
(d)  Criteria required for temporary signs. The criteria for temporary signs are set forth below. A temporary sign is unlawful if it does not meet the criteria established for the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
Temporary Sign Design Standards and Limitations Zoning Districts R-7, R-7.5, R-9, R-10, PD-R A-U, PRS, R-MF, R-MFA, PD, CO, CG, PROF, P/QP, E-I, LI, Shopping Centers Maximum Number of Signs per Parcel 4 4 if = 200 lineal feet of street frontage 1 per 50 lineal feet of street frontage if > 200 lineal feet of street frontage Maximum Sign Area 6 sq ft/sign 32 sq ft/sign Maximum Sign Height 5 feet 8 feet Minimum Sign Setback 5 feet 5 feet Minimum Spacing between Signs (Temporary or Permanent) 15 feet 15 feet Duration of Display Event: 
Maximum of 90 days before event; Remove within 7 days after event Non-Event: 
Maximum of 30 days  
(e)  Prohibition of temporary signs on public property or right-of-way. Other than government signs, temporary signs on public property or within right-of-way are prohibited. 
(f)  Display of temporary sign requires permission of real property owner. A temporary sign on any parcel shall not be erected or maintained if the placement of the same does not have the permission of the owner of the real property. 
(g)  A temporary sign may not display any lighting and must remain static. A temporary sign may not be lit, activated, or animated by any means. 
(h)  A temporary sign may not obstruct a permanent sign or the visions between pedestrians and vehicles. A temporary sign may not obstruct the view of a permanent sign as viewed from any public road, street or highway or any public sidewalk, and may not obstruct the visions between pedestrians and vehicles using the public right-of-way, including but not restricted to, those meeting intersection visibility requirements. 
(i)  A temporary sign may display multiple messages. A temporary sign may display multiple independent messages on any portion of the sign area. 
(j)  A temporary sign is not subject to permitting. A temporary sign does not require a permit from the city. 
(k)  Regulation of interior facing signage. Section 12-989 allows for the regulation of interior facing temporary signs, except for interior of school yards, ball/play fields or similar uses where such signage is designed to face the interior of such locations and is not to be viewed or seen from adjacent roadways. 
(l)  Administrative waiver for temporary signs. 
(1)  The city manager or designee may grant an administrative waiver from subsection 12-989(d) provided the deviation does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the temporary sign criteria. Any other deviation from the temporary sign section shall require a sign variance from city council in accordance to section 12-159 of this Code. 
(2)  Temporary sign waiver application and process. An application shall be submitted to the city manager or designee with appropriate information, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Description and explanation of the requested temporary sign waiver. 
b.  A graphic of the proposed temporary sign(s) that identifies the height, sign area, dimensions, sign supports and method of how the sign will be attached to either the ground or structure, etc. 
c.  Property owner contact information, deed, and legal description 
d.  Where applicable, the applicant shall submit a letter from the property owner granting permission to display the proposed sign(s). 
e.  A site plan of the property identifying the location of proposed temporary sign(s) in relation to existing signs, driveway entrances, intersections, streets, property line, sight triangles or visibility at entrances, landscaping, public infrastructure, parking spaces and vehicle use areas, buildings, etc. 
f.  Additional information that will support the requested waiver application. 
(3)  Waiver applications shall be reviewed by the city manager or designee within ten (10) business days of the receipt of a temporary sign waiver application. The city manager or designee shall provide written notice to the property owner, applicant, and/or authorized agent with regards to the reasons for approval or denial of the requested temporary sign waiver(s). 
(4)  Waivers to the temporary sign section of this Code shall be allowed to be approved by the city manager or designee, based on the following criteria: 
a.  The application of the provision of this section of the LDC to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
b.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
c.  Relief, if granted would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this section of the LDC. In permitting any waiver for a temporary sign from the terms of this section of the LDC, the city manager or designee shall prescribe any conditions it deems to be necessary or desirable to promote the public interest and shall fully set forth, in its findings, the reasons for permitting or denying a waiver from the temporary sign section of the LDC. Any waiver granted shall be the minimum practicable waiver. 
(5)  Appeal process. 
a.  Any person adversely affected by a decision of the city manager or designee in the enforcement or the interpretation of any of the terms or provisions of the temporary sign section of the LDC may appeal such decision to the city council. 
b.  Such appeal shall be made by filing a written request to the city clerk within ten (10) business days of the determination of the city manager or designee. Appeals shall be heard by the city council on the earliest available agenda following the submittal of the written request to the city council. The applicant also shall have the opportunity to present the reason for appeal and evidence in support of the appeal to the city council. The city council shall: 
1.  Affirm the decision of the city manager or designee, or 
2.  Reverse the decision. Decisions of the city council may be challenged in a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh. A), 8-16-2016 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1401, § 1(Exh. A), adopted August 16, 2016 , repealed the former § 12-989, and enacted a new § 12-989 as set out herein. The former § 12-989 pertained to political signs and derived from Code 2001, § 25.765.12; Ord. No. 769, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 817, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 835, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 836, 4-20-1993; Ord. No. 879, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 899, 8-15-1995; Ord. No. 1278, 8-17-2010. 
Secs. 12-990-12-1006. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - SEAWALLS, RIPRAP, RAMPS, DOCKS AND OTHER PRIVATE OVER THE WATER STRUCTURES ON THE HILLSBOROUGH RIVER 

Sec. 12-1007. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bent means that section of a dock or pier which forms a transverse framework intended to carry lateral as well as vertical loads (similar to a railroad trestle superstructure). 
    Construction means the erection of any new structure, the replacement of any existing structure, or the additions to any existing structures. 
    Dock means any structure, otherwise known as a pier, wharf, or loading platform, which is constructed on piling, suspended over open water or which is supported by flotation on the water. 
    Finger pier means that part of a dock structure which is attached in a perpendicular fashion to a central dock and provides direct access to boats and moorings. 
    Floating dock means any dock supported by flotation devices and influenced by the daily ebb and flow of the water body. 
    Frontage means the amount of riverbank or shoreline measured in linear feet. 
    Middle Hillsborough River means the portion of the river from the Fletcher Avenue bridge downstream to the City of Tampa dam. 
    Ordinary high water mark means a line determined by examining the bed and banks of the water body and ascertaining where the presence and action of the water has marked upon the bed, a character distinct from that of the banks with respect to vegetation or nature of the soil itself. This delineation is used in non-tidally influenced areas. 
    Parcel means land bounded by lines legally established for the purpose of property division. 
    Permanently moored means to moor a floating structure or vessel in a manner designed for use in essentially the same manner as a fixed structure. 
    Piling means poles, concrete bars or other materials which are embedded in the river bottom forming the structural support of a dock. 
    Residential dock means any dock which will be used by an individual owner, the owner's family and friends. 
    Riprap means a sloping sustaining wall made to reduce the force of waves and to protect the shore from erosion and consisting of unconsolidated boulders, rocks, clean concrete rubble, plastic webbing or similar manufactured material, or a combination thereof, with a base of filter fabric and no exposed reinforcing rods or similar protrusions. 
    Tie pilings means pilings which are used for the anchorage or mooring of a vessel. 
    Vertical seawall means a manmade wall, made to break the force of the waves and to protect the shore from erosion, the waterward face of which is at a slope greater than seventy-five (75) degrees to the horizontal. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.1) 
Sec. 12-1008. - Minimum specifications for all dock construction. 
(a)  The provisions of chapter 15 of the Florida Building Code shall govern the design, materials, construction and quality of permitted roof assemblies. Roof assemblies shall meet or exceed the performance requirements for wind resistance in accordance with chapter 16, Florida Building Code. 
(b)  The design of structural elements or systems constructed partially or wholly of wood based products, shall be in accordance with chapter 23, Florida Building Code. All lumber, timber, piles and poles, and plywood supporting permanent structures shall be naturally durable or preservative treated wood conforming to the requirements of the American Wood Preservers Association (AWPA) standards for species and products. 
(c)  All metal fastenings including nails, screws, bolts, clips and hangers shall be corrosion resistant and conform to the standards of ASTM F 1667. Corrosion resistance shall meet ASTM A 641, Class 1 or an equal corrosion resistance by coating, electro galvanization, mechanical galvanization, hot-dipped galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metal or other suitable corrosion resistant material. 
(d)  The quality and design of materials for dock and pile foundations shall meet or exceed the provisions specified in chapter 19, Florida Building Code as determined by the type of foundation being constructed. This construction may include but shall not be limited to concrete cast in place piles, concrete filled tube piles, timber piles, and precast concrete piles. The use of creosotes piles and creosote wood products is strictly prohibited. 
(e)  Tie pilings shall project above ordinary high water only as reasonably necessary for their use and application but in no case greater than ten (10) feet above mean high water. Any such wood piling shall consist of naturally durable or preservative treated lumber under the requirements of AWPA standards. Concrete tie pilings shall be subject to design and reinforcement criteria outlined in chapter 19, Florida Building Code. 
(f)  All floating private docks in the city must have a minimum of twenty (20) pounds per square foot flotation and be constructed with materials approved by the city and the Tampa Port Authority. 
(g)  All electrical systems are to comply with the National Electrical Code requirements, latest adopted edition. 
(h)  The decking and walking surfaces of all docks shall be designed and constructed to ensure a maximum of light penetration through the dock, with full consideration of safety and practicality. Under no circumstance shall decking surface be constructed in a manner that renders the structure area impervious to light or water runoff. A minimum one-inch opening is required per linear foot of structure with a minimum of one-half-inch spacing gap required between decking planks. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.2; Ord. No. 1276, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 12-1009. - Minimum specifications for seawall and riprap construction. 
(a)  Where repair of existing seawalls will require replacement or reconstruction of more than twenty (20) percent of the total linear footage of the length of the existing seawall, the seawall must be repaired or replaced with natural slopes or riprap. No more than forty (40) percent of the length of the seawall may be repaired in any five-year period without reverting to natural slopes or riprap. 
(b)  Riprap installed for shoreline stabilization must consist of clean broken concrete or natural rock, with diameters of about twelve (12) inches or plastic webbing material (Geoweb or similar manufactured shoreline stabilization material). In no case will asphalt or other hydrocarbon-based materials be permitted for shoreline stabilization. 
(c)  Filter fabric must be provided as a base for all riprap construction other than plastic webbing material. 
(d)  The vertical slope of riprap construction may not exceed a two to one (2:1) (horizontal:vertical) ratio. 
(e)  Riprap shall be installed such that impacts to existing wetland vegetation and/or wildlife habitat are minimized. Wetland vegetation and/or wildlife habitat on lands adjacent to area of riprap coverage shall not be damaged or destroyed during installation. 
(f)  Riprap construction must include plantings of indigenous types of vegetation. The Hillsborough County Environmental Protection Commission shall be the resource agency for information regarding appropriate types of vegetation and methods of planting. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.3; Ord. No. 1276, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 12-1010. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Where docks are permitted under this division, only one dock per parcel is permitted. 
(b)  Residential docks shall be positioned such that impacts to existing vegetation are avoided or minimized. 
(c)  Maximum height of roofed structures shall be measured from nearest adjacent grade unless otherwise specified. 
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR OVER-WATER STRUCTURES 
Maximum size and height of roofs over docks 150 sq. ft.; 11 ft. Maximum size of dock 5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. of linear river frontage; up to max 250 sq. ft. Maximum extension into water 10% of river width measured from ordinary high water Setback from property lines on either side Minimum 1/3 of linear river frontage from either side Maximum width of dock 25% of linear river frontage; up to max 25 ft. Maximum height of tie pilings No more than 10 ft. above ordinary high water Maximum roof coverage and height of covered boat lifts 365 sq. ft.; 11 ft.  

(Code 2001, § 25.770.4; Ord. No. 1276, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 12-1011. - Permitting. 
(a)  The administration and enforcement of building and mechanical codes of the Florida Building Code which establish the technical standards that apply to the construction, installation, alteration, removal, repair, replacement and maintenance to any over-water structure shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 8, Buildings and Fire Prevention, of this Code. Minimum specifications are declared to be remedial and shall be construed to be necessary to secure the beneficial interests and purpose to address public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  All applications for permits from the city for construction of riprap, docks, boat lifts, or other over-the-water structures must be accompanied by either permits or permit exemptions from the department of environmental protection and the Tampa Port Authority. 
(c)  Failure to obtain a permit for an alteration, addition or improvement prior to construction shall be grounds for referral to the city's municipal code enforcement board. Repairs, alterations, additions or improvements to an existing structure which will constitute fifty (50) percent, or greater, of said structure size, will require a new permit and shall conform to the design standards established in this division. 
(d)  Persons wishing to engage in the business of contracting or acting in the capacity of a aquatic contractor or subcontractor undertaking construction, repair or maintenance of riprap, docks, boat lifts, or other over-the-water structures shall maintain a certificate of competency with the county, be registered with the city and be registered with the state in accordance with F.S. ch. 489. 
(e)  The city shall have the right to deny a permit for the construction of an over-the water structure where it is determined that such construction will adversely affect one or more of the following: 
(1)  The use of the Hillsborough River for navigation, transportation, recreation or other public purpose; 
(2)  The flow of water of tidal currents in the river; 
(3)  The rate or amount of erosion, public erosion control efforts, or the shoaling of navigation channels; 
(4)  Water quality, wildlife conservation, aquatic life, wetlands and other natural resources; 
(5)  Uplands surrounding the site, if materially disturbed by the general plan of development; and 
(6)  The health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.5; Ord. No. 1276, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 12-1012. - Prohibited construction. 
(a)  Construction of new vertical seawalls is prohibited, except as may be necessary to ensure the public health, safety and welfare, as in the construction of vertical sections of seawall associated with flood control structures or other public facilities. 
(b)  Construction of over-the-water structures along the Middle Hillsborough River is prohibited, except for docks, covered boat lifts, boardwalks, public bridges and structures that are clearly for the benefit of the public or where property ownership includes submerged lands. 
(c)  In no case shall administrative approval be given for the enclosing of the sides of any dock, boat lift or any other type of over-the-water structure. 
(d)  Filling or dredging in the floodway for any construction is prohibited. 
(e)  The construction of multidecked structures is prohibited. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.6; Ord. No. 1276, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 12-1013. - Additional provisions. 
(a)  Construction materials, debris, or other trash must not be allowed to escape into the river at any time during construction. Turbidity screens shall be utilized throughout the installation of riprap and dock pilings. The screens shall be placed so as to enclose and confine to the construction site any sediment-laden waters generated by the activity. 
(b)  All docks must be marked with reflectors or reflective tape so that their extent is clearly indicated to boaters on the waterway. 
(c)  All residential docks shall be for private use only and cannot be used to generate income. 
(d)  The maintenance and repair of any over-the-water structure shall be the sole responsibility of its owner. If any over-the-water structure constructed hereunder or continued in existence hereunder is permitted to fall into disrepair so as to become a dangerous structure involving risks to the safety and well being of the community or individual members thereof, such structure shall either be repaired or removed so as to conform to the requirements of these rules and regulations. Upon determination by the building official that a structure has become dangerous, the city shall serve written notice upon the owner of record of the adjacent upland property. Said party shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to remove or repair said structure to conform to the requirements of this division. Failure to act will be cause for referral to the municipal code enforcement board. 
(e)  Permanently moored vessels are prohibited. 
(f)  Moored boats shall not extend more than one boat width past the riverward edge of dock. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.7) 
Sec. 12-1014. - Variances. 
(a)  A variance from design, construction standards and materials may be granted by the city's building official provided that the proposed construction methods and materials are equivalent to or better than those specified by this division. It is the responsibility of the petitioner to verify that the proposed alternate methods or materials are equal to those required herein. 
(b)  A variance from size, location, and placement criteria for an over-the-water structure, including deviations from other design criteria not mentioned above, may only be granted by the city board of adjustment. The standard procedures for board of adjustment cases shall be followed except that riverfront property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property shall be notified in addition to property owners within one hundred (100) feet in any direction. 
(Code 2001, § 25.770.8; Ord. No. 746, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 1276, 7-20-2010) 
Secs. 12-1015-12-1041. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING 

Sec. 12-1042. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish minimum landscaping and buffering standards for all construction except single and two-family residential uses on individually platted lots, and to encourage the use of xeriscape, or low water usage landscape design. Standards are provided for interior landscaping, perimeter landscaping and buffering, and the maintenance thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.1; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1043. - Plant material and design. 
(a)  Xeriscape design. Unless impractical due to constraints of parcel size, topography, design or layout of existing or planned improvements, or other material factors, xeriscape materials, plantings, and methods shall be utilized. The principles, characteristics, and guidelines for xeriscape landscape design are identified in Exhibit A in section 12-1044 and made a part hereof. 
(b)  Quality. Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this division shall conform to the standards for Florida No. 1, or better, as given in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, 2015, as amended, Florida Department of Agriculture, or equal thereto as approved by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Trees. All trees shall be species having an average mature spread or crown of greater than fifteen (15) feet in the city area and having trunks which can be maintained in a clean condition over five (5) feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread or crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a fifteen-foot crown spread at maturity. Immediately after planting, trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet overall height and have a trunk four (4) inches or greater in diameter, when measured four (4) feet above the ground. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted. Those species of trees listed on the city's recommended tree list shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this division. 
(d)  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where required, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen within a maximum of two (2) years after time of planting. 
(e)  Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in height immediately after planting and may only be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified. 
(f)  Ground covers. Ground cover in lieu of grass, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage, and shall be used with a decorative mulch such as pine or cypress bark or other organic material. In no instance shall stone or gravel be utilized. 
(g)  Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown in permanent lawns in the Temple Terrace area. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.2; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995; Ord. No. 1424 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 12-1044. - Water efficient landscaping guidelines. 
Exhibit A. Water Efficient Landscaping Guidelines 
Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of these administrative guidelines is to establish the minimum standards for the development, installation, and maintenance of landscaped areas without inhibiting creative landscape design. These guidelines encourage specific water conservation measures including the preservation of natural vegetation where applicable. Implementation will aid in improving environmental quality and the aesthetic appearance of public, commercial, industrial, and residential areas. It is the intent of these guidelines to encourage resourceful planning to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare in the areas of water conservation and preservation. 
(b)  Creative site development concepts shall be used in order to promote water conservation. Water requirements may be reduced by providing for: 
(1)  The preservation of existing plant communities; 
(2)  The re-establishment of native plant communities; 
(3)  The use of site specific plant materials; 
(4)  Site development that retains stormwater runoff on site; 
(5)  The use of concave topped berm design; 
(6)  The use of water efficiency in landscaping; and 
(7)  Other environmentally sensitive site development concepts. 
(c)  The land clearing/vegetation protection and preservation objectives are: 
(1)  To reduce the use of irrigation water in open space areas by promoting the preservation of existing plant communities; 
(2)  To prevent the removal of existing vegetation in advance of the approval of land development plans; and 
(3)  To prevent the removal of existing vegetation when no comparable vegetation plan has been prepared for the site. 
(d)  To achieve the objectives of the city's xeriscape landscape guidelines, the following seven (7) basic principles of water efficient landscaping apply. These principles, listed below with detailed explanation, are included in this section for the purpose of giving guidance and direction for the administration and enforcement of the standards contained herein: 
(1)  Planning and design. 
(2)  Soil analysis. 
(3)  Appropriate plant selection. 
(4)  Practical turf areas. 
(5)  Efficient irrigation. 
(6)  Use of mulches. 
(7)  Appropriate maintenance. 
Definitions. 
    For purpose of these guidelines, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Automatic controller means a mechanical or electronic timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
    Emitter (low volume) means devices which are used to control the application of irrigation water. This term is primarily used to refer to the low flow rate devices used in microirrigation systems. 
    Existing plant communities means all species currently existing on the site, excluding any vegetation listed as invasive by the exotic pest plant council or by the city council. 
    Ground cover means plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity. 
    Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
    Irrigation system means a permanent, artificial watering system designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
    Landscaped area means the entire parcel less the building footprint, driveways, non-irrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes such as decks, patios, pools, spas and other non-porous areas. Water features such as ponds are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. 
    Landscaping means any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and non-living landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch or decorative paving materials). 
    Microirrigation (low volume) means the frequent application of small quantities of water directly on or below the soil surface, usually as discrete drops, tiny streams, or miniature sprays through emitters placed along the water delivery pipes (laterals). Microirrigation encompasses a number of methods or concepts including drip, subsurface, bubbler, and spray irrigation, previously referred to as trickle irrigation, low volume, or low flow irrigation. 
    Mulch means non-living, organic or synthetic materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture. 
    Native vegetation. See Vegetation, native. 
    Plant communities means a natural association of plants that are dominated by one or more prominent species, or a characteristic physical attribute. 
    Rain sensor device means a low voltage electrical or mechanical component placed in the circuitry of an automatic lawn irrigation system which is designed to turn off a sprinkler controller when precipitation has reached a pre-set quantity. 
    Runoff means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. 
    Site specific plant means a selection of plant material that is particularly well suited to withstand the physical growing conditions that are normal for a specific location. 
    Soil texture means the classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt, and clay in the soil. 
    Turf and/or turf grass means continuous plant coverage consisting of grass species suited to growth in the city. 
    Valve means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
    Vegetation, native, means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all, or part, of the state. 
    Water use zone means a grouping of sprays, sprinklers, or microirrigation emitters so that they can be operated simultaneously by the control of one valve according to the water requirements of the plants used. 
Design standards. 
(a)  Planning and design. 
(1)  Landscape plans submitted in accordance with this appendix will be reviewed and approved pursuant to the city's normal site specific review process. 
(2)  Landscape plans shall identify all vegetated areas to be preserved. Installed trees and plant materials shall be grouped together into zones according to water use needs as specified below. Plants with similar water and cultural (soil, climate, sun, and light) requirements shall be grouped together and irrigated based on their water requirements. The Southwest Florida Water Management District Plant Guide may be used for reference. The water use zones shall be shown on the landscape plan. All newly installed plants require regular, moderately applied watering for the first year to become established. Installed trees and vegetation shall be spaced and located to accommodate their mature size on the site. The water use zones are as follows: 
a.  High water use zone (oasis). An area of the site limited to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the total landscaped area. Plants and turf types which, within this area, are associated with moist soils and require supplemental water in addition to natural rainfall to survive. This zone includes shallow rooted turf grass varieties. 
b.  Moderate water use zone (drought tolerant). Plants which survive on natural rainfall with supplemental water during seasonal dry periods. This zone includes deep rooted turf grass varieties. 
c.  Low water use zone (natural). Plants which survive on natural rainfall without supplemental water. Because of the relatively high water requirements of turf grass, no presently available varieties are included in this category. 
(b)  Soil analysis. 
(1)  Soils will vary from site to site and even within a given site. A soil analysis based on random sampling is recommended. The soil analysis will provide information that will enable proper selection of plants and, if needed, soil amendments. When appropriate, soil amendments can achieve the health and growing capabilities of the landscape by improving drainage, moisture penetration, and a soil's water and nutrient holding capacity. 
(2)  To ensure the proper selection of plants for the site, a soil analysis for the measurement of pH should be completed. 
(c)  Appropriate plant selection. 
(1)  According to state statute, plant selection must consider prohibited invasive exotic plant species and controlled plant species. The following are recommended sources for appropriate plant selection: 
a.  The Southwest Florida Water Management District Plant Guide; 
b.  Article IX, division 8 of this LDC, Tree Removal or Trimming, Tables 1 and 3 in section 12-772 for encouraged and prohibited plant species; 
c.  Hillsborough County Agricultural Extension Office; 
d.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(2)  Landscape plans shall be designed to achieve the aesthetic effect desired and, most importantly, grouped in accordance with their respective water needs. Maximum water conservation can be achieved by selecting the appropriate plants that require a minimal amount of supplemental watering. 
(3)  Plant material shall be selected that is best suited to withstand the soil and physical growing conditions which are found in the microclimate of each particular location on a site. 
(d)  Practical turf areas. 
(1)  The type and location of turf areas shall be selected in the same manner as with all other plantings. Turf shall not be treated as fill-in material but rather as a major planned element of the landscape. Since many turf varieties require supplemental watering at frequencies different than the other types of landscape plants, turf shall be placed so that it can be irrigated separately. 
(2)  While turf areas provide many practical benefits in a landscape, how and where it is used can result in a significant reduction in water use. Turf grass areas shall be consolidated and limited to those areas on the site that receive pedestrian traffic, provide for recreation use, or provide soil erosion control such as on slopes or in swales; where turf grass is used as a design unifier, or other similar practical use. Turf areas shall be identified on the landscape plan. 
(e)  Efficient irrigation. 
(1)  Irrigation systems should be designed to correlate to the organization of plants into zones as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Retained trees, shrubs and native plant communities shall not be required to be irrigated, unless directed to do so by the city for the successful establishment of the landscape area. Turf grass areas shall be irrigated on separate irrigation zones from trees, shrubs and ground cover beds. 
(3)  Reclaimed or non-potable water may be used for irrigation if an acceptable source is determined to be available by the director of the public works department. 
(4)  A rain sensor device or switch shall be required on automatic irrigation systems to avoid irrigation during periods of sufficient rainfall. Said equipment shall consist of an automatic mechanical or electronic sensing device or switch which will override the irrigation cycle of the sprinkler system when precipitation has reached a preset quantity. 
(5)  The use of emitters (low volume) is required for trees, shrubs and ground covers so as to minimize irrigation overthrow onto impervious surfaces. 
(f)  Use of mulches. 
(1)  Mulches applied and maintained at appropriate depths in planting beds will assist soils in retaining moisture, reducing weed growth, and preventing erosion. Mulch can also be used in places where conditions aren't adequate for or conducive to growing quality turf or ground covers. 
(2)  A layer of mulch to a minimum depth of three (3) inches shall be specified on the landscape plan in plant beds and around individual trees in turf grass areas. Melaleuca mulch and recycled wood products are recommended. Mulch shall not be required in annual beds. 
(g)  Appropriate maintenance. 
(1)  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. 
(2)  Repair of irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.2(exh. A); Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1045. - Plan approval. 
    Except for single- or two-family residential uses, prior to the issuance of any permit for development under the provisions of this LDC, a landscape plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development department. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include all pertinent dimensions and indicate clearly the existing and proposed parking spaces or other vehicular use areas, access aisles, driveways, hydrants, source of water supply for planting and the location and size of all landscape materials, including, but not limited to, location of planting protective devices, the location and size of buildings, and shall designate plants by specific (genus and species) and common name and by location of the plant material to be installed or, if existing, to be used, in accordance with the requirements hereof. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.3; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 12-1046. - Installation. 
    All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the landscape plan as finally approved prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.4; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1047. - Maintenance. 
    The owner or tenant and their agent(s) shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping and landscaped areas which shall be so maintained as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained with an adequate, functional, automatic sprinkler system. Maintenance shall include replacement of dead and damaged plant material. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.5; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1048. - Required interior landscaping. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas in excess of five (5) spaces shall have at least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space, excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by section 12-1049. 
(b)  Other vehicular use areas. Other vehicular use areas, including, but not limited to, drive aisles, roadways, access points, and loading zones, which are integral to off-street parking areas and occupy more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of space, shall have ten (10) square feet of landscaped area for each five hundred (500) square feet or fraction thereof. Said landscaping shall be placed along interior lines or elsewhere within the site provided no distance greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet may exist between plantings. Each required separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet and shall include shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material. 
(c)  Trees. Each development site shall have the equivalent of at least one tree for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parking area or vehicular use area. Each tree shall be planted in an area of at least twenty-five (25) square feet. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.6; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1049. - Required perimeter landscaping. 
(a)  When an off-street parking area abuts or lies within twenty-five (25) feet of a public right-of-way: 
(1)  When an off-street parking area abuts a street right-of-way or lies, in whole or in part, within twenty-five (25) feet of a public right-of-way line, in any zoning district, except as provided for in subsection (a)(3) of this section (where right-of-way serves as a buffer between commercial and residential property), said parking area shall be buffered and landscaped along the entire parcel/right-of-way line by either: 
a.  A three-foot-high landscape buffer; or 
b.  A three-foot-high modified solid buffer or modified wood fence buffer. 
All of the above buffers shall be designed with periodic breaks for pedestrian access. Modified solid buffers and modified wood fence buffers shall have an average one shrub or vine, for each ten (10) linear feet, or fraction thereof; provided, however, that any such shrub or vine shall be planted along the street side of said buffers, unless it is of sufficient height at the time of planting to be readily visible over the tops of said buffers. Pathways through the buffers shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, stepping stones or other hard surface materials. 
(2)  The side and rear property lines of lots, or parcels, containing off-street parking areas as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be separated from adjoining lots by three-foot-high "landscape buffers" when the adjoining lots are nonresidential, or by a full six-foot "solid buffer," or "modified landscape buffer," when the adjoining properties are zoned and used as residential. Exceptions: when the off-street parking areas contain less than twenty (20) spaces, or when cross-access/cross-parking agreements are in place, and the adjoining lots are nonresidential there shall be no requirement for buffers or landscaping along side property lines. 
(3)  The side and rear property lines of lots, or parcels, containing off-street parking areas as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section; when such lots or parcels are separated from land zoned and used as residential by an intervening public or private roadway shall be further buffered from the neighboring residential areas by a six (6) foot "solid buffer" or "modified landscape buffer." These buffers shall be designed with periodic breaks for pedestrian access as explained in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  When an off-street parking area lies between twenty-six (26) feet and one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from a public right-of-way: 
    Whenever an off-street parking area lies in whole, or in part, between twenty-six (26) feet and one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, so long as no part is less than twenty-six (26) feet, from a public right-of-way in any zoning district, that perimeter of the parking lot fronting the public right-of-way shall contain a four-foot-high "landscape buffer" contiguous to the parking lot front perimeter. This fronting "landscape buffer" must be extended around the sides and along the rear perimeters of the parking lot but only to the extent necessary to completely screen that part of the parking lot lying between twenty-six (26) feet and one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, from view by persons standing off site along the public right-of-way. 
(c)  When an off-street parking area lies, in its entirety, further than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from a public right-of-way, no landscaping or buffering is required. 
(d)  Perimeter landscaping and buffering requirements set forth above are in addition to interior landscaping requirements for parking lots and sites specified elsewhere in this LDC. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.7; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1050. - Required buffering and landscaping of nonresidential buildings from land zoned and used as residential. 
(a)  Where nonresidential buildings, or other nonresidential structures and facilities, (excluding commercial buildings and structures, and parking lots or other vehicular use areas), lie in whole, or in part, within seventy-five (75) feet of the property line of lots or parcels zoned and used as residential, those buildings or other structures or parts thereof within seventy-five (75) feet must be buffered from the residential property by a six-foot "landscape buffer," a "solid buffer," or a "modified landscape buffer" placed along the residential property line. 
(b)  Where commercial buildings, or commercial structures and facilities lie in whole, or in part, within seventy-five (75) feet of the property line of lots or parcels zoned and used as residential, those buildings or structures or facilities or parts thereof within seventy-five (75) feet, must be buffered from the residential property by a "solid buffer," or a "modified landscape buffer" placed along the residential property line. 
(c)  Where nonresidential buildings, or other nonresidential structures and facilities, (including commercial buildings and structures, but excluding parking lots and other vehicular use areas) lie beyond seventy-five (75) feet, so long as no part is less than seventy-five (75) feet, from the property line of lots or parcels zoned and used as residential, those buildings or other structures or parts thereof less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from residential property lines must be buffered from the residential property by a "landscape buffer" or "modified landscape buffer" placed within twenty-five (25) feet of the building or structure perimeter facing the residential property. The buffers so located shall be extended around the sides and rear of the building and structure but only to the extent necessary to screen those portions of the buildings and structures falling within twenty-five (25) feet and one hundred fifty (150) feet from the property line and visible to persons standing along the common property line. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.8; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1051. - Required buffering and landscaping of "other vehicular use areas." 
(a)  When loading areas and zones are located on nonresidential property within twenty-five (25) feet of the property line they shall be screened from view by persons standing off-site. The screen provided shall consist of fencing, walls and/or landscaping placed along the property line so that at least seventy-five (75) percent of the loading area is masked from view. 
(b)  Where loading areas and/or zones are between twenty-six (26) feet and one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the property line, the required buffer screen shall be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of the perimeter of the loading area facing the property line and shall be extended around the sides and to the rear of the loading area, but only to the extent necessary to screen the loading area from view by persons standing off site. 
(c)  When internal roadways or drive aisles, or parts thereof, are present, not integral to on-site parking areas, and lie within seventy-five (75) feet of adjacent noncommercial property lines, they shall be landscaped with hedges thirty-six (36) inches in height. The hedges at time of planting shall be no less than two (2) feet in height provided they are of a species known to be capable of reaching three (3) feet within one additional year. The hedges shall be planted within five (5) feet of, and parallel with, the roadway. 
(d)  When internal roadways or drive aisles, or parts thereof, are present, not integral to on-site parking areas, and lie between seventy-six (76) feet and one hundred fifty (150) feet from adjacent noncommercial property lines, they shall be landscaped or buffered to screen vehicle headlight impact points and areas to prevent light trespass whenever it occurs along the lot and parcel perimeter boundaries. The screens shall consist of walls, fence lines or hedge rows not less than forty-eight (48) inches in height. If walls or fence lines are used, they shall be landscaped with one vine or shrub for each ten (10) feet of wall or fence. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.9; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1052. - Landscaping, buffering, and screening of public or private utility structures and/or facilities including security fencing. 
(a)  Public or private utility structures and/or facilities: including, but not limited to, telephone switching facilities, electric generation, or transmission facilities, sanitary sewer lift stations, water supply or irrigation wells, pumps or meters; which, for security, safety, aesthetics, or other reasons require fencing, shall be enclosed on all sides by a minimum four-foot "modified solid buffer" or "modified wood fence buffer." Four-foot chainlink fences may be used in lieu of the foregoing, provided the fence is integrated as part of a "modified landscape buffer" on all exterior sides, except where gates providing pedestrian or vehicular access are located. The city engineer shall determine the needs for fencing public utility structures and/or facilities and may modify the height or fencing as the engineer deems necessary. 
(b)  If a privately-owned infrastructure, as mentioned above, is not fenced, stands to a height of more than two and one-half (21/2) feet, and is within seventy-five (75) feet of the property line, it must at a minimum be landscaped on all exterior sides. Landscaping shall include at least one bush or shrub for each five (5) linear feet of perimeter. For purposes of this section, an "exterior" side is any side facing a public right-of-way or publicly owned or used land. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.10; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1053. - Landscaping, buffering and screening of retention and detention basins including security fencing. 
(a)  Where side slopes of either wet and dry retention or detention ponds are steeper than four-to-one (4:1), a nonclimbable fence, or wall, including chainlink, at least four (4) feet high shall be installed. All chainlink fences shall be constructed with a six-inch gap at the bottom to permit wildlife access. The bottoms of chainlink fences shall be laced with stainless steel tension wire to resist lifting and expansion of the gap. The fence or wall shall contain a gate opening of eight (8) feet, double swing, and shall be kept locked at all times. Decking or other kinds of pond coverings are permissible when approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Where a fence or wall is required, it shall be centered on a ten-foot-wide maintenance area adjacent to the top of the bank. Every point on the maintenance area shall be at, or above, the elevation of the top of the bank. The cross slope of the maintenance area shall be no steeper than four-to-one (4:1). All fences and walls shall be landscaped with trees at a dispersal rate of one tree per forty (40) linear feet of fence or wall, or fraction thereof. Trees may be planted along either the inside or the outside of the fence or wall along all sides. Additionally, exterior faces of every wall shall be landscaped with one shrub or vine for each ten (10) linear feet of wall. For purposes of this division, an exterior side (face) is a side abutting a public right-of-way or other publicly-owned or used land. If chainlink fences are used, the chainlink fence must be integrated into a modified landscape buffer on all exterior sides. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.11; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1054. - Fencing and landscaping of dumpsters. 
    All solid waste refuse containers, i.e., "dumpsters," shall be screened by concrete or wood enclosures having a depth of not more than eight (8) feet, with walls not exceeding six and one-half (61/2) feet in height, and minimum openings of ten (10) feet. Enclosures not meeting the above criteria shall have a minimum twelve-foot opening. Modifications to the above standards, or additional standards may be adopted and approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.12; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1055. - Sight distance for landscaping and buffering adjacent to public right-of-way and points of access. 
    When an access way intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way, all landscaping and buffering within the triangular areas described below shall allow unobstructed, cross-visibility between the level of three (3) and six (6) feet; provided, however, trees having limbs and foliage trimmed so that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area shall be allowed, and provided further, such trees shall be located so as not to create a traffic hazard. Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer than one and one-half (11/2) feet from the edge of any access way pavement. The triangular areas referred to above are: 
(1)  The areas of property on both sides of an access way formed by the intersection of each side of the access way and public right-of-way lines with two (2) sides of each triangle being twenty (20) feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) sides; 
(2)  The area of property formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way with two (2) sides of the triangular area being thirty (30) feet in length along the abutting right-of-way lines, measured from their point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) lines. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.13; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1056. - Existing plant material. 
    In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in part or whole, the city manager or designee may adjust the application of the above-mentioned standards, to allow credit for such plant material if, in the manager or designee's opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the intent of this division. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.14; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 12-1057. - Aboveground portable planters. 
    Up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required area for landscaping may consist of aboveground portable planters, provided that such planters are of sufficient size and quality to support and protect the landscaping to be placed in such planter. 
(Code 2001, § 25.780.15; Ord. No. 420, 4-7-1981; Ord. No. 520, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 618, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 727, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 797, 2-4-1992; Ord. No. 895, 5-2-1995) 
Secs. 12-1058-12-1082. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - LEVEL OF SERVICE MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS AND CONCURRENCY[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions providing that public facilities and services meet or exceed the standards established in the capital improvements element and are available when needed for the development, or that development orders and permits are conditioned on the availability of these public facilities and services necessary to serve the proposed development required, F.S. § 162.3202(2)(g); concurrency, F.S. § 163.3180. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-1083. - Concurrency management program and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This article outlines the schedule and identifies the mechanisms for concurrency management and level of service (LOS) measuring and monitoring required by F.S. ch. 163, F.A.C. ch. 9J-11 and the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Identification of impact. Public facilities' LOS monitoring and annual reporting, adopted in the city's comprehensive plan, is the administrative mechanism that identifies the impact of additional development on these facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.900) 
Sec. 12-1084. - Vested development and development orders. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This section outlines the conditions under which the issuance of development permits is exempt from the concurrency requirements and monitoring requirements of this article except public school concurrency and transportation concurrency in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District. All residential developments that require a final subdivision plat or final site plan approval are subject to review under division 2 of this article regarding public school concurrency. Development orders in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District shall be issued by the city and evaluated for conformance with division 3 of this article, Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual, in effect on the date review takes place. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(b)  Developments of regional impact. Developments of regional impact and development orders issued pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, which were approved prior to February 1, 1990, are exempt from the provisions of this article to the extent provided for in F.S. § 163.3167(8). (Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(c)  Reconstruction exemption. Reconstruction of facilities in existence on February 1, 1990, as a result of fire, storm or other disaster are exempt from the concurrency provisions of this article, so long as the facility is not enlarged by more than five (5) percent or the use changed resulting in an increased demand on required facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.905; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1085. - Facility capacity reservation periods. 
(a)  Development permits. Development permits, described below, issued after February 1, 1990, for which review has been completed under the provisions of this article and for which required facility capacity has been determined available, shall complete development activity consecutively under the specific development permit approval periods to retain their reservation of acquired facility capacity for purposes of concurrency. 
(b)  Approval periods. 
Development Permit Approval Period Final site plan approval 12 months Infrastructure permit 6 months Building permit 6 months  
(c)  Continuation of development activity. Upon approval of a final site plan or issuance of an infrastructure or building permit, the development activity related to the development permit must be substantially completed and subsequent development permit obtained during the timeframe in subsection (b) of this section to retain the facility capacity reservation. 
(d)  Extensions. The city manager or designee may grant one extension, not to exceed six (6) months, for each development permit due to the complexity or magnitude of a particular development activity or as a result of acts of nature or other reasonable circumstances. Extensions related to public schools facilities shall be governed by division 2 of this article, Concurrency Management for Public School Facilities. Extensions to development orders related to transportation concurrency in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District shall be issued by the city and evaluated for accordance with division 3 of this article, Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual, in effect on the date review takes place. 
(Code 2001, § 25.910; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1086. - Minimum requirements for concurrency. 
(a)  Analysis on affected facilities. Required facilities include any utility, amenity, service or system that is required to maintain a level of service (LOS) as adopted in the city's comprehensive plan. The impact on the LOS and the need for additional required facilities shall be identified by the development permit applicant and reviewed for concurrency by the city in compliance with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Conditions for concurrency. Prior to the issuance of a development permit, concurrency requirements will be considered met if the following conditions are addressed for each of the facility LOS requirements: 
(1)  Potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage: 
a.  The required facilities are in place at the time a development permit is issued; 
b.  A development permit is issued subject to the condition that the required facilities will be in place when the development impacts occur; 
c.  The required facilities are under construction at the time a permit is issued; or 
d.  The required facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement that includes the provisions of subsection (b)(1)a through c of this section. 
(2)  Recreation: 
a.  Compliance with subsection (b)(1)a through c of this section. 
b.  At the time the development permit is issued, the required facilities are the subject of a binding, executed contract that provides for the commencement of the actual construction of the required facilities or their provision within one year of the development permit's issuance. 
(3)  Traffic circulation (city limits) and transportation concurrency in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District: 
a.  Compliance with subsection (b)(1)a through d or subsection (b)(2)b of this section. (Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(4)  Public school facilities: 
a.  Compliance with division 2 of this article and the public schools facilities element and capital improvement element as contained in the city comprehensive plan. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(Code 2001, § 25.915; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1087. - Responsibility for implementation. 
(a)  Coordinating department. The department of community development shall coordinate the implementation and measurement of level of service standards, except that the public schools facilities will be implemented and measured based on division 2 of this article, Concurrency Management for Public School Facilities, and transportation concurrency in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District development orders shall be issued by the city and evaluated for accordance with division 3 of this article, Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual in effect on the date review takes place, and by November 1 of each year shall provide the applicable department with the following information: 
(1)  City limits and the reserve area current population estimates and projections for a five-year period; 
(2)  Building permit activity for the previous three (3) years and three-year projections; 
(3)  Additional statistical information the lead department/division may reasonably request. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(b)  Applicable departments. The following department/division will be responsible for the individual monitoring and reporting schedules outlined in this LDC: 
Applicable Department Facilities Public works Potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, traffic circulation, transportation facilities in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District and drainage Leisure services Park land and recreation facilities Community development Public school facilities  
(Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(c)  Standards establishment. The department of community development shall establish a "persons per unit" standard for residential structures and an equivalent standard "per square footage" for commercial use. These standards shall be applied to building permit applications to document the growth and allocation of service capacity as it relates to the adopted LOS for required facilities. (Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(Code 2001, § 25.920; Ord. No. 1161, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1088. - Implementation and monitoring. 
(a)  To ensure that the goals, objectives, policies and programs established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan will be achieved, the following review procedure is hereby enacted, except that the public schools facilities will be evaluated and monitored based on division 2 of this article, Concurrency Management for Public School Facilities, and Transportation Facilities in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District will be implemented and measured based on division 3 of this article, Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual in effect on the date review takes place. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(1)  Development permit review (site plan review). When application is made for a development permit, it will outline the development's impact on the LOS of required facilities, what facilities must be provided, and how the facilities will be provided concurrently. 
(2)  Building permit review. The application review of a building permit will outline the impact on the LOS of required facilities, what facilities must be provided, and how the facilities will be provided concurrently. 
(3)  Annual budget. The annual budget will identify projects required to maintain or attain an adopted LOS. Capital projects, which are required for LOS maintenance or attainment, but are unfunded in the annual budget, shall cause the revocation of any development order or building permit that was issued contingent upon the construction of the project. 
(4)  Comprehensive plan amendments. The semi-annual report to the department of economic affairs relative to plan amendments will report any changes to adopted goals, objectives, policies, and programs in the capital improvements element. 
(5)  Monitoring. Each required facility with an adopted LOS will be measured at least annually, except as follows, to document the current LOS and ensure that the adopted LOS is maintained. 
(b)  If the annual report indicates the current LOS is within ten (10) percent of the adopted LOS, monitoring for that required facility shall begin on a quarterly basis until the current LOS exceeds the adopted LOS and service and action are commenced under section 12-1090(b). 
(c)  The specific methodology for each monitoring schedule and report is outlined in the specific guidelines for concurrency for each required facility. 
(Code 2001, § 25.925; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1089. - Specific guidelines for concurrency management. 
    To ensure that concurrency management requirements are properly met, the following specific guidelines for concurrency management are hereby established for evaluating and monitoring facilities within the city, except that the availability of public schools facilities shall be evaluated and monitored per division 2 of this article, Concurrency Management for Public School Facilities, and Transportation Facilities in the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District will be evaluated and monitored based on division 3 of this article, Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual in effect on the date review takes place. 
(1)  Recreation facilities and park land. 
a.  Required facilities (see comprehensive plan for adopted LOS). 
1.  Recreation facilities that have adopted LOS standards: golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, baseball fields, softball fields, football/soccer fields, exercise trails, handball/racquetball courts, gymnasiums, volleyball courts, track and field, multipurpose courts, hiking/nature trails, and bicycling paths. 
2.  Neighborhood park: park land that serves a particular neighborhood by foot or bike. 
3.  Community park: park land that serves more than one neighborhood. 
4.  District park: park land and open space that serves many neighborhoods and communities. 
b.  Responsibility for implementation. The leisure services department shall be the lead department in all monitoring and reporting activities related to recreational facilities and park land. 
c.  Methodology. LOS measurement and concurrency management for park land and recreational facilities shall be on a citywide basis. Recreational facilities and park lands will be cited using existing inventory and the projections provided under section 12-1087. 
(2)  Potable water, sanitary sewer, drainage and solid waste. 
a.  Required facilities (see comprehensive plan for adopted LOS). 
1.  Potable water. 
(i)  Average daily flow (ADF) per capita. The total number of gallons of water pumped in a year divided by three hundred sixty-five (365) and then divided by the population of the area served. 
(ii)  Peak daily flow per capita. The highest number of gallons of water pumped in one day, in a given year, divided by the population of the area served. 
(iii)  Storage capacity. The total volume of water stored in advance of its use excluding water stored in transmission and distribution lines. 
2.  Sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Minimum daily flow per capita. The lowest number of gallons of sanitary sewage discharged into the City of Tampa's sanitary sewer system, in one day, in a given year, divided by the population of the area served. 
(ii)  Maximum daily flow per capita. The highest number of gallons of sanitary sewage discharged into the City of Tampa's sanitary sewage system, in one day, in a given year, divided by the population of the area served. 
3.  Solid waste. Pounds per capita per day: The total number of pounds of residential solid waste delivered for disposal, in a year, divided by three hundred sixty-five (365) and then divided by the population of the area served. 
4.  Drainage. Storm return frequency: The expected period of times, in years, of a reoccurrence of a rainfall event of the same magnitude, volume and intensity. (Example: Over a fifty-year period, five-, ten-year storm events are expected to occur.) 
b.  The public works department shall be the lead department in monitoring and reporting all activities related to potable water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste facilities. 
c.  Methodology. 
1.  Potable water. LOS measurement and concurrency management for potable water facilities shall be conducted on a city and service area-wide basis utilizing the projections provided under section 12-1087(a) and (c). 
2.  Sanitary sewer. LOS measurement and concurrency management for sanitary sewer facilities shall be conducted by service area tributary to each of the points of discharge into the City of Tampa sanitary sewer collection system. 
3.  Solid waste. LOS measurement and concurrency management for solid waste equipment shall be conducted on a city-wide basis utilizing the projections provided under section 12-1087(a) and (c), and the existing inventory of solid waste vehicles. 
4.  Drainage. LOS measurement and concurrency management for drainage (stormwater) shall be conducted on an individual development site basis in accordance with "pre" and "post" development LOS. 
(3)  Traffic circulation. 
a.  Required facilities (see comprehensive plan for adopted LOS). 
Arterial roads and collector roads as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
b.  The public works department shall be the lead department in all monitoring and reporting activities related to traffic circulation. 
c.  Methodology. The applicable test as set forth in Section 2.2.0 Test for Concurrency as determined in City of Temple Terrace Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Policy and Procedures Manual, in effect on the date review takes place. 
d.  LOS analysis. Impacts of new PM Peak Hour trips will be evaluated based on the table under section 3.2.0 in the City of Temple Terrace Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Policy and Procedures Manual. 
e.  Proportionate fair share shall be evaluated and determined in accordance with section 3.3.0 in the City of Temple Terrace Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Policy and Procedures Manual. 
(Code 2001, § 25.930; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1090. - Level of service reporting. 
(a)  Annual level of service (LOS) report (for facilities other than public schools). By January 1 of each year, the lead department shall prepare a report analyzing the following issues for their required facilities other than public school facilities: 
(1)  Current LOS versus adopted LOS. 
(2)  Current and/or potential LOS deficiencies for ensuing five-year period. 
(3)  Capital improvement projects required to maintain adopted LOS. 
(4)  For those required facilities with a LOS deficiency, a recommendation to: 
a.  Fund the necessary improvements to maintain or re-establish the adopted LOS; 
b.  Amend the comprehensive plan adopting a lower LOS consistent with the current LOS; or 
c.  Cease issuing development permits that impact the LOS until the adopted LOS is re-established. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
(b)  Remedial action. In January of every year, the city manager or designee shall present the LOS reports to the city council at a public meeting. For each of the required facilities with an identified LOS deficiency, the city council shall tentatively elect an option from subsection (a)(4)a or b of this section and hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days to obtain public input on the LOS deficiency remedy. Within thirty (30) days from the close of the public hearing, the city council shall initiate action to implement an option from subsection (a)(4)a or b of this section. (Ord. No. 716, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
(c)  Public schools facilities. Public schools facilities level of service report is governed by division 2 of this article, the public schools facilities element and the adopted public schools interlocal agreement. (Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
(d)  Transportation facilities. Transportation facilities level of service report will be based on division 3 of this article, Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management, and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Policies and Procedures Manual. (Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
(Code 2001, § 25.935; Ord. No. 716, 1-23-1990; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Secs. 12-1091-12-1118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL FACILITIES 

Sec. 12-1119. - Title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Public School Concurrency Management Ordinance." 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.1; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1120. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate school capacity means the circumstance where there is sufficient school capacity, based on adopted level of service standards, to accommodate the demand created by a proposed development. 
    Capacity means "capacity" as defined in the Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH) Manual, as identified in the Capital Improvements Element of the city comprehensive plan (hereinafter the "FISH Manual"). 
    Concurrency service area or CSA. The concurrency service areas (CSAs) shall be coterminous with the school attendance zones for elementary, middle and high schools as shown in the public schools facilities element in the city's comprehensive plan. For special schools and charter schools, the concurrency service area shall be district-wide. 
    Current student enrollment means the number of students enrolled in all existing public school facilities operated by the school district in a given school year on the fortieth day of the school year. 
    Development proposal means an application for any approval of residential development or a phase of a residential development that meets one of the following: 
(1)  For developments undergoing subdivision review, the development proposal is the final subdivision plat or its functional equivalent; 
(2)  For developments not undergoing subdivision review, the development proposal is the Final site plan, building permit or its functional equivalent; 
(3)  A development order, or an amendment, to an existing development order, other than a zoning or rezoning, which could reasonably be expected to result in additional students. 
    Director means the community development director or designee. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used to provide living facilities for one family. 
    Exempt development means projects that do not generate at least one full time student at the elementary school level utilizing the applicable student generation multiplier in effect at the time of the request are not subject to school concurrency. The following residential development types shall also be considered exempt from the school concurrency requirements: 
(1)  Any lot of record, any lot approved through final plat or those projects having unexpired preliminary plat approval which meets the density and intensity consistent with the underlying zoning as of the effective date of the public schools facilities element of the city comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Multifamily residential development having received final site plan approval prior to the effective date of the PSFE, or multifamily projects for which the city has received a complete final site plan application and paid the review fee in full that meets the density and intensity consistent with the underlying zoning as of the effective date of the public schools facilities element of the city comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Amendments to a preliminary or final plat, which were approved prior to the effective date of the PSFE, and which does not increase the number of students generated by the development based on the student generation rates for each school type. 
(4)  Amendments to residential development approvals, which were previously approved prior to the effective date of the PSFE, and which do not increase the number of students generated by the development based on the student generation rates for each school type. 
(5)  Age restricted fifty-five (55) plus developments that are subject to deed restrictions prohibiting the permanent occupancy of a resident under the age of fifty-five (55). Such deed restrictions must be recorded and must be irrevocable for a period of at least thirty (30) years. 
(6)  Group quarters that do not generate students, including, but not limited to, residential facilities such as local jails, prisons, hospitals, bed and breakfast, motels and hotels, temporary emergency shelters for the homeless, adult halfway houses, firehouse dorms, college dorms exclusive of married student housing, and apartments specifically designed for college students and religious non-youth facilities. 
    Finding of available school capacity means a report in which the school district designee determines that adequate school facilities will be in place or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program after the issuance of an approval for a final site plan or final subdivision plat, based on the projected impacts of the development proposal and the school district's five-year work plan as adopted in the city's capital improvements element (CIE). A finding of available school capacity may be based upon an executed proportionate share mitigation agreement. 
    Finding of no available school capacity means a report in which the school district designee determines that adequate school facilities will not be in place or planned within the first three (3) years the work program after the issuance of an approval for a final site plan or final subdivision plat, based on the projected impacts of the development proposal, the school district's five-year work plan as adopted in the city's capital improvements element (CIE) and the failure of the applicant to proffer an acceptable proportionate share mitigation agreement. 
    Level of service (LOS) means the comparison of public school enrollment to school capacity in a given concurrency service area. 
    Level of service standard (LOS standard) means the level of service applied to a concurrency service area that is adopted in the public schools interlocal agreement and the public schools facilities element for each level or type of public school facility. 
    Permanent capacity means capacity that is added by "permanent buildings" as defined in the FISH Manual. (See Public school facilities. ) 
    Proportionate share mitigation means funds paid by the developer that assures adequate school capacity will be available or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program. Mitigation options shall include options listed in the public schools facilities element that are agreed upon by the school board, applicant and city. Proportionate share mitigation must be identified in a five-year work program, unless the school district has committed itself in a proportionate share mitigation agreement to include the mitigation in the five-year work program during the next annual update to the five-year work program. 
    Proportionate share mitigation agreement means a voluntary, legally-binding written agreement to provide proportionate share mitigation to ensure public school concurrency can be achieved, where school capacity would not otherwise be adequate to support the demand resulting from approval of a development proposal at the time the development proposal is being considered. The applicant, school district and the city shall be parties to a proportionate share mitigation agreement. 
    Public school concurrency, as provided in F.S. § 163.3180(13)(e), means the necessary public school facilities to maintain level of service standards are in place or are scheduled in the work program to be constructed within three (3) years of approval of a development proposal. 
    Public school facilities means permanent public school buildings provided by the school district, as defined by the of the Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH), published by the Florida Department of Education, Office of Educational Facilities as identified in the capital improvements element of the city comprehensive plan, or a charter school approved by the school district as school capacity. 
    Public school facilities, existing, means public school facilities that are already constructed and operational at the time that the school district designee makes a finding regarding school capacity. 
    Public school facilities, planned, means public school facilities that will be in place or planned within the first three (3) years of the school districts five-year work program after the issuance of final subdivision or site plan approval. 
    Public school facilities, total, means existing public school facilities and planned public school facilities. 
    Public schools interlocal agreement means the interlocal agreement between the city and the school district, pursuant to F.S. § 163.31777, which establishes standards and procedures for a coordinated, uniform public school concurrency program and which ensures the level of service standards for public school facilities are achieved and maintained. 
    School capacity means the demand that can be accommodated by a public school facility at the level of service standard, as determined by the school district. 
    School concurrency application means an application for the school district to make a finding of available school capacity and issue a school concurrency determination. 
    School concurrency determination means a reservation of school capacity made by the school district after a finding of available school capacity, upon the city's approval of a development proposal. 
    School district means the School District of Hillsborough County. 
    School district designee means a person or committee designated to act on behalf of the school district, and to make determinations regarding whether public school concurrency has been achieved for school concurrency applications submitted to the school district by the director. 
    Work program means a five-year capital improvement plan that is financially feasible, as defined by state statute, and which is adopted by the school district and the city and incorporated into the capital improvement element (CIE) of the city's comprehensive plan. The work program is updated on an annual basis. The work program itemizes planned public school facilities and includes the following: 
(1)  All planned public school facilities, including new construction, expansions, and renovations that will create additional capacity, whether provided by the school district or through proportionate share mitigation; 
(2)  Existing and projected enrollment of public school facilities; 
(3)  The year in which each planned public school facility will be undertaken; 
(4)  The source of funding for each planned public school facility and the year in which the funding becomes available; 
(5)  The capacity created by each planned public school facility; and 
(6)  Necessary data and analysis supporting the proposed work program. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.1; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1121. - Purpose, intent, and findings. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this division is: 
(1)  To implement the provisions of the city comprehensive plan related to the adequacy of public school facilities as new residential growth occurs. 
(2)  To ensure that public schools needed to support new development will meet level of service standards. 
(3)  To ensure that the city assists the school district to maintain a financially-feasible work program to accommodate new residential development based on the school district's ability to provide adequate public school facilities to serve new development. 
(4)  To ensure that no development proposal as defined herein is approved that would generate demands that exceed the capacity of public schools at the level of service standards. 
(5)  To ensure that adequate public school facilities will be in place or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program after the issuance of approval of any development proposal as defined herein, as provided by state statute, by providing a mechanism to implement proportionate share mitigation for public school facilities where needed. 
(6)  To establish uniform procedures for the review of school concurrency applications subject to the standards and requirements of this division. 
(7)  To establish a method whereby the impacts of development on public school facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors. 
(8)  To encourage development in areas where public school facilities are adequate and/or planned in the work program as provided for and required by state law. 
(9)  To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are incorporated into these procedures and requirements. 
(10)  To ensure that approval of development proposals will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of existing and future residents of the city. 
(b)  In adopting this division, the city hereby finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The availability of public school facilities is necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  New residential growth and development within the city can have an impact on the school capacity of public school facilities, which impact can be mitigated by the timing and sequencing of residential development as provided herein. 
(3)  The school district has prepared and adopted a five-year work program to provide the public school facilities needed to accommodate projected rates of growth. Per the public schools interlocal agreement, the five-year work program will be reviewed and updated annually to reflect changes in the growth rate, available financial resources, and other relevant factors; and said updates will be incorporated into the city's comprehensive plan so that level of service standards are maintained. 
(4)  The impacts on public school facilities resulting from new development may be mitigated by measures that either reduce projected impacts on, or increase the school capacity of public school facilities. 
(5)  This division is necessary so that continued growth does not outstrip the school district's ability to plan for and fund necessary public school facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.2; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1122. - Level of service standards. 
    The level of service standards applicable to public school facilities shall be as set forth in the public schools interlocal agreement and the city comprehensive plan. The level of service standards shall be applied consistently by the city and school district countywide to all schools of the same type. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.4; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1123. - Applicability. 
    Unless a development proposal is found to be exempt, all residential development shall be subject to public school concurrency and subject to the availability of adequate public school facilities capacity pursuant to this division. The provisions of this division shall apply only to development proposals submitted for residential development or a phase of residential development after the effective date of public schools facilities element of the city comprehensive plan, as follows: 
(1)  Residential development. 
a.  Projects that do not generate at least one full time student at the elementary school level utilizing the applicable student generation multiplier in effect at the time of the request are not subject to school concurrency. 
b.  Before approval of any development proposal, or phase thereof, a valid and unexpired finding of available school capacity, and either: 
1.  A valid and unexpired school concurrency determination; or 
2.  A proportionate share mitigation agreement executed by the applicant and the school district must be obtained. 
(2)  Nonresidential development. A finding of available school capacity is not required for the nonresidential component of any development proposal. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.5; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1124. - Application and review procedure. 
(a)  When required. Applications must be made in conjunction with a preliminary plat or preliminary site plan or a building permit that generates additional impacts not previously considered. No development proposal will be approved by the city unless an unexpired finding of available school capacity is first obtained. 
(b)  Requirements for school concurrency application. The school concurrency application shall be created by the school district and be amended from time to time at their discretion and shall include but not be limited to the following key information: 
(1)  Name, address, and phone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Property location, including parcel identification numbers and vicinity map; 
(3)  A description of the development proposal, including type, intensity and amount of development, adequate to determine the number and type of public school students generated by the development proposal; 
(4)  A phasing schedule for any development proposal to be completed in more than one phase; 
(5)  A description of any past or proposed public school facility dedicated, constructed, or funded in order to mitigate the public school impacts of the development proposal; 
(6)  In the event that there is not available school capacity to accommodate the development proposal, a proposed proportionate share mitigation agreement, using the form provided by the school district, and a description of the proposed proportionate share mitigation option(s) being utilized; and 
(7)  Other relevant information required by the school district that is needed to evaluate the school concurrency application and to make a finding with regard to available school capacity. 
(c)  Completeness review. Within ten (10) business days after its receipt, the director will determine whether the school concurrency application is complete and complies with the submission requirements set forth in this section. If the school concurrency application is complete and the submission requirements have been met, the director will forward the school concurrency application to the school district designee for review and a finding with regard to available school capacity. If the school concurrency application is not complete, the director will notify the applicant of its deficiencies in writing within ten (10) business days of its receipt. At the time that the school concurrency application is determined to be complete, the director shall send it to the school district for review. The failure of the school district or city to meet the time frames above does not entitle the applicant to the allocation of seats or an automatic school concurrency determination without meeting the requirements of this LDC. 
(d)  Capacity determination. 
(1)  Within the following number of days of the submission to the school district of a complete school concurrency application, a revised school concurrency application, or a proffered proportionate share mitigation agreement, the school district designee shall provide the city with a written report regarding school concurrency findings: 
a.  Thirty (30) calendar days for a planned development zoning reclassification. 
b.  Fifteen (15) working days for a site development plan or subdivision plat. 
(2)  The written report from the school district shall include the following information: 
a.  Identifies available school capacity in the relevant concurrency service area, pursuant to the terms of this article and the applicable public schools interlocal agreement; 
b.  Identifies any previously dedicated, constructed, or funded public school facility accepted as proportionate share mitigation for the public school impacts of the development proposal; 
c.  Based on information provided by the applicant and its own data and five-year work program, the report will state whether public school concurrency can be achieved for each type of public school facility sufficient to accommodate the development proposal; and 
d.  Identifies acceptable and appropriate mitigation options per the interlocal agreement and section 12-1126. 
(3)  Finding of available school capacity. 
a.  Where, based on the standards and methodologies agreed upon in the public schools facilities element and the interlocal agreement, the school district determines that public school concurrency has been achieved; the school district shall issue a finding of available school capacity. 
b.  Upon issuance of a finding of available school capacity, the school district designee shall allocate, for up to six (6) months, the amount of school capacity to be required by the development proposal. 
c.  This temporary allocation of school capacity will expire either at the end of six (6) months, or upon the withdrawal, rejection or denial of the development proposal. It shall be reduced if, and to the same extent that, the development proposal is amended to reduce the impacts on public school facilities. The city shall issue a school concurrency determination if the development proposal is approved by city council and notify the school district to formally reserve the capacity. 
d.  If a finding of available school capacity is based on a public school facility provided through proportionate share mitigation, final approval of the development proposal shall not be given by the city until the execution of a proportionate share mitigation agreement by the applicant and the school district, pursuant to section 12-1126. Upon approval of the development proposal, the city shall execute the proportionate share mitigation agreement and issue a school concurrency determination. 
e.  The city may approve a school concurrency application earlier in the approval process if requested by the applicant such as at time of the preliminary plat approval or through a development agreement authorized per F.S. ch. 163. The approval would be contingent on the school board reviewing and approving the determination, allocations of capacity, and proportionate share mitigation commitments, as provided in this subsection. 
(e)  Duration and effect of a school concurrency determination. 
(1)  A school concurrency determination shall remain valid and shall apply to any certificate of occupancy or building permit requested for as long as the approval of the development proposal remains effective. A school concurrency determination is permanent upon final plat approval provided the plat is recorded within six (6) months from the date of city council approval. 
(2)  A school concurrency determination shall not affect the need for the applicant to meet all other requirements set forth in this LDC and all other provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Extensions to a school concurrency determination can only be granted by city council as part of a final site plan or final plat extension as provided for is section 12-380. The applicant may request from the city an extension on the finding of available capacity for good cause. The request must be made prior the end of the six-month period the school concurrency determination is valid. The request may only be granted for six (6) additional months provided the school district agrees in writing that they do not object to the extension. 
(f)  Finding of no available school capacity; proportionate share mitigation agreements. 
(1)  If the school district designee determines that no available school capacity exists to accommodate the development proposal and no mutually acceptable proportionate share mitigation agreement has been proffered for the school district's and city's execution, pursuant to subsection (f)(3)c of this section, the school district designee shall issue a finding of no available school capacity which would include the reasons for the denial. 
(2)  Upon the receipt from the school district designee a finding of no available school capacity, the director must notify the applicant in writing within ten (10) business days of the denial. The notice must state the reasons for the denial and any actions that the applicant may take voluntarily to receive a finding of available school capacity. 
(3)  Upon a finding of no available school capacity, an applicant may: 
a.  Submit a development proposal for a reduced amount of development for which available school capacity exists; 
b.  Submit an amended development proposal that includes the following: 
1.  A proposed phasing schedule setting forth the amount, location, and timing of development associated with each proposed phase; 
2.  A written report from the school district that available school capacity will exist for each phase of development; and 
3.  Other additional information or materials identified by the school district designee as necessary to ensure public school concurrency; 
c.  Proffer an executed proportionate share mitigation agreement, pursuant to section 12-1126, which shall fully mitigate the impact of the development proposal on public school facilities; or 
d.  Wait until school capacity may exist for the development proposal pursuant to the five-year work program. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.6; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1125. - Procedures for finding whether there is available school capacity. 
    The school district designee shall conduct a concurrency review that includes findings and recommendations of whether there is available school capacity in each level of school based on the approved level of service standards and make a finding in accordance with the requirements of this article and the public schools interlocal agreement, based on the methodology below: 
(1)  The school district designee will measure available school capacity for each school level, based on the school capacity of the concurrency service area in which a development proposal is located. If school capacity is not available in the affected concurrency service area, the school district designee shall determine whether there is available school capacity in any contiguous concurrency service area within the limits established in subsection (2) of this section. For each school type (elementary, middle and high), the school district designee shall issue a finding of available school capacity if: 
a.  Adequate school facilities will be in place or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program after the issuance of the final subdivision or final site plan approval for each level of school. Any relevant programmed improvements that will not be in place or planned within the first three (3) years of the work program, as adopted in the city comprehensive plan capital improvements element, shall not be considered available capacity for the project unless funding for the improvement is assured through school board funding to accelerate the project, through proportionate share mitigation, or some other means of assuring adequate capacity; or 
b.  Adequate school facilities are available in a contiguous CSA within the limits outlined in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  Residential projects in an adjacent CSA cannot shift capacity to another school if that school's current student enrollment plus capacity reserved through other applicable school concurrency determinations is ninety-five (95) percent or greater of Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH) capacity. Capacity improvements within the first three (3) years of the school district's work plan as described in city comprehensive plan's public schools facilities element must also be included when determining the actual capacity of a school. Where more than one concurrency service area is available to accommodate student impacts, the school board shall evaluate how the impacts of that development shall be shifted. Measures to maximize capacity including modifications to concurrency service areas in lieu of shifting development impacts can be considered. 
(3)  In evaluating a subdivision plat or site plan for concurrency, programmed improvements in years one, two (2) or three (3) of the five-year schedule of improvements shall be considered available capacity for the project and factored into the level of service analysis. 
(4)  If capacity is not available in the subject CSA or adjacent CSA's, the school board may identify acceptable forms of mitigation consistent with the policies herein and the interlocal agreement. Proportionate share mitigation shall follow the requirements outlined in section 12-1126. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.7; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1126. - Proportionate share mitigation agreements. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to an applicant that either has received a finding of no available school capacity or wishes to proffer proportionate share mitigation. Proportionate share mitigation may not be provided unless it is first accepted by the school district. Any mitigation that is provided for in a proportionate share mitigation agreement must satisfy the demand created by the additional or new residential units, and shall be directed by the school district toward permanent capacity improvements identified in the work program and in the city comprehensive plan's CIE. 
(b)  Proportionate share mitigation agreement. If it is determined necessary or desirable, the school district and the city may convene a meeting with the applicant or each other if desired, to discuss the specific details of the proportionate share mitigation agreement. The agreement shall provide mitigation that is at least proportionate to the demand for public school facilities to be created by the additional or new residential units in the development proposal, and for which there is no available school capacity. 
(c)  Options for proportionate share mitigation. 
(1)  Mitigation shall be allowed for those developments that cannot meet the adopted level of service standards. Mitigation options shall include options for which the school district assumes operational responsibility through incorporation in the adopted school board's financially feasible work program and which will maintain adopted level of service standards. If the applicant chooses to enter into a proportionate share mitigation agreement, the applicant shall provide acceptable mitigation options selected from those listed in the interlocal agreement in conjunction with the city and the school board. 
(2)  The applicant and the school district shall consult on the options available for mitigating the concurrency service area affected by the development proposal. The agreed upon mitigation shall be described in an exhibit to the proportionate share mitigation agreement. Mitigation shall be directed towards a permanent capacity improvement identified in the school board's five-year work plan, which satisfies the deficiencies created by the proposed development consistent with the adopted level of service standards. Improvements cannot be smaller in size than one classroom. Relocatable classrooms will not be accepted as mitigation. Type 2 (noncombustible) modular units shall not be considered relocatables for the purpose of proportionate share mitigation. All improvements must be acceptable to the city and the school district and outlined in a legally binding development agreement between the school district, city and the applicant. The development agreement must be executed by all parties prior to approval of any final site plan or final plat. 
(d)  Determination of amount of proportionate share mitigation required. 
(1)  The amount of proportionate share mitigation required from an applicant to resolve a capacity deficiency shall be determined pursuant to the procedures established in the public schools facilities element and school interlocal agreement as follows: 
Multiply the number of deficient student stations needed to serve the development by the state average costs per student station at the time of construction (as adopted in F.S. § 1013.64) for each school type. The state average cost per student station includes school facility construction costs contract costs, legal and administrative costs, fees of architects and engineers, furniture and equipment and site improvement costs. It does not include the cost of land purchase or lease, extraordinary site preparation costs, hurricane hardening of structures and off-site infrastructure costs that are typically borne by the school district that may be necessary to serve the school. Costs for these items shall be included as part of the proportionate share calculations as appropriate. 
(2)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(13), the applicant's proportionate-share mitigation obligation shall be credited toward any other impact or exaction fee imposed by local ordinance for the same need, on a dollar-for-dollar basis, at fair market value. If within ninety (90) days of the date the applicant initiates the mitigation negotiation period, the applicant and the school board are able to agree to an acceptable form of mitigation, a legally binding mitigation agreement shall be executed, which sets forth the terms of the mitigation, including such issues as the amount, nature, and timing of donations, construction, or funding to be provided by the developer, and any other matters necessary to effectuate mitigation in accordance with this agreement. The mitigation agreement shall specify the amount and timing of any impact fee credits or reimbursements that will be provided by the city as required by state law. 
(3)  If, after ninety (90) days, the applicant and the school board are unable to agree to an acceptable form of mitigation, the school board will report an impasse to the city in writing and the city will not approve the development proposal. The school board may grant two (2) ninety-day extensions to the mitigation negotiation period. 
(4)  The proportionate share mitigation agreement must be signed by the applicant and the school board before the development application is approved. The city shall execute the proportionate share mitigation agreement following approval of the development application. 
SUMMARY OF THE CONCURRENCY EVALUATION AND PROPORTIONATE SHARE MITIGATION Step 1. Determine the number of students to be generated by the development: Number of dwelling units in the proposed development (by unit type) MULTIPLIED BY Student generation rate (by type of DU and by school type) EQUALS Number students stations needed to serve the proposed development Step 2. Comparing the available capacity to the number of student stations calculated in Step 1 to assess the need for mitigation: Available capacity (see subsection (d) of this section) MINUS The number of new student stations needed to accommodate the proposed development EQUALS The shortfall (negative number) or surplus (positive number) of capacity to serve the development Step 3. Evaluating the available capacity in contiguous service areas: If Step 2 results in a negative number, repeat that step for one or more contiguous service areas. If this step results in a negative number, then proceed to Step 4 to calculate the proportionate share mitigation. Step 4. Calculating proportionate share mitigation: Needed additional student stations from Step 3 MULTIPLIED BY Average cost per student station plus additional costs (see subsection (d) of this section) EQUALS Proportionate-share mitigation obligation. The full cost of proportionate share mitigation shall be required from the development proposal.  
At the time of initial adoption of the PSFE, the student generation rates are those found in the comprehensive impact fee study dated June 2004 prepared for Hillsborough County by Duncan Associates in association with Dr. James C. Nicholas. The student generation rates will be periodically reviewed and updated by the school district as provided in the interlocal agreement. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.8; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 12-1127. - Appeals. 
    An applicant may appeal an alleged error in determination by the school district designee or the applicability of the city public school concurrency management ordinance to a particular application or any final decision by the director, made pursuant to the terms of this division, to the city council. Appeals must be filed with the community development department within thirty (30) business days of the determination or decision being appealed. Appeals shall be heard by the city council on the earliest available agenda following the submittal of the written request to the community development department. The applicant also shall have the opportunity to present the reason for appeal and evidence in support of the appeal to the city council. The city council may: 
(1)  Affirm the decision of the school district designee or director; 
(2)  Remand the matter to the school district designee or director for further proceedings; or 
(3)  Reverse the decision. 
Decisions of the city may be challenged in a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 2001, § 25.940.9; Ord. No. 1227, 5-20-2008) 
Secs. 12-1128-12-1147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 12-1148. - Multimodal transportation concurrency management. 
    This division shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Management Ordinance of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida." 
(Code 2001, § 25.950; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 12-1149. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division and accompanying Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Policy and Procedures Manual (manual) is to define the transportation concurrency requirements of the comprehensive plan. This division and the manual specify the requirements and procedures that must be followed by applicants for new developments in order to satisfy transportation concurrency. Finally, this division and the manual specify the procedures to be followed by staff in maintaining the transportation concurrency management system (CMS), as defined in the manual. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.1) 
Sec. 12-1150. - Multimodal transportation concurrency policy. 
(a)  Where the comprehensive plan supports mixed-use, infill or revitalization at urban densities, and expanding roadway capacity to serve this development is inconsistent with community goals, the city has established the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District (TTMTD) for the purpose of maintaining transportation concurrency. The boundaries of the Temple Terrace Multimodal Transportation District (TTMTD) are as designated in the city comprehensive plan and approved by the state, and as subsequently amended and approved. The provisions for mobility fee mitigation inside the TTMTD shall apply to development proposals submitted for development or phase of development after the effective date of the mobility element of the city comprehensive plan. 
(b)  No final development order shall be issued by the city after the effective date of the city concurrency management ordinance, unless there is sufficient capacity of the transportation concurrency facilities as provided in the comprehensive plan to meet the standards for level of service (LOS) for the existing population, previously permitted development and for the proposed development. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.2; Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-1151. - Policy and procedures manual. 
    A Traffic Circulation and Multimodal Transportation Concurrency Policy and Procedures Manual shall be developed by the city to define the transportation concurrency requirements in the city comprehensive plan, to specify the requirements and procedures that must be followed by applicants for new development in order to satisfy transportation concurrency, and to specify the procedures to be followed by staff in maintaining the CMS. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.3) 
Sec. 12-1152. - Transportation concurrency review procedures. 
(a)  In order to satisfy transportation concurrency, all proposed development, except that development found to be exempt or vested under the provisions of the city comprehensive plan, shall undergo a transportation concurrency review prior to issuance of a building and/or infrastructure permit. 
(b)  The concurrency review shall determine if there is adequate available capacity in each of the concurrency facilities to accommodate the impact of the proposed new development, consistent with the city comprehensive plan. 
(c)  The city shall maintain a CMS that consists of an inventory of facility capacity and a demand accounting database that reflects the current status of transportation concurrency facilities. Information contained in the database, as defined in the manual, will be updated regularly to reflect newly approved developments and recent traffic counts. 
(d)  Based on the results of the concurrency review, the public works department shall issue a certificate of concurrency, issue a conditional certificate of concurrency, or deny a certificate of concurrency. 
(e)  The applicant shall have the right to appeal denials of certificates of concurrency. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.4) 
Sec. 12-1153. - Mobility fee program. 
    Consistent with the city comprehensive plan, the city shall implement a mobility fee program, based on projected development and a financially feasible plan of long-range improvements. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.5; Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 5-21-2013; Ord. No. 1399, § 1(Exh. A), 7-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-1154. - Appeals. 
(a)  Should an appeal be necessary, it shall be submitted, to the city manager or designee within ten (10) business days of the determination or decision being appealed. The city manager or designee shall: 
(1)  Affirm the decision of the public works department; 
(2)  Remand the matter to the public works department for further proceedings; or 
(3)  Reverse the decision within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the appeal by the city. 
(b)  Should a further appeal be necessary, it shall be submitted, to the city clerk within thirty (30) business days of the determination of the city manager or designee. Appeals shall be heard by the city council on the earliest available agenda following the submittal of the written request to the city council. The applicant also shall have the opportunity to present the reason for appeal and evidence in support of the appeal to the city council. The city council shall: 
(1)  Affirm the decision of the DRC; 
(2)  Remand the matter to the DRC for further proceedings; or 
(3)  Reverse the decision. Decisions of the city council may be challenged in a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.6) 
Sec. 12-1155. - Fees. 
(a)  Authorization. The city council, upon recommendation from the city manager or designee, shall by resolution establish reasonable rates for concurrency review applications in the manual. The rates shall be based upon the specific use, density, and intensity of each proposed development subject to concurrency review. The cost of the concurrency review to the city is to be wholly borne by the users of the concurrency review service, and the fees assessed to an applicant is to be generally reflective of the actual cost to the city to review and assess the application for a determination of concurrency. 
(b)  Collection of fee. The concurrency review fee shall be payable at the time of the filing of the application for concurrency review with the community development department. 
(c)  Manager to keep records, make changes. It shall be the duty of the city manager or designee to keep accurate record of the applicants for concurrency review, and to recommend changes to concurrency review fees. 
(Code 2001, § 25.950.7; Ord. No. 1244, 3-17-2009) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES, PERMITS, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Economic development ad valorem tax exemption. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as the "City of Temple Terrace Economic Development Ad Valorem Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(b)  Enactment authority. Article VII, section 3, of the constitution of the state and F.S. § 196.1995 empower the city to grant economic development ad valorem tax exemptions to new businesses and expansions of existing businesses after the electors of the city, voting on the question in a referendum, authorize such exemptions. In a referendum held on January 31, 2012, the city electors authorized the city council to grant economic development ad valorem tax exemptions. 
(c)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  It is a recognized function of local government to promote economic development within its jurisdiction by providing financial incentives that will encourage new businesses to relocate within its jurisdiction and existing businesses to expand, thereby creating employment opportunities that will benefit the entire community. 
(2)  The current economic climate has impacted the quality of life for the city's citizens and the sustainability of local businesses. 
(3)  In order to ensure that applications for economic development ad valorem tax exemptions are considered in a non-arbitrary and non-discriminatory manner, it is necessary to establish guidelines that further the city's economic development policy to assist the city council in making its determinations. 
(4)  The city council determines that granting economic development ad valorem tax exemptions to new businesses locating in the city and to existing businesses expanding in the city as provided in this section will promote and strengthen the local economy which will enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens, which action is in the best interest of the city and serves both a city and a public purpose. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Except where indicated otherwise such words, phrases, and terms shall have the same meanings attributed to them in the Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code as amended from time to time: 
    Applicant means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who files an application with the city seeking an exemption. 
    Application means a written application for an exemption on the form prescribed by the department, together with any supplemental form prescribed by the city manager and any additional information requested by the city manager. 
    Average annual employment means the sum of the number of full-time equivalent employees as of the last day of each month of the preceding calendar year divided by twelve (12). 
    Average annual private sector wage means the lesser of the average annual private sector wage throughout the State of Florida, MSA, or the county. 
    Average annual wage means the sum of the wages paid to full-time equivalent employees included in the average annual employment, divided by the average annual employment. 
    Brownfield area means an area so designated pursuant to F.S. § 376.80. 
    Business means any activity engaged in by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other business organization or entity, with the object of private or public gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect. 
    Capital investment means any expenditure for an expansion of an existing business or a new business to be located in the city which can be capitalized under generally accepted accounting principles. 
    Community redevelopment agency means the public agency created by the city pursuant to F.S. § 163.330 et seq. 
    Department means the state department of revenue. 
    Destination retail business means an expansion of an existing business or a new business that is regularly engaged in, and whose business consists to a substantial extent of, the selling of unique goods or such a wide assortment of goods to a consumer, not principally for the purpose of resale, such that the business attracts a substantial number of consumers who are willing to make a special trip from throughout a wide geographic area of sufficient distance to necessitate overnight stays generating lodging and entertainment expenditures. 
    Economic development ad valorem tax exemption or exemption means an ad valorem tax exemption granted by the city commission to a qualified business pursuant to subsection (g)(5) of this section in its sole and absolute discretion as authorized in article VII, section 3, of the constitution of the state and F.S. § 196.1995. 
    Enterprise zone means an area designated as an enterprise zone pursuant to F.S. § 290.0065. 
    Exemption criteria means the criteria to be applied by the city council in making its determination to grant an exemption, as provided for in subsection (g)(4) of this section. 
    Expansion of an existing business means: 
(1)  a.  A business establishing ten (10) or more jobs to employ ten (10) or more full-time employees in the city, which manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; or 
b.  A business establishing twenty-five (25) or more jobs to employ twenty-five (25) or more full-time employees in the city the sales factor of which for the facility with respect to which it requests an exemption is less than one-half (1/2) for each year the exemption is claimed, provided that such business increases operations on a site collocated with a commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business, resulting in a net increase in employment of not less than ten (10) percent or an increase in productive output of not less than ten (10) percent. 
(2)  Any business located in an enterprise zone or brownfield area that increases operations on a site collocated with a commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business. 
    Full-time equivalent employee means a person who is employed by a business that works at least thirty-five (35) hours per week and is eligible to receive benefits, including health benefits, through the employer, subject to any eligible vesting periods. 
    Goods means all personal property when purchased primarily for personal, family, or household use, but not including personal property sold for commercial or industrial use. 
    High value business means an expansion of an existing business or a new business that is expected to have a significant economic impact as a result of the number of its full-time equivalent employees, its average annual wage, the capital investment in the business, or additional jobs subsequently created as a result of such business. 
    Improvements means physical changes made to raw land and structures placed on or under the land surface, including all tangible personal property acquired to facilitate an expansion of an existing business provided that the tangible personal property is added or increased on or after the day an ordinance specifically granting a business an exemption is adopted. However, tangible personal property acquired to replace existing property shall not be considered to facilitate a business expansion. 
    Metropolitan statistical area or MSA means a geographical region with a relatively high population density at its core and close economic ties throughout the area. For purposes of this section, the MSA includes Hillsborough, Hernando, Pasco, and Pinellas Counties. 
    New business means: 
(1)  a.  A business establishing ten (10) or more jobs to employ ten (10) or more full-time employees in the city which manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; 
b.  A business establishing twenty-five (25) or more jobs to employ twenty-five (25) or more full-time employees in the city, the sales factor of which for the facility with respect to which it requests an exemption is less than one-half (1/2) for each year the exemption is claimed; or 
c.  An office space in the city owned and used by a business newly domiciled in the city; provided such office space houses fifty (50) or more full-time employees of such corporation; and, provided that such business first begins operation within the city on a site clearly separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business. 
(2)  Any business located in an enterprise zone or brownfield area that first begins operation on a site clearly separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business. 
    Qualified business means a business that is a destination retail business, a high value business, or a target industry business. 
    Retail operation means a business regularly engaged in, and whose business consists to a substantial extent of, selling goods to a buyer, not principally for the purpose of resale. 
    Sales factor means a fraction, the numerator of which is the total sales of the taxpayer in the state during the taxable year or period and the denominator of which is the total sales of the taxpayer everywhere during the taxable year or period. 
    Tangible industry business means an expansion of an existing business or a new business that is designated by the state office of tourism, trade, and economic development pursuant to F.S. § 288.106 as a target industry business. 
    Wages means all compensation including salaries, bonuses, commission, and the value of exercised stock options subject to federal income tax, but excluding fringe benefits; provided stock options shall be included in the calculation of wages in a manner consistent with the program established pursuant to F.S. § 288.106. 
(e)  Establishment of economic development ad valorem tax exemption. 
(1)  Incentive. There is hereby established an economic development ad valorem tax exemption for ad valorem taxes levied by the city. The exemption is a local option tax incentive for a qualified business which may be granted or refused at the sole and absolute discretion of the city council. 
(2)  Ineligible improvements. The exemption shall not accrue to improvements made by or for the use of a qualified business when such improvements have been included on the tax rolls prior to the effective date of an ordinance specifically granting a business an exemption. 
(3)  Eligible improvements. At the sole and absolute discretion of the city council, and except as otherwise provided for in this section, the exemption may be granted for up to one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of all improvements made by or for the use of a qualifying new business and of all tangible personal property of such new business, or up to one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of all added Improvements made to facilitate the qualifying expansion of an existing business and of the net increase in all tangible personal property acquired to facilitate such expansion of an existing business, provided that the improvements are made or the tangible personal property is added or increased on or after the day the ordinance specifically granting an exemption is adopted. Property acquired to replace existing property shall not be considered to facilitate a business expansion. 
(4)  Land. No exemption shall be granted for the land upon which a new business or an expansion of an existing business is to be located. 
(5)  Exemption. Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the exemption may be for a period of up to ten (10) years from the date the city council adopts the ordinance specifically granting an exemption. 
(6)  Taxes applicable. The exemption shall apply only to taxes levied by the city. The exemption shall not apply to taxes levied by Hillsborough County, school district, or water management district, or to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to section 9(b) or 12, article VII of the state constitution. 
(7)  Maximum amount of annual exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the exemptions granted by the city council for each fiscal year shall not result in an estimated aggregate annual amount of forgone ad valorem tax revenues in excess of $2,000,000.00 or such amount approved by a supermajority vote of the city council, which amount shall be calculated based on the property appraiser's estimates on the revenue lost to the city during the then-particular fiscal year by virtue of exemptions previously granted plus exemptions under consideration in such particular fiscal year. 
(8)  Retail. No exemption shall be granted to any retail operation that is not a destination retail business. 
(f)  Application for exemption. 
(1)  Application. Any eligible person, firm, partnership or corporation which desires an exemption shall file a written application with the city manager. The application must be filed no later than March 1 of the year the exemption is desired to take effect. 
(2)  Review. Upon submittal of the application, the city manager shall review it and, within ten (10) days of submission, notify the applicant of any deficiencies. Complete applications shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the city council no later than forty-five (45) days following the city manager's receipt of the property appraiser's report provided for in this section. The applicant shall be notified of the date and time of the public hearing. 
(3)  Agreement. As a condition to receiving the exemption, a business will be required to enter into an agreement with the city to ensure that the business satisfies all requirements associated with granting and continuing the exemption. 
(g)  Consideration of applications. 
(1)  Property appraiser review and report. Before the city council takes action on an application, a copy of the completed application shall be delivered to the property appraiser for review. After consideration of the application, the property appraiser shall provide a report to the city council which shall include: 
a.  The total revenue available to the city for the current fiscal year from ad valorem tax sources, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual total revenue available cannot be determined; 
b.  The amount of any revenue lost to the city for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions previously granted, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual revenue lost cannot be determined; 
c.  An estimate of the amount of ad valorem revenue that the city would lose during the current fiscal year if the exemption was granted; 
d.  A determination as to the exemption being incorporated into a new business or the expansion of an existing business, or neither. The property appraiser shall affix the determination to the face of the application. Upon request, the department will provide the property appraiser information it may have available to assist in making the determination. 
(2)  Eligibility threshold. Eligibility is whether the business meets the definition of a new business or an expansion of an existing business. 
(3)  Ineligible business. Any business in violation of any federal, state, or local law or regulation including, but not limited to, environmental matters will not be eligible for an exemption. 
(4)  Exemption criteria. In making its determination, the city council shall apply the exemption criteria outlined herein, provided that the council, in its sole and absolute discretion, may deviate from the exemption criteria when considering applications from destination retail businesses and high value businesses if the city council determines that such deviation is in the city's best interest: 
Tier Number of New Jobs Average Annual Wage or Capital Investment per Job Period Maximum Exemption One 10 or more full-time equivalent employees in manufacturing jobs; or 25 or more full-time employees where the business's sales factor is less than 50%; or 50 or more full-time equivalent employees in office jobs if a new business 115% of the average annual private sector wage or capital investment exceeding $200,000.00 per full-time equivalent employee 5 years 50% BONUS-Enterprise zone, brownfield area, or community redevelopment area 10 or more full-time equivalent employees in manufacturing jobs; or 25 or more full-time equivalent employees where the business's sales factor is less than 50%; or 50 or more full-time equivalent employees in office jobs if a new business 100% 5 years 75% Two 30 or more full-time equivalent employees in manufacturing jobs; or 75 or more full-time employees where the business's sales factor is less than 50%; or 100 or more full-time equivalent employees in office jobs if a new business 115% of the average annual private sector wage or capital investment exceeding $200,000.00 per full-time equivalent employee 7 years 50% BONUS-Enterprise zone, brownfield area, or community redevelopment area 30 or more full-time equivalent employees in manufacturing jobs; or 75 or more full-time equivalent employees where the business's sales factor is less than 50%; or 100 or more full-time equivalent employees in office jobs if a new business 100% 7 years 75% Three 90 or more full-time equivalent employees in manufacturing jobs; or 100 or more full-time employees where the business's sales factor is less than 50%; or 200 or more full-time equivalent employees in office jobs if a new business 150% of the average annual private sector wage or capital investment exceeding $200,000.00 per full-time equivalent employee 10 years 50% BONUS-Enterprise zone, brownfield area, or community redevelopment area 90 or more full-time equivalent employees in manufacturing jobs; or 100 or more full-time equivalent employees where the business's sales factor is less than 50%; or 50 or more full-time equivalent employees in office jobs if a new business 100% 10 years 75%  
(5)  Ordinance. After consideration of the application, the property appraiser's report, community redevelopment agency input, if applicable, and such other information deemed relevant, and the exemption criteria application, the city council may choose, in its sole and absolute discretion, to adopt an ordinance granting the applicant an exemption. If the city council decides to adopt such an ordinance, the ordinance shall be adopted in the same manner as any other general city ordinance and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the new business or the expansion of an existing business to which the exemption is granted; 
b.  The name of the owner of the new business or the expansion of an existing business; 
c.  The total amount of revenue available to the county from ad valorem tax sources for the current fiscal year, the total amount of revenue lost to the county for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions currently in effect, and the estimated revenue loss to the county for the current fiscal year attributable to the exemption of the business named in the ordinance; 
d.  The period of time for which the exemption will remain in effect and the expiration date of the exemption; and 
e.  A finding that the business named in the ordinance qualifies as a new business under F.S. § 196.012(15), or alternatively qualifies for expansion of an existing business under F.S. § 196.012(16). 
(6)  Precedent; standard for consideration of applications. No precedent shall be implied or inferred by granting any exemption. After considering the property appraiser's report on the application and exemption criteria, the city council, in its legislative capacity, shall consider each application on a case-by-case basis. 
(h)  Application fees. No fees shall be charged for processing an application or an exemption ordinance. 
(i)  Continuing performance. 
(1)  Change in ownership. 
a.  The business granted an exemption shall be required to inform the city manager in writing within ten (10) days of any changes in ownership. The transferee business shall continue to comply with all exemption requirements and shall assume all of the obligations of the transferor business provided for in the agreement in accordance with subsection (f)(3) of this section. 
b.  Failure of the business granted an exemption to notify the city manager of any change in ownership is cause for revoking the ordinance granting the exemption, at the city council's discretion. 
(2)  Annual filings. The ability to receive an exemption for the period granted shall be conditioned upon the applicant's ability to maintain, in all respects, its status as a qualified business throughout the entire exemption period. The applicant shall be required to submit an annual renewal statement and an annual report to the city manager on or before March 1 of each year for which the exemption is granted. The applicant shall also comply timely with all filing required by F.S. § 196.011. 
a.  The annual renewal statement shall certify that the information provided in the original application has not changed. 
b.  The annual report shall provide a report on the status of the business, evidencing satisfaction of the business maintenance and continued performance conditions set forth in the application. The report shall be prepared in substantially the form approved by the city manager and shall contain such information as the city manager may reasonably deem necessary for the purpose of determining the business's continuing performance of the conditions of this section, the ordinance specifically granting the business an exemption, and the representations made in the application. 
(j)  Revocation. If any business granted an exemption pursuant to this section fails to (i) file the annual renewal statement and/or annual report on or before March 1 of each year the exemption has been granted; (ii) continue to meet the definition of a new business or an expansion of an existing business; (iii) timely inform the city manager of a change of ownership; (iv) promptly file a new application upon any material change in the information provided in the original application; (v) fulfill any material representation made to the city during the application process; or (vi) comply with any other requirement provided for in this section, the city council may adopt an ordinance revoking the exemption or take such other action with respect to the exemption as it deems appropriate upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the respective business. 
(1)  Notification. Upon revocation, the city manager shall immediately notify the property appraiser. 
(2)  Recovery of taxes. If it is determined that a business was not entitled to an exemption in any year for which the business received an exemption, the city, property appraiser, or tax collector shall be entitled to recover all taxes not paid on tangible personal property as a result of the exemption, plus interest at the maximum rate allowed by law, plus all costs of collection including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(k)  Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications. To this end, the provisions of this section are declared severable. 
(l)  Conflicts. In the event of a conflict with any other ordinances or parts of ordinances, the provision of this section shall prevail. 
(m)  Sunset date. Pursuant to F.S. § 196.1995, this section shall expire on January 31, 2022, ten (10) years after the date such authority to grant economic development ad valorem tax exemptions was approved by the city electors voting on the question in a referendum; provided that for purposes of enforcement and revocation, this section shall survive such expiration date. No business shall be allowed to begin receiving an exemption after that date; however, the expiration shall not affect the operation of any exemption for which a business has qualified under this section prior to January 31, 2022. 
(Ord. No. 1332, §§ 1-13, 10-16-2012) 
State Law reference- Economic development ad valorem tax exemption authorized, F.S. § 196.1995. 
Secs. 14-2-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public service tax, F.S. § 163.231 et seq.; communications tax, F.S. ch. 202. 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electronic transfer means the use of the Automated Clearing House (the "ACH"), or other electronic transfer system approved by the city finance director on a case-by-case basis, by the seller, to send the taxes collected directly from the seller's bank to the city's primary bank. 
    Fuel oil means and includes fuel oil grade Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, kerosene and coal oil. 
    Levy means and includes the imposition of the tax under F.S. § 166.231 or 166.232, all changes in the rate of tax imposed under either of those sections. 
    Remit, remittance, and remitting, for purposes of the tax imposed by this article, mean the sending by the seller and the receipt by the city of all taxes levied and collected pursuant to this article. The date of receipt of such taxes by the city's primary bank as indicated on the city's bank statement. 
    Seller means a person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity who sells a service that is subject to a levy. 
    Tax means the municipal public service tax authorized under F.S. § 166.231. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.1) 
Sec. 14-20. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 14-21. - Interest and penalties for late payments and returns. 
    Any seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (manufactured or natural), fuel oil, and water service failing to remit to the city on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month; or quarter if applicable, or if the twentieth day is either a legal holiday or is not a city business day, then on or before the first city business day that is not also a legal holiday following the twentieth day of the month or quarter, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding tax period shall be liable for interest on the unpaid amount of tax at the rate of one percent per month, from the date the tax was due until paid. In addition, penalties will be assessed at a rate of five (5) percent per month of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total penalty of twenty-five (25) percent, except that in no event will the penalty for failure to file a return be less than $15.00. In the case of a fraudulent return or a willful intent to evade payment of the tax, the seller making such fraudulent return or willfully attempting to evade payment of the tax shall be liable for a specific penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the tax. Interest and penalties shall be computed on the net tax due after application of any overpayments. The interest and penalties shall accrue from the due date until the date such taxes are paid; provided, however, that the city manager or designee may settle or compromise any interest due pursuant to this section as it reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.7) 
Sec. 14-22. - Purchase of electricity, gas, fuel oil, and water service-Levy of tax; amount; payment generally of tax. 
    Except as provided below or as otherwise exempted by section 14-24 there is hereby levied and imposed by the city on each and every purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured gas), fuel oil, and water service, within the corporate limits of the city, a tax at the rate of ten (10) percent of the sales price of such utility service or commodity. Included in taxable services are any gross receipts taxes or franchise fees separately stated on customer bills. The tax imposed by this section shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. Except as provided below or as otherwise exempted by section 14-24, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city on each and every purchase of fuel oil within the corporate limits of the city a tax at the rate of $0.04 per gallon purchased. The term "fuel adjustment charge" shall mean all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.2) 
Sec. 14-23. - Same-Collection generally and disposition of tax; discontinuance of service upon failure of purchaser to pay tax and seller's charge. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas, (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax levied by section 14-22 at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction and to report and remit on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, or if the twentieth day is either a legal holiday or is not a city business day, then on or before the first city business day that is not also a legal holiday following the twentieth day of the month, unto the finance director of the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of electricity, metered or bottled gas, (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such sales, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had actually been paid to the seller, and the city manager or designee shall cause to be brought all suit actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected charges. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required on account of the sale for which such charge is made, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(b)  Sellers remitting tax collections of $10,000.00 or more, on average, per month over a period of three (3) consecutive months shall thereafter, beginning in the month immediately following the third consecutive month, make all tax remittances to the city's primary bank by electronic transfer using the ACH system, or other electronic means as may be approved by the city finance director on a case-by-case basis. Those sellers meeting this criterion shall continue remittances by electronic transfer regardless of whether the seller's average collections fall below the $10,000.00 threshold for any subsequent consecutive three-month period. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the event the total amount of tax anticipated to be collected within a calendar quarter does not exceed $120.00, the seller of such service may, with the written authorization of the city, remit the taxes collected during such calendar quarter to the city quarterly. In such case, the tax shall be due on or before the twentieth day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter in which the taxes were collected. 
(d)  All other sellers may remit by hand delivery, postal service or electronic transfer. However, if a seller elects to remit by electronic transfer, that seller shall thereafter always remit by electronic transfer. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.3) 
Sec. 14-24. - Same-Exemptions and exclusions from payment of tax. 
(a)  The tax levied in section 14-22 is subject to the mandatory exemptions from taxation in F.S. § 166.231. 
(b)  Purchases of electricity or metered natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas either metered or bottled, or manufactured gas either metered or bottled purchased per month, when purchased by an industrial consumer which uses the electricity or gas directly in industrial manufacturing, processing, compounding, or a production process, at a fixed location in the city, of items of tangible personal property for sale are exempt from the tax levied in section 14-22. 
(1)  In order to qualify for this exemption, industrial consumers shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The business must file an application with the city's community development department on a form provided by the city, to include, at a minimum, the business name and location, the industrial classification applied to the business by the county property appraiser, as well as the items produced. 
b.  This exemption shall extend to all companies classified in the same Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) industry major group number as designated by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Possession by a seller of electricity or gas of a written certification by the purchaser, certifying the purchaser's entitlement to an exemption permitted by this subsection (b), relieves the seller from the responsibility of collecting the tax on the nontaxable amounts. The city shall look solely to the purchaser for recovery of such tax if it determines that the purchaser was not entitled to the exemption. 
(3)  If an audit conducted by the city determines that the business did not meet the criteria outlined in this section, the amount of taxes exempted pursuant to this section shall immediately be due and payable to the city by the business, together with the appropriate interest and penalty, computed from the due date of each bill for the electrical energy and gas purchased as exempt under this section. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.4; Ord. No. 1250, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 14-25. - Same-Computation of tax when seller collects the price thereof in monthly periods. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, or water service collects the price thereof in monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such period; provided, that the amount of tax to be collected shall be to the nearest whole cent to the amount computed, and shall not exceed the rates set forth in section 14-22 for any monthly period on each separate service. Such service shall be classified as a separate service in case of metered electricity, gas or water, whenever an individual meter is used for the measuring thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.5) 
Sec. 14-26. - Records to be kept by seller; general administrative audit plan for enforcement; authority of city to audit such records. 
(a)  Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas, (natural or manufactured), fuel oil, and water service shall keep at its principal place of business, complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon such sale, the date of payment thereof, the date such tax was remitted and other related information that may be required to verify proper collection and remittance of said taxes. 
(b)  To assure proper administration of the provisions of this article, the city may, where possible and practical, conduct a periodic audit of such sales records of all businesses in connection with which a tax is imposed under this article. Failure to conduct such an audit will not eliminate the liability of the seller for collection and remittance of such tax. 
(Code 2001, § 19.190.6) 
Secs. 14-27-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local Business Tax Act, F.S. ch. 205; local business tax exemptions, F.S. § 205.054 et seq. 

Sec. 14-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative office means and includes any physical office from which a professional conducts business with an employee other than the professional. In addition to this classification, each professional must pay a fee. This category also applies to home occupations. 
    Auctioneer means any person who in any room, booth, place or shelter sells goods, chattels or articles of personal property at public outcry, or who, in any room, booth, place or shelter sells goods, chattels or articles of personal property to the highest bidder. 
    Average annual inventory of stock on hand means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the sum of the actual inventory on hand, in storage or held on consignment for each month of the preceding fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30, at cost. 
    Business means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, trades, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. 
    Business tax means a tax levied on each business, occupation, or profession for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, occupation, or profession within the city limits. It does not mean any fees or licenses paid to any board, commission, or officer for permits, registrations, examination, or inspection. Unless otherwise provided by law, these are deemed to be regulatory and in addition to, but not in lieu of, any local business tax imposed under the provisions of this article. 
    Employee means and includes every person engaged in any business, profession, occupation under any appointment, agency, contract of hire, or apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written. 
    Merchandise means and includes any goods, wares or commodities bought or sold in the usual course of trade, wholesale or retail. 
    Merchant means and includes any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise or food at retail or wholesale. 
    Merchant, retail, means and includes any merchant who sells to the consumer or for any purpose other than resale, except that sales to manufacturers and sales to the state, United States Government, or any political subdivision of any of them shall be considered wholesale sales. 
    Merchant, wholesale, means and includes any merchant who sells to another for the purpose of resale. Sales to governmental entities shall be considered wholesale sales. 
    Receipt means a document that is issued by the city which bears the words "Local Business Tax Receipt" and provides evidence that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this chapter relating to the local business tax. 
    Sale means and includes the transfer of ownership, title or possession, transfer, exchange or barter, whether conditional or otherwise for consideration. 
    Secondhand dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing and selling goods of any kind or description having once been used or transferred from the manufacturer to the dealer and then received into the possession of third parties whether the same consists of clothes, rags, iron, or other metals, furniture or articles of household utensils, or articles of personal use, or male or female wearing apparel, or of jewelry of any kind or description or of gold and silver. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.1; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.022. 
Sec. 14-57. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 14-58. - Levy of local business tax. 
    A local business tax is hereby imposed and levied upon and shall be collected from every person exercising the privilege of carrying on or engaging in any business, profession or occupation and who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city and any person who transactions any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce where such a business tax is not prohibited by section 8, article 1, of the United States Constitution, in accordance with the schedule of local business taxes to be paid, as specifically enumerated in section 14-72. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.2; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy a business tax, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 14-59. - Local business tax receipt required; payment of tax; compliance with chapter. 
    No person shall exercise, carry on, engage in or conduct any business, occupation or profession in the city without paying a local business tax at the time and in the manner provided herein or fail to make reports as provided herein, or violate any other provisions of this article. 
(1)  No person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city shall engage in or manage a profession, business or occupation named in this article within the city, unless all applicable receipts have been issued, based on the amount stated in this article. 
(2)  The burden of payment of the local business tax rests with the principal of a business, but in the event of noncompliance by the principal, the principal's agent, or employee shall be subject to the same enforcement policies. 
(3)  Local business tax receipts shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle, whichever is the principal place of business. 
(4)  Persons and organizations that are exempt pursuant to Internal Revenue Code 501(c)3 must register their business in accordance section 14-136 and apply for an exemption receipt. When requested, those exempt under this provision shall provide evidence of said exemption. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.3; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-60. - Evidence of engaging in business. 
    For the purposes of this article, any person claiming to the public, at a given location, by sign, printed matter, classified section, telephone directory, city directory, word of mouth, or otherwise, to be engaged in business, or as offering services or personal property or the personal property of others, or personal property or antiques acquired for sale to the public, regardless of whether such person actually transacts any business or practices a profession, shall be considered as engaging in business and shall be liable for payment of the local business tax therefor. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the sale by a family or an individual of tangible personal property acquired by the family or individual and used as part of the household. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.4; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-61. - Illegal business. 
    No business tax receipt issued under the provisions of this article, and no payment of any business tax required, imposed or levied under this article, shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business, occupation or profession, or of any business, occupation or profession as may now or hereafter be prohibited by ordinance, or of any legal business, occupation or profession in an illegal manner. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.5; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-62. - Local business tax certificate; due dates; proration. 
(a)  It shall be no defense of nonpayment of any delinquency penalty required by this article that the business tax receipt holder did not receive any bill or notice that the business tax was due from the city. 
(b)  No receipt shall be issued for more than one year. The full annual tax shall be paid for each receipt obtained between October 1 and March 31. If the tax is paid between April 1 and September 30, one-half of the tax shall be paid. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.6; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Due date of local business tax and proration, F.S. §§ 205.043, 205.053. 
Sec. 14-63. - Delinquency; penalty; business without a tax receipt. 
    Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article, who does not pay the required business tax within one hundred fifty (150) days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of $250.00. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.7; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Due dates, delinquencies, and penalties, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 14-64. - Debt to the city. 
    The amount of any tax, fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a debt due to the city, and any person carrying on any business without first having paid the local business tax to the city to do so shall be liable to the city for the amount of such local business tax, fee and penalty recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.8; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-65. - Separate business tax for each location and business activity. 
    A separate tax receipt shall be obtained for each location including branches of the business within the city as if the branch or location were a separate business, unless prohibited by F.S. ch. 205. A tax receipt shall also be obtained for each unique and different type of business activity. Whenever any business, occupation or profession shall fall into more than one of the classifications contained in the schedule set forth in this chapter, such occupation, business, or profession shall be required to comply with the tax requirements and to pay the business tax imposed under or pertaining to each classification or privilege. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to determine the classification for each business activity. All business activities shall be assigned to at least one of the approved classifications. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.9; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-66. - Transfers authorized; fee. 
(a)  A business tax receipt may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the annual business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00, and presentation of the original local business tax receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(b)  In the event a business location is changed to another location within the city limits, the holder of the tax receipt shall, within fifteen (15) days after the location is changed, have the tax receipt transferred to the new location. This transfer shall be made upon written request and presentation of the original local business tax receipt and evidence of location change, and upon payment of a transfer fee of ten (10) percent of the annual business tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. Written request shall be made by submitting a completed new business application as provided in section 14-136. 
(c)  No transfers shall be authorized for changes in business classifications. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.10; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Transfer of business tax receipts and fees therefor, F.S. § 205.043. 
Sec. 14-67. - Payment of tax, penalties prerequisite to tax receipt. 
    It is the intent of the city to grant a valid local business tax receipt only to those businesses that have fully and faithfully paid the required taxes as established in the schedule of taxes in this article. No receipt shall be valid until all taxes are so paid. A dishonored bank draft, check or other similar non-cash payment shall be in direct contravention of the intent expressed in this section. Any local business tax receipt issued to any business whose payment is subsequently dishonored shall be void ab initio. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.11; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-68. - Adjustment. 
    If a local business tax receipt holder shall effect a change in or the status of the business by: 
(1)  Augmenting the volume of business; 
(2)  Expanding the size of the business, plant or premises; 
(3)  Increasing the number or size of vehicles; or 
(4)  Making any other lawful and material change of any kind in the business; 
the city manager or designee shall require the payment of an additional or higher local business tax, to be prorated by the balance of the business tax year. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.12; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-69. - Rebate. 
    No portion of any local business tax assessed in this article shall be rebated, unless it clearly appears that such local business tax was collected by mistake or error. Before making such rebates to a receipt holder, all business taxes payable shall be paid by such business. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.13; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-70. - Exemptions for disabled veterans. 
    All applications for the business tax exemption for disabled veterans shall be filed with the city manager or designee on forms to be furnished by the city manager or designee. A new application and certification must be filed each year. However, the applications of disabled veterans who previously have furnished the city manager or designee with evidence that their disability has been rated as permanent and not subject to review need not be accompanied by a certificate of disability. If the application is complete and the applicant qualified under the state statutes, then the city manager or designee shall issue and grant the exemption. 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.14; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Exemption for disabled veterans, F.S. § 205.171. 
Sec. 14-71. - Records of businesses. 
(a)  It shall be the right and duty of the city manager or designee, auditor, inspector or representative, to inspect from time to time the records of any business in the city, where the local business tax of the business is based on amount of inventory, number of employees, number of vehicles, or number of rental units. The information obtained from such inspection and investigation shall be used as an aid in determining the proper classification and tax for such business or establishment. Any person hindering, impeding or obstructing the city manager or designee, auditor, inspector or representative in the reasonable performance of his duty shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Business tax receipts shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle, whichever is the principal business location. 
(Code 2001, § 13.140) 
Sec. 14-72. - Schedule of local business taxes to be paid; tax levied; payment required; amounts to be paid. 
    As set forth in section 14-58, a local business tax is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person exercising the privilege of carrying on or engaging in the following specifically enumerated businesses in the amount hereinafter specifically stated: 
Note: 
* Indicates the merchant classification 
** In addition to the flat business tax levied for such business classification, an additional graduated tax, predicated on the number of employees, shall be charged as follows: 
One-3 employees ..... $  0.00 
4-5 employees ..... 14.45 
6-10 employees ..... 35.87 
11-25 employees ..... 72.34 
Over 25 employees ..... 107.65 
Plus $2.00 for each employee over first 25 
-A- 
(1)  Abstracts of title ..... $173.63 
(2)  Accountant. See: Professionals 
(3)  Adding machines, calculators, typewriters, cash registers and other business machines, new and used; sale and repair* ..... 115.76 
(4)  Administrative office** ..... 115.76 
(5)  Advertising** ..... 115.76 
(6)  Agencies. All, including but not limited to commercial agency, insurance, real estate** ..... 115.76 
(7)  Alcoholic beverages. See: Restaurant and/or bars, lounges and taverns 
(8)  Ambulance service operator** ..... 231.52 
(9)  Amusements: 
a.  Amusement arcade or hall, where the sole or main business is the use or operation of said devices by the same owner at a single location ..... 20.83 
In addition thereto, a tax for each device shall be assessed. (See: Coin-operated devices and items below.) Provided, however, that none of said devices used in an amusement arcade or hall shall be transferred from said amusement arcade or hall location to another location, unless a separate tax for said device is first paid. Before any tax is assessed under this division applicant must furnish the city manager or designee a list of all devices to be assessed and locations where they are to be located. Should the business desire to increase the number of such devices after the issuance of a business tax receipt, the business shall first furnish the city manager or designee a list of all additional devices to be assessed. 
b.  Bathing or swimming pools where a charge is made ..... 57.87 
c.  Bowling alleys: 
First 2 alleys ..... 57.87 
Each additional alley ..... 7.22 
d.  Pool and billiard tables, for each table ..... 14.45 
e.  Golf: 
1.  Carpet or miniature golf ..... 57.87 
2.  Golf course ..... 115.76 
3.  Golf driving range ..... 57.87 
f.  Shooting galleries ..... 231.52 
Archery range ..... 34.72 
g.  Rinks, skating or bicycle ..... 289.40 
h.  Circus: 
Having 5,000 seats or less per day ..... 578.81 
Having over 5,000 seats shall pay in addition to the above for each 1,000 seats or fraction of 1,000 over 5,000 seats, per day ..... 208.37 
Provided that for each parade through the streets, when the performance is inside the city, there shall be an additional tax of ..... 57.87 
Provided that for each parade through the streets when the performance is outside the city and no city tax for the circus is paid; the tax shall be ..... 173.63 
i.  Motion picture theaters. Where admission is charged, the tax shall be determined and measured by the seating capacity, as follows: 
1.  Where seating capacity if 500 or less ..... 347.28 
2.  For each additional 100 or fraction thereof ..... 49.77 
j.  Shows, traveling shows of all kinds, except circuses, per day ..... 173.63 
k.  Show bands, instrumental, performing publicly or privately for dancing, entertainment or amusement and operated for profit, when not paying a traveling show business tax** ..... 11.57 
l.  Street carnivals, including side shows, and other amusements incident thereto, for each day or fraction thereof ..... 231.52 
m.  Amusement parks, where amusements such as small shows, merry-go-rounds, etc., are located at one general place and operated under one general management ..... 231.52 
1.  Ferris wheels and other amusement devices operated for profit not in amusement parks, each device ..... 35.87 
n.  Exhibitions: 
1.  Promoters, wrestling or boxing, per day ..... 173.63 
2.  Performers, wrestlers and boxers, per day ..... 14.45 
Provided, however, a promoter shall be permitted to pay an annual tax for an unlimited number of performances and performers, per year ..... 1,085.25 
3.  Exhibitions without sale, per week ..... 28.93 
4.  Exhibitions with sales (such as home shows, boat shows, mobile and camper shows, stamp shows, etc., not to exceed 30 days) ..... 231.52 
o.  Indoor sports activity center, gym arena ..... 434.10 
(10)  Animal and pet grooming. See: Pet shops 
(11)  Antique shop* ..... 115.76 
(12)  Apartments. See: Rental housing units 
(13)  Appliances: 
a.  Appliances, major: Includes stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, ironers, air conditioners, freezers, dishwashers, ice making machines, new or used, whether electrical, mechanical or gas operated (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
b.  Other household: Includes new or used sewing machines, vacuum cleaners, electric sweepers, and like items (retail only)* ..... 81.02 
Repair ..... 81.02 
(14)  Aquariums and tropical fish supplies* ..... 115.76 
(15)  Arterial pressure measurements ..... 57.87 
Each person (other than state licensed physicians or nurses) who engages in the practice of measuring systolic arterial pressure or diastolic sphygmomanometer, hem dynamometer, stethoscope, or the similar devices commonly used by physicians, or any combination of such devices, and charging fees or receiving any compensation, either directly or indirectly for making such measurements. 
(16)  Art galleries, supplies and framing* ..... 115.76 
(17)  Artists, each ..... 23.15 
(18)  Art schools. See: Schools 
(19)  Astrologists, fortunetellers, palmists, clairvoyants, card readers, phrenologists, spiritual readers and advisors, whether making charges or accepting donations ..... Prohibited 
(20)  Attorneys. See: Professionals 
(21)  Auctioneers: 
a.  Auctioneers, itinerant, per day** ..... 57.87 
b.  Auctions of real property, including furnished homes: 
1.  Where conducted by licensed brokers having an established office in the city ..... 57.87 
2.  Where conducted by brokers having no established office in the city, for each day ..... 81.02 
(22)  Automatic vending machines. See: Coin-operated devices 
(23)  Auto loan. See: Finance companies 
(24)  Automobiles or motor vehicles: 
a.  Agencies, selling automobiles or trucks** ..... 115.76 
b.  Filling stations, selling gasoline, oil or other petroleum products: 
1.  First pump (gasoline) ..... 34.72 
2.  Each additional pump (gasoline) ..... 3.58 
c.  Motor vehicle repair shop in connection with filling station, tire or department store, or automobile agency, for each bay ..... 7.22 
d.  Auto washing service, unconnected with other business** ..... 115.76 
e.  Taxicabs. See: Zoning Code 
f.  Auto towing. Persons using what are commonly termed "wreckers" for the purpose of towing or transporting wrecked or disabled automobiles, whether such activity be incidental to or connected with any other business or not, for each vehicle ..... 23.15 
g.  Motorcycles, mini-bikes, etc., including repairs: Dealers** ..... 115.76 
(25)  Automotive parts (retail or wholesale, over the counter sales only)* ..... 115.76 
(26)  Automotive supplies and equipment (retail or over the counter sales only)* ..... 115.76 
(27)  Awnings and tents (retail sales and service)* ..... 57.87 
-B- 
(28)  Bakery products (retail only)** ..... 57.87 
Each truck in connection with retail business ..... 7.22 
(29)  Bakery supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(30)  Bankrupt, fire, going-out-of-business, etc., sale: 
Itinerant: 
For a period of 30 days ..... 57.87 
Over 30 days, each additional day ..... 3.46 
Nonitinerant: 
For a period of 30 days ..... 46.30 
Over 30 days, each additional day ..... 2.88 
(Maximum days of sale is 45 days) 
(31)  Banks and building or savings and loan associations** ..... 260.46 
a.  Remote service terminal, each location ..... 71.76 
(32)  Barbershops. See: Professionals 
Not more than one chair ..... 17.35 
Each additional chair ..... 3.46 
(33)  Barber school/college ..... 115.76 
(34)  Bars, lounges, and taverns (where no food is prepared on the premises)** ..... 92.61 
(35)  Batteries* ..... 46.30 
(36)  Beauty and barber supplies (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(37)  Beauty parlors and beauty culturists: 
Also See: Professionals 
First booth ..... 17.35 
Each additional booth ..... 3.46 
(38)  Beauty schools ..... 115.76 
(39)  Beer and wine. See: Restaurants and/or bars, lounges and taverns 
(40)  Benches, each ..... 7.22 
a.  Dealer. See: Merchants* ..... 115.76 
b.  Repair shop ..... 23.15 
c.  Rink. See: Amusements 
(41)  Billboards. See: Sign ordinance 
(42)  Billiards or pool tables. See: Amusements 
(43)  Billiard supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(44)  Blood pressure machines and other so-called health machines. See: Arterial pressure measurements 
(45)  Blueprinting supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(46)  Boats, marine supplies (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(47)  Bonding companies. See: Insurance 
(48)  Bonds, stocks and other investments. See: Brokers 
(49)  Bondsmen** ..... 173.63 
(50)  Bookkeepers. See: Professionals 
(51)  Book or periodical sales** ..... 115.76 
(52)  Book stores, not including outside magazine and book agents*. See: Magazines, also ..... 23.15 
(53)  Reserved 
(54)  Bottled water, delivery of* ..... 34.72 
(55)  Bottled gas, sales and installation of appliances or equipment in connection with use of bottled gas or tank liquefied petroleum gas* ..... 46.30 
(56)  Bowling alleys. See: Amusements 
(57)  Broadcasting station. See: Radio broadcasting and television broadcasting 
(58)  Brokers, including insurance brokers, merchandise brokers, agents or representatives and manufacturers' agents, brokers and representatives, stock and bond brokers, transportation ticket brokers (including persons selling upon commission tickets for any form of transportation, except when paying a travel agency or bureau tax), brokers or persons buying and selling established businesses also known as business opportunities (when not paying a real estate broker's business tax)** ..... 115.76 
(59)  Builders. See: Contractors 
(60)  Building and loan association or agents for building and loan associations and mortgage companies. See: Banks 
(61)  Builders supplies (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(62)  Buses (not paying franchise taxes or fees)** ..... 57.87 
(63)  Business schools. See: Schools 
(64)  Butcher shops, meat, poultry and fish* ..... 57.87 
(65)  Butcher supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 57.87 
(66)  Buying club** ..... 57.87 
-C- 
(67)  Cafe, cafeteria. See Restaurants 
(68)  Camera and photo shop* ..... 57.87 
(69)  Candy: 
Retail (unless included in merchant's license) ..... 23.15 
(70)  Canvassers. See: Section 14-224 
(71)  Card and novelty shop* ..... 57.87 
(72)  Carnivals. See: Amusements 
(73)  Carpenter. See: Contractor 
(74)  Carpet and/or rug cleaners and installers. See: Rug 
(75)  Caterers** ..... 115.76 
(76)  Ceramics (retail only)* ..... 57.87 
(77)  Certified public accountants. See: Professionals 
(78)  Chemicals (retail only)* ..... 57.87 
(79)  Reserved 
(80)  Child care centers. See: Nurseries 
(81)  Chiropractor. See: Professionals 
(82)  Chiropodist. See: Professionals 
(83)  Christmas tree lots* ..... 23.15 
(84)  Church supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(85)  Cigar, cigarette and tobacco dealers and shops* ..... 57.87 
(86)  Circuses. See: Amusements 
(87)  Civil engineers. See: Professionals 
(88)  Claim and collection agencies. See: Collection or bill collectors 
(89)  Claim and collection agents** ..... 57.87 
(90)  Cleaners. See: Laundry and dry cleaners 
(91)  Cleaners and dyers supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(92)  Clothing stores* ..... 115.76 
(93)  Coffee or tea store* ..... 57.87 
(94)  Coin and stamp shop* ..... 57.87 
(95)  Coin-operated devices: 
a.  Service machines, each machine ..... 3.46 
b.  Skill games, pinball machines, music boxes or phonographs, video games, slot or coin operation, when legally permitted, each machine ..... 3.46 
Before any business receipt is issued, applicant must furnish the city manager or designee a list of addresses where all such machines are to be located. 
c.  Vending machines: 
1.  Gumball and novelty machines: 
(i)  4 machines or less, on single rack ..... 7.22 
(ii)  6 machines or less, on single rack ..... 20.83 
(iii)  8 machines or less, on single rack ..... 28.93 
(iv)  Single machine ..... 3.46 
2.  Ice ..... 7.22 
3.  Beverage machines (not including milk) ..... 3.46 
4.  Candy, cracker and chips ..... 3.46 
5.  Food (including milk) ..... 3.46 
6.  Other vending machines: 
(i)  Less than $0.05 to operate ..... 3.46 
(ii)  $0.05 to $0.15 to operate ..... 4.33 
(iii)  Over $0.15 to operate ..... 4.63 
(96)  Cold storage ..... 57.87 
(97)  Collection agency or bill collector. See: Financial adjusters 
(98)  Contests, persons conducting contests by offering inducements for securing subscription to newspapers, magazines, periodicals or publications** ..... 231.52 
(99)  Contractors: 
a.  General building contractors: 
Class A ..... 173.63 
Class B ..... 115.76 
Class C ..... 115.76 
b.  Subcontractor; class "A": 
Acoustical ..... 57.87 
Aluminum fabricators ..... 57.87 
Concrete-masonry ..... 57.87 
Demolition ..... 57.87 
Fence erecting ..... 57.87 
Floor surfacing ..... 57.87 
Framing, carpentry ..... 57.87 
Glass glazing ..... 57.87 
Ornamental iron and welding ..... 57.87 
Plastering, stucco, lathing, drywall ..... 57.87 
Roof coating ..... 57.87 
Roofing, related sheet metal ..... 57.87 
Specialty ..... 57.87 
Structures, moving only ..... 57.87 
Tile, terrazzo, marble ..... 57.87 
Tower erection ..... 57.87 
Waterproofing, guniting, sandblasting ..... 57.87 
Window installation ..... 57.87 
c.  Subcontractors, class "B": 
Acoustical ..... 57.87 
Excavating ..... 57.87 
Framing, carpentry ..... 57.87 
Lathing ..... 57.87 
Overhead and garage door installation ..... 57.87 
Pile driving ..... 57.87 
Roof deck, wall panels, cellular floor systems, precast decorative concrete ..... 57.87 
Sprinkler systems ..... 57.87 
Steeplejack, steeplejack wrecking ..... 57.87 
Structural steel erection, steel enforcing ..... 57.87 
Specialty ..... 57.87 
Tile, terrazzo, marble ..... 57.87 
Wood floor, sanding, refinishing ..... 57.87 
d.  Subcontractors, class "C" Aluminum structure erectors ..... 115.76 
e.  Master painters and/or paper hangers ..... 69.45 
f.  Signs and outdoor display contractors ..... 57.87 
g.  Plumbers ..... 115.76 
Master ..... 115.76 
Master gas fitter ..... 115.76 
Well driller only ..... 115.76 
Well driller, pump and lawn sprinkler installer ..... 115.76 
Septic tank contractor ..... 115.76 
Storm sewer contractor ..... 115.76 
h.  Electrical contractors: 
Class A ..... 115.76 
Class B ..... 81.02 
i.  Mechanical contractors: 
Class A ..... 173.63 
Class B ..... 115.76 
Class C ..... 81.02 
Class D ..... 81.02 
Insulation contractor ..... 115.76 
Sheet metal contractor ..... 115.76 
Roller maker contractor and related work ..... 69.45 
Petroleum equipment contractor ..... 115.76 
j.  Sidewalk contractor ..... 115.76 
k.  Street paving ..... 115.76 
l.  Swimming pool contractor ..... 115.76 
m.  Tinsmith ..... 57.87 
n.  Elevators ..... 57.87 
o.  Dredging ..... 57.87 
p.  Excavations and land clearing ..... 57.87 
q.  Drainage and sanitary sewers ..... 57.87 
r.  Seawall and docks ..... 57.87 
s.  Tent and awnings ..... 57.87 
t.  Unclassified contractors ..... 57.87 
(100)  Copy machines, supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(101)  Cosmetics* ..... 57.87 
(102)  Credit associations, persons or agents thereof operating in the city supplying information or collecting accounts for members or others** ..... 57.87 
(103)  Curio dealers (retail only)* ..... 57.87 
-D- 
(104)  Dairy products* ..... 115.76 
(105)  Dancing schools. See: Schools 
(106)  Data, keypunch service, computer programs, software** ..... 115.76 
(107)  Data processing supplies and equipment; computer supplies and equipment* ..... 115.76 
(108)  Decorators: 
a.  Interior decorators** ..... 44.10 
b.  Persons engaged in the business of decorating streets or buildings, including the decorating or manufacture of floats or other parade items** ..... 34.72 
(109)  Delicatessens* ..... 115.76 
(110)  Delivery service** ..... 11.57 
(111)  Dentists. See: Professionals 
(112)  Department store* ..... 520.92 
(113)  Detectives or detective agency, private** ..... 115.76 
(114)  Dictating supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(115)  Directories, persons making or offering for sale, state, county or city directories, telephone or otherwise** ..... 115.76 
(116)  Disinfectants, fumigators or exterminators** ..... 81.02 
Certified pesticide operator, each ..... 20.83 
Per vehicle. above tax, plus ..... 7.22 
(117)  Doctor. See: Professionals 
(118)  Draftsman ..... 57.87 
(119)  Drug store* ..... 231.52 
(120)  Dry cleaning. See: Laundry and dry cleaning 
(121)  Duplex houses. See: Rental housing units 
-E- 
(122)  Electrical: 
a.  Electrical fixtures (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
b.  Electronics; includes radio, television, recorders, hi-fi, stereo, and like items, sale of, whether new or used (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(123)  Electricians. See: Contractors 
(124)  Elevators: 
a.  Dealers in and agents for and including maintenance* ..... 115.76 
b.  Maintenance and repair service only** ..... 81.02 
(125)  Embalmers. See: Funeral directors 
(126)  Employment, temporary help, registries: 
a.  Employment agency** ..... 115.76 
b.  Temporary help, babysitting, modeling, theatrical agencies and nurse's registries** ..... 57.87 
(127)  Engineers. See: Professionals 
(128)  Express company agent** ..... 115.76 
(129)  Exterminators. Also see: Disinfectants, fumigators or exterminators** ..... 34.72 
-F- 
(130)  Fabric store* ..... 115.76 
(131)  Feed and grain dealer (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(132)  Fencing. See: Contractors 
(133)  Fertilizer sales* ..... 57.87 
(134)  Filling stations. See: Automobile 
(135)  Filmmaker** ..... 57.87 
(136)  Financial adjusters also known as proraters, budgeteers, debt managers, debt poolers, budget balancers, or similar designations whose principal business is making of arrangements on behalf of debtors with creditors for extending the time of payment of such debts, diminishing the amount of installment payments, or otherwise obtaining concessions for the payment of such debts, and which services a fee, commission, or other compensation is charged the debtor** ..... 115.76 
(137)  Finance companies or moneylenders, (excluding pawnbrokers, salary purchasers, banks or building and loan associations). Those persons, firms or corporations who act as agent for making loans or financing the sale or purchase of obligations given for real or personal property** ..... 115.76 
(138)  Fire extinguisher, servicing and maintenance** ..... 57.87 
(139)  Fish and seafood market (retail only)* ..... 57.87 
(140)  Floor covering* ..... 57.87 
(141)  Florist. See: Garden supplies 
(142)  Food stores. See: Groceries 
(143)  Foundry. See: Machine shop 
(144)  Fruit, dealer or agent: 
a.  Retail only* ..... 57.87 
b.  Fruit truck or wagon ..... 57.87 
(145)  Fuel. See: Petroleum products 
(146)  Funds, administrators, consultants and planners of trust or pension funds, tax shelters** ..... 115.76 
(147)  Fundraisers, professional** ..... 115.76 
(148)  Funeral directors, undertakers, and embalmers** ..... 115.76 
Also see: Professionals and/or undertakers 
(149)  Furniture dealers or store* ..... 115.76 
(150)  Furniture repair shop** ..... 115.76 
-G- 
(151)  Games and devices. See: Amusements 
(152)  Garages. See: Automobiles 
(153)  Garden supplies, florists, flowers and nurseries: 
a.  Florists, and dealers in potted plants, including the right to sell cut flowers* ..... 57.87 
b.  Flowers, cut flowers only* ..... 23.15 
c.  Garden shop* ..... 115.76 
d.  Nursery, including dealing in nursery stock, potted plants and the right to sell cut flowers* ..... 57.87 
e.  Grass or sod (retail only)* ..... 57.87 
(154)  Gas, bottled. See: Bottled gas sales 
(155)  Gasoline and oil. See: Petroleum products or automobile 
(156)  Gift shop* ..... 115.76 
(157)  Glass and mirror, plate (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(158)  Golf, miniature. See: Amusements 
(159)  Grocery store* ..... 115.76 
(160)  Grocery supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(161)  Guard service** ..... 115.76 
(162)  Guns: 
a.  Sale of all firearms* ..... 57.87 
b.  Gunsmiths** ..... 34.72 
-H- 
(163)  Hairdressing, when not paying a beauty parlor license** ..... 34.72 
(164)  Hardware store* ..... 115.76 
(165)  Reserved 
(166)  Health and/or health food store (retail)* ..... 115.76 
(167)  Health studios, gymnasiums, physical culture and slenderizing salons** ..... 57.87 
(168)  Hearing aids* ..... 57.87 
(169)  Heating supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(170)  Hobby and toy store* ..... 57.87 
(171)  Home occupations. See: Chapter 12 
(172)  Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, infirmaries or convalescent homes and nursing homes** ..... 81.02 
(173)  Hotels or roominghouses or motels. See: Rental housing units 
-I- 
(174)  Ice cream, yogurt, frozen ice, etc.: 
a.  Retail store* ..... 81.02 
b.  Retail store with drive-thru/carry out at window-(add) ..... 57.87 
c.  Retail stand, temporary (maximum 10 days) ..... 23.18 
d.  Retail peddling, per vehicle ..... 57.87 
(175)  Import goods dealers* ..... 46.30 
(176)  Insurance and bonding companies** ..... 115.76 
(177)  Insurance adjusters** ..... 115.76 
(178)  Insurance agent or salesman ..... 46.30 
(179)  Interior decorator. See: Decorators 
(180)  Itinerant merchants. See: Merchant, itinerant 
-J- 
(181)  Janitorial, window cleaning service** ..... 57.87 
(182)  Jewelry store* ..... 115.76 
(183)  Jewelry or watch repair ..... 23.18 
-K- 
(184)  Kerosene. See: Petroleum products 
(185)  Kindergartens. See: Nurseries 
(186)  Knife, scissors or saw sharpener** ..... 17.35 
-L- 
(187)  Laboratories** ..... 115.76 
(188)  Laboratory supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(189)  Land developing companies ..... 57.87 
(190)  Landscaping, yard cleaning and lawn work contractors, tree surgeons** ..... 57.87 
(191)  Launderettes: 
a.  10 machines or less ..... 81.02 
b.  Each such machine in excess of the first 10 ..... 2.88 
(192)  Laundry and dry cleaning** ..... 81.02 
(193)  Leather and leather goods* ..... 57.87 
(194)  Letter service, multigraphing, xeroxing, duplicating or mimeographing, photo printing** ..... 57.87 
(195)  Library or book exchange* ..... 23.15 
(196)  Linen shop* ..... 34.72 
(197)  Linen, towel or apron supply** ..... 115.76 
(198)  Lithographers. See: Card writers and engravers 
(199)  Loan agents. See: Finance company 
(200)  Loan company. See: Finance company 
(201)  Lock smiths* ..... 17.35 
(202)  Lumber (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
-M- 
(203)  Magazine, book or newspaper sales* ..... 115.76 
(204)  Manicurists ..... 23.15 
(205)  Manufacturers. Light manufacturing, research and development, center ..... 520.92 
plus $0.05 per square foot up to 100,000 square feet; $0.03 per square foot over 100,000 square feet. 
(206)  Manufacturers' agents** ..... 115.76 
(207)  Maid service agency** ..... 57.87 
(208)  Mail order agency** ..... 57.87 
(209)  Marine and boat dealers. See: Boats 
(210)  Meat market* ..... 46.30 
(211)  Medical and dental supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(212)  Merchants, dealers, agents, brokers, manufacturers or distributors, merchants selling at retail or wholesale or on a commission basis. All merchants (*) classifications shall pay an additional tax based upon the rates set forth below. Every merchant or shopkeeper shall pay a tax based upon average annual inventory on hand at cost for the preceding fiscal year beginning August 1, and ending July 31, for each classification of merchandise as follows: 
Average Annual Inventory Retail Wholesale Less than $1,000.00 in value $    0.00 $    0.00 $1,000.00 and less than $5,000.00 0 0 $5,000.00 and less than $10,000.00 0 0 $10,000.00 and less than $20,000.00 0 0 $20,000.00 and less than $30,000.00 0 0 $30,000.00 and less than $40,000.00 55.12 55.12 $40,000.00 and less than $50,000.00 110.25 110.25 $50,000.00 and less than $60,000.00 220.50 220.50 $60,000.00 and less than $75,000.00 385.87 385.87 $75,000.00 and less than $100,000.00 661.50 661.50 $100,000.00 and less than $150,000.00 771.75 771.75 $150,000.00 and less than $200,000.00 1,433.25 1,433.25 $200,000.00 and less than $250,000.00 2,205.00 2,205.00 $250,000.00 and less than $300,000.00 2,756.25 2,756.25 $300,000.00 and less than $350,000.00 3,150.00 3,150.00 $350,000.00 and less than $400,000.00 4,410.00 4,410.00 $400,000.00 and less than $500,000.00 5,512.50 5,512.50 Over 500,000.00, at the rate of $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00  
The business application for any merchant classification (*) shall be returned with a report under oath, showing the average annual inventory for the preceding year. 
(213)  Merchants, itinerant, itinerants, either principal or agent, temporarily engaged in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail and occupying any building or structure for the sale thereof, in addition to any other tax receipt required, shall pay per month ..... 115.76 
In addition to paying the tax herein required, itinerants before the issuance of a tax receipt, must first post with the city manager or designee an acceptable surety company bond in the amount of $2,500.00 guaranteeing that all commitments, contracts, or promises to customers shall be performed, and indemnifying such customers for any loss that may be occasioned by failure of such itinerants to perform or carry out such commitments, contracts, or promises. 
(214)  Messenger service or package delivery service other than telegraph companies** ..... 23.15 
(215)  Milk depot (retail dairy products only)* ..... 34.72 
(216)  Milk vending machines. See: Coin-operated devices 
(217)  Millinery (hat store)** ..... 115.76 
(218)  Mobile homes, campers and motor homes, movers and hookup only** ..... 115.76 
(219)  Moneylenders. See: Finance companies 
(220)  Mortgages: 
a.  Brokers: See: Real estate 
b.  Company. See: Banks 
(221)  Motels. See: Rental housing units 
(222)  Motion picture, filmmaker. See: Filmmaker 
(223)  Motion picture theater. See: Amusements 
(224)  Motor courts or motels. See: Rental housing units 
(225)  Motorcycles and minibikes. See: Automobiles 
(226)  Motor vehicles. See: Automobiles 
(227)  Moving or transfer company** ..... 115.76 
(228)  Multigraphing and mimeographing. See: Letter service 
(229)  Music schools. See: Schools 
(230)  Musical instruments* ..... 115.76 
-N- 
(231)  Neon signs. See: Contractors, signs and outdoor display 
(232)  Newspapers, periodicals and other publications* ..... 57.87 
(233)  Newsstands ..... 34.72 
(234)  Novelty shop (retail only) See: Card and novelty shop 
(235)  Nurseries and/or kindergartens: 
a.  One to 15 children ..... 17.35 
b.  16 to 30 children ..... 34.72 
c.  31 to 45 children ..... 81.02 
d.  46 to 75 children ..... 115.76 
e.  76 to 100 children ..... 173.63 
f.  101 and over children ..... 231.52 
-O- 
(236)  Oculist. See: Professionals 
(237)  Office supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(238)  Oil (retail only). See: Petroleum products 
(239)  Optical goods and supplies, including what is generally known as optical laboratory when not paying an oculist or optometrist tax (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(240)  Optician. See: Professionals 
(241)  Optometrist. See: Professionals 
(242)  Ornamental shrubs and nurserymen. See: Garden supplies 
(243)  Osteopaths. See: Professionals 
(244)  Outdoor display contractor. See: Contractor 
(245)  Oxygen and air products* ..... 115.76 
-P- 
(246)  Painting or painter. See: Contractor 
(247)  Paint and/or wallpaper store* ..... 115.76 
(248)  Palmist. See: Fortunetellers 
(249)  Paperhangers. See: Contractors 
(250)  Paper products (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(251)  Parking lots. See: Automobiles 
(252)  Peddlers. See: Section 14-224 
(253)  Pet shops and pet grooming* ..... 57.87 
(254)  Petroleum products: 
a.  Retail fuel oil truck for the delivery of kerosene or other fuel to the homes, for each vehicle ..... 21.70 
b.  Retail dealers in motor vehicle lubricating oil, when not paying an automobile service station tax* ..... 34.72 
c.  Retail gas trucks for the delivery of natural, artificial or mixed gas, or other fuel within the city, to homes, parks, or businesses, each vehicle ..... 21.70 
This tax is not applicable when sold at an established place of business paying a merchants or manufacturers license. 
(255)  Pharmacies. See: Drug stores, professionals 
(256)  Phrenologists. See: Fortuneteller 
(257)  Piano and organ tuners** ..... 23.15 
(258)  Pinball machines. See: Coin-operated machines 
(259)  Pistols and guns. See: Guns 
(260)  Photographers 
a.  Maintaining an established studio in the city ..... 34.72 
b.  Itinerant photographers** ..... 115.76 
c.  Resident or itinerant employing the sale of coupons, tickets or any other scheme or device for the purpose of permitting persons to participate in the same where any reward is to be made or claims to be made of any photograph** ..... 115.76 
In addition to paying the business tax herein required, all photography studios and itinerant photographers, before the issuance of a tax receipt, must first post with the city manager or designee an acceptable surety company bond in the amount of $2,500.00 guaranteeing that all commitments, contracts, or promises to customers shall be performed, and indemnifying such customers for any loss that may be occasioned by failure of such photographers to perform or carry out such commitments, contracts, or promises. 
(261)  Physicians and surgeons. See: Professionals 
(262)  Plasterers. See: Contractors 
(263)  Plumbers. See: Contractors 
(264)  Plumbing supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(265)  Pool and billiard supplies (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(266)  Reserved 
(267)  Pressing. See: Laundry and dry cleaning 
(268)  Printers or printing shops** ..... 57.87 
(269)  Printing supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(270)  Professionals, as follows: 
a.  Accountants, CPAs, auditors ..... 57.87 
b.  Acupuncturist, certified ..... 115.76 
c.  Architects ..... 57.87 
d.  Attorneys at law ..... 115.76 
e.  Barber assistant, barber ..... 17.35 
Barber teachers, intern teachers ..... 34.72 
f.  Chiropractor, chiropractor assistant II ..... 115.76 
g.  Cosmetologist ..... 17.35 
Cosmetology instructors ..... 34.72 
h.  Dentists ..... 115.76 
Dental radiographer, dental hygienist ..... 46.30 
i.  Dispensing opticians ..... 46.30 
Dispensing opticians apprentice ..... 34.72 
j.  Engineers ..... 57.87 
k.  Land surveyors ..... 57.87 
l.  Landscape architect ..... 57.87 
m.  Funeral directors and/or embalmers ..... 115.76 
Intern embalmer and/or funeral director ..... 34.72 
Concurrent intern ..... 34.72 
Embalmer apprentice ..... 34.72 
Director disposer ..... 115.76 
n.  Massage Therapist ..... 34.72 
o.  Physicians ..... 115.76 
Physicians assistant, temporary/limited physician ..... 115.76 
Physical therapist ..... 115.76 
Occupational therapist ..... 115.76 
p.  Hearing aid specialty ..... 34.72 
q.  Naturopath ..... 115.76 
r.  Nursing home administrator ..... 115.76 
s.  Nurses (R.N., L.P.N. and A.R.N.P.) ..... 46.30 
t.  Optometrist ..... 115.76 
u.  Osteopathic medical examiner/physician ..... 115.76 
Osteopathic physician assistant ..... 115.76 
v.  Pharmacist (F.S. § 205.196) ..... waived 
Pharmacist consultant (F.S. § 205.196) ..... waived 
w.  Deputy pilot, state pilot ..... 34.72 
x.  Podiatrist ..... 115.76 
y.  Psychologist ..... 115.76 
Mental health, marriage/family therapist, school psychologist, social worker ..... 34.72 
z.  Veterinarian ..... 115.76 
(271)  Property management/leasing/administrative offices-on site only for services of complex** ..... 115.76 
(272)  Public service, rendered for a fee and not specifically provided for in other sections herein ..... 34.72 
(273)  Public utilities, when plants, substations or offices located in the city and not paying a license tax or fee under franchise agreement ..... 115.76 
-R- 
(274)  Radio. See: Electronics 
(275)  Radio broadcasting: 
AM station only ..... 231.52 
FM station only ..... 217.04 
Combined AM and FM station ..... 347.28 
Television station ..... 434.10 
(276)  Real estate: 
a.  Appraiser ..... 34.72 
b.  Brokers ..... 46.30 
c.  Reserved 
d.  Real estate agency, each location** ..... 46.30 
e.  Mortgage broker, (excluding brokers employed by a bank, building and loan association or any other lending agency)** ..... 34.72 
(277)  Record, tape, videotape, related electronic equipment and like items, rental/leasing* ..... 57.87 
(278)  Refrigerators. See: Appliances 
(279)  Rental housing units: 
a.  Hotels, not exceeding 6 ..... 57.87 
Each additional bedroom ..... 1.43 
b.  Apartments and duplexes ..... 11.57 
For each additional single bedroom unit ..... 1.43 
For each unit with 2 or more bedrooms an additional ..... 2.07 
c.  Motels, not exceeding 6 bedrooms ..... 57.87 
Each additional bedroom ..... 1.43 
d.  Dwelling house, each rental house in excess of one ..... 11.57 
No business tax receipt shall be issued hereunder for any such apartment house unless the applicant shall have first produced such license from the state or any department or bureau thereof as shall be required by the laws of the state. The closing of any such apartment house by the state board of health or the county board of health, or the city health officer or the revocation of any license to such apartment house issued by the state, county, or any bureau or commission thereof shall automatically revoke any authorization issued by the city for the operation of such apartment house. 
(280)  Rentals, persons renting machinery, or other equipment, whether incidental to or connected with any other business or not: 
a.  Light equipment, lawn mowers, hospital equipment, household wares, clothing, costumes and the like** ..... 81.02 
(281)  Repair shops and services, other than garage and machine** ..... 34.72 
(282)  Restaurants** ..... 46.30 
a.  In addition to the flat rate applicable to all restaurants, a graduated assessment determined by the number of seats, chairs, stools, bench or booth seating spaces shall be applied as follows: 
One to 20 ..... 26.04 
21 to 40 ..... 36.17 
41 to 100 ..... 62.50 
Over 100 ..... 134.28 
b.  In addition to the fixed restaurant business tax and the graduated assessment predicated on number of seats, if applicable, the following fixed business tax shall be paid: 
1.  Carryout, delivery or drive-thru ..... 115.76 
2.  Catering ..... 115.76 
3.  Bar, tavern, lounge ..... 46.30 
(283)  Restaurant supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(284)  Rinks, skating or bicycle. See: Amusements 
(285)  Roofers. See: Contractors 
(286)  Roofing supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(287)  Rug and/or carpet cleaners and installers 
a.  Rug or carpet cleaners** ..... 81.02 
b.  Installation and service** ..... 81.02 
-S- 
(288)  Safety supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(289)  Sand or shell dealers. See: Builders supplies 
(290)  Sanitary supplies and equipment (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(291)  Sanitariums. See: Hospitals 
(292)  Schools, art, business, dancing, music, dramatic, physical culture: 
a.  One to 50 pupils ..... 23.15 
b.  Over 50 pupils ..... 34.72 
(293)  Seawall and dock construction and repair. See: Contractors 
(294)  Security systems sales and service* ..... 57.87 
(295)  Seed, feed and grain (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(296)  Service, operation, processing center ..... 520.92 
plus $0.05 per square foot up to 100,000 square feet; $0.03 per square foot over 100,000 square feet 
(297)  Septic tank cleaners* ..... 57.87 
(298)  Septic tank contractors. See: Contractors 
(299)  Sewing and tailoring** ..... 57.87 
(300)  Shoe repair** ..... 34.72 
(301)  Shoe store* ..... 115.76 
(302)  Shooting gallery. See: Amusements 
(303)  Shows. See: Amusements 
(304)  Sign contractors. See: Contractors 
(305)  Sign painter ..... 57.87 
(306)  Skating rinks. See: Amusements 
(307)  Solicitors. See: Section 14-224 
(308)  Sound truck. See: Advertising 
(309)  Sporting goods* ..... 115.76 
(310)  Stamp shop. See: Coin and stamp shop 
(311)  Stationery shop. See: Card and novelty shop 
(312)  Stereo and hi-fi shop. See: Electrical 
(313)  Stenographers, public* ..... 11.57 
(314)  Stocks. See: Brokers 
(315)  Subcontractors. See: Contractors 
(316)  Subscription agents, not applicable to a paper boy delivering on regular newspaper route or selling newspapers in area authorized by the city manager. See: Peddlers 
(317)  Sundry store (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
(318)  Surgeons. See: Professionals 
(319)  Swimming pool supplies (retail only)* ..... 115.76 
-T- 
(320)  Tackle shop* ..... 115.76 
(321)  Taxicabs or other vehicles for hire** ..... 57.87 
(322)  Taxidermist** ..... 57.87 
(323)  Tea or coffee stores* ..... 57.87 
(324)  Reserved 
(325)  Telephone answering service** ..... 34.72 
(326)  Telephone companies. See: Public utilities 
(327)  Telephone solicitations, any person, firm or corporation soliciting by telephone and business** ..... 115.76 
(328)  Tent Shows. See: Amusements 
(329)  Termite exterminators. See: Exterminators 
(330)  Theater, motion pictures. See: Amusements 
(331)  Tilesetters. See: Contractors 
(332)  Tinsmith. See: Contractors 
(333)  Tire dealers* ..... 115.76 
(334)  Tobacco dealers. See: Cigar 
(335)  Towel supply companies. See: Laundries 
(336)  Trading stamp companies* ..... 115.76 
(337)  Travel agencies or bureaus** ..... 57.87 
(Defined as any person who shall operate, maintain or conduct in the city, a place of business for the solicitation of passenger transportation or for the sale, exchange, barter or transfer of passenger transportation or tickets by water, rail, air or motor or shall hold itself out as being in the business of acting as intermediary or medium between carriers of such passengers and the traveling public and shall receive compensation for such services either from carriers, or passengers; provided nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to carriers selling directly transportation over their own respective lines.) 
(338)  Tree surgeons. See: Landscaping 
(339)  Trophies* ..... 57.87 
(340)  Typewriters: 
a.  Repair ..... 81.02 
b.  Sales* ..... 115.76 
-U- 
(341)  Unclassified, any business, profession or occupation not otherwise provided for herein** ..... 57.87 
(342)  Unclassified retail store* ..... 115.76 
(343)  Undertakers or funeral directors. See: Professionals 
(344)  Upholsterers and/or furniture repairs** ..... 115.76 
-V- 
(345)  Vending machine. See: Coin-operated devices 
(346)  Reserved 
-W- 
(347)  Wallpaper store. See: Paint 
(348)  Watchmakers and repair of jewelry. See: Jewelry and watch repair 
(349)  Wash racks. See: Automobiles 
(350)  Weighing machines. See: Coin-operated devices 
(351)  Well drillers. See: Contractors 
(352)  Wigs* ..... 115.76 
(353)  Window washers or cleaning** ..... 23.15 
(354)  Wood dealers* ..... 11.57 
(355)  Woodworking and repairs** ..... 115.76 
(356)  Wrecker service. See: Automobile 
-X- 
(357)  X-ray equipment and supplies (retail only)** ..... 115.76 
-Y- 
(358)  Yard maintenance. See: Landscaping 
(359)  Yarn shop** ..... 115.76 
(Code 2001, § 19.195.16; Ord. No. 180, 4-18-1967; Ord. No. 244, 3-16-1971; Ord. No. 248, 9-21-1971; Ord. No. 254, 1-1-1972; Ord. No. 578, 5-6-1986; Ord. No. 986, 9-29-1998; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 1274, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 1327, § 1, 8-21-2012) 
Secs. 14-73-14-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-103. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative office means and includes any physical office from which a professional conducts business with an employee other than the professional. In addition to this classification, each professional must pay a fee. This category also applies to home occupations. 
    Auctioneer means any person who in any room, booth, place or shelter sells goods, chattels or articles of personal property at public outcry, or who, in any room, booth, place or shelter sells goods, chattels or articles of personal property to the highest bidder. 
    Average annual inventory of stock on hand means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the sum of the actual inventory on hand, in storage or held on consignment for each month of the preceding fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30, at cost. 
    Business means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, trades, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. 
    Business tax means a tax levied on each business, occupation, or profession for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, occupation, or profession within the city limits. It does not mean any fees or licenses paid to any board, commission, or officer for permits, registrations, examination, or inspection. Unless otherwise provided by law, these are deemed to be regulatory and in addition to, but not in lieu of, any local business tax imposed under the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
    Employee means and includes every person engaged in any business, profession, occupation under any appointment, agency, contract of hire, or apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written. 
    Merchandise means and includes any goods, wares or commodities bought or sold in the usual course of trade, wholesale or retail. 
    Merchant means and includes any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise or food at retail or wholesale. 
    Merchant, retail, means and includes any merchant who sells to the consumer or for any purpose other than resale, except that sales to manufacturers and sales to the state, United States Government, or any political subdivision of either of them shall be considered wholesale sales. 
    Merchant, wholesale, means and includes any merchant who sells to another for the purpose of resale. Sales to governmental entities shall be considered wholesale sales. 
    Receipt means a document that is issued by the city which bears the words "Local Business Tax Receipt" and provides evidence that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this article and article III of this chapter, relating to the annual business tax. 
    Sale means and includes the transfer of ownership, title or possession, transfer exchange or barter, whether conditional or otherwise for consideration. 
(Code 2001, § 13.135; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Secs. 14-104-14-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-135. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the division are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 14-136. - Application for new business; information to be shown; issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a business within the city shall file an application with the city manager or designee to register said business. Such application shall contain the name of the applicant or, if a co-partnership, then the names of the persons who constitute such co-partnership, and if a corporation, the names of its directors or trustees and present or managing officer, location and type of proposed business. Copies of all other state licenses and/or certifications pertinent to the business, and/or information as required by state statutes, shall be submitted at time of application. There will be a nonrefundable application fee, based upon the type of business. All applications are subject to approval and may require further information upon request. 
(b)  Persons and organizations who are exempt pursuant to Internal Revenue Code 501(c)3 from paying a local business tax, as set forth in this section and following, are required to register their business as provided herein and apply for an exemption receipt. When requested, those exempt under this provision shall provide evidence of said exemption. 
(Code 2001, § 13.130; Ord. No. 1055, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-137. - Requirements for new businesses. 
(a)  The application for a new business shall state the exact location at which the business shall be operated and a zoning official shall verify that such business, occupation or profession is allowed under the land development code. 
(b)  The application shall be approved by the city council, when required, for the business, occupation or profession. 
(c)  The application shall be approved by the county health department, when required, for the business, occupation or profession. 
(d)  The application shall be approved by the building official when occupancy of a vacant or reconstructed business premise is involved. 
(e)  The application shall be completed without failure to disclose or misrepresentation of the information required. 
(f)  After issuance of the business tax receipt, notification will be given to both the police and fire departments for review. 
(g)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in a violation of this Code and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
(Code 2001, § 13.145; Ord. No. 921, 7-9-1996; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-138. - Annual review. 
(a)  Annually any business operating within the city shall be reviewed and examined to determine if all applicable provisions of state law, city ordinance, rules, and regulations have been complied with, followed and adhered to by such business. 
(b)  When the business has failed to comply with, follow or adhere to any applicable provisions of state law, city ordinance, rule, or regulation, it shall result in a violation of this Code and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement as provided in chapter 1, article II, of this Code. 
(Code 2001, § 13.155; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Secs. 14-139-14-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AUCTIONEERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, F.S. ch. 538. 

Sec. 14-160. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this division are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 14-161. - Application for new business; compliance with division. 
    No person shall conduct an auction or engage in business within the city as a secondhand dealer until after filing an application with the city manager or designee to register his business, in the manner prescribed in section 14-162. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.1; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-162. - Application for new business; information to be shown. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a business as an auctioneer or secondhand dealer shall file his application with the city manager or designee. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and age of the applicant; 
(2)  If a copartnership, then the names and ages of the persons who constitute such copartnership; or 
(3)  If a corporation, the names and ages of its directors or trustees and present or managing officer, and location of the proposed business together with proof that the applicant has registered with the state as required by F.S. § 538.09. 
(b)  Upon filing such information, the applicant shall be authorized to conduct business, but such authorization shall not extend beyond midnight on September 30 next, except when the authorization is granted during the month of September, and then in that event, if granted, it shall extend until midnight of the next succeeding September 30. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.2; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 14-163. - Register to be kept; information to be shown; inspection. 
(a)  Any auctioneer or secondhand dealer shall keep a register, on forms provided by the city police department. 
(b)  At the close of business on each day or not later than 8:00 a.m. of the succeeding day, each auctioneer or secondhand dealer shall enter or cause to be entered in said register, an accurate description of the person from whom any article of personal property is purchased or received, including but not limited to the name, age, sex, color, nationality and place of residence of such person. 
(c)  In such register shall also be entered an accurate description of any article of personal property so purchased or received, including but not limited to a description of any mark, brand, monogram, words or letters blown, stamped, etched or otherwise permanently marked upon such article. 
(d)  All articles so purchased or received shall be so arranged in stock so as to enable the same to be inspected by the chief of police or designee. The auctioneer or secondhand dealer's register shall at all times be kept open for inspection and examination by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.3) 
Sec. 14-164. - Transcript of register to be furnished police. 
    All secondhand dealers and auctioneers shall, not later than 12:00 noon of each day, furnish to the chief of police a full and complete copy or transcript of the register referred to in section 14-163 in which the descriptions of the articles and sellers are entered for the transactions of the preceding day. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.4) 
Sec. 14-165. - Receiving articles belonging to city. 
    No auctioneer or secondhand dealer shall buy or receive for sale any goods or chattels or other articles of personal property from the driver of any vehicle owned by the city of any licensed contractor or transfer company, unless said auctioneer or secondhand dealer has first received the written consent of such contractor or the owner or manager of such transfer company or the chief or head of the city department in which such vehicle is used. Such written consent shall be filed for inspection for not less than three (3) months. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.5) 
Sec. 14-166. - Dealing with minors. 
    No auctioneer or secondhand dealer shall buy or receive from any minor any goods, chattels or other articles of personal property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any minor who has in his possession a written consent to the proposed transaction signed by his parent or guardian, nor shall it apply to any minor whose disabilities of nonage have been removed as provided by law. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.6) 
Sec. 14-167. - Time goods to be held before sale. 
    No goods, chattels or articles of personal property of any kind or character shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by any auctioneer, or secondhand dealer, until ten (10) days after the chief of police or designee has been furnished a copy or transcript of the register in which such goods, chattels or articles of personal property are described, together with the description of their seller. 
(Code 2001, § 13.235.7) 
Secs. 14-168-14-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GARAGE SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Persons who hold garage sales less than ten weekends per year not to be subject to regulation as secondhand dealer, F.S. § 538.03(2)(f). 

Sec. 14-188. - Definition. 
    The term "garage sale" means the sale of old, used or unwanted household articles and other personal items displayed or offered for sale on a lot, parcel or tract of land in any area not zoned for retail or wholesale sale of such articles or items, nor similar commercial uses; provided that the casual sale of household articles and personal items shall not be considered a garage sale where such sale shall be advertised by means other than by a sign or poster on or near the premises where such sale is conducted and where articles and items for sale are kept and displayed solely within or upon the premises as would be appropriate for the type of item. 
(Code 2001, § 13.240.1) 
Sec. 14-189. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 14-190. - Time limitations on conduct of sale. 
(a)  No garage sale shall extend more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(b)  Only one garage sale every six (6) months shall be allowed on any single lot, parcel, or tract of land. 
(Code 2001, § 13.240.2) 
Sec. 14-191. - Display of sale items, signs advertising sale. 
    At the conclusion of the garage sale, all unsold articles and items shall be removed or packed in such a manner as not to be visible from any public street or from the abutting properties. 
(Code 2001, § 13.240.3) 
Sec. 14-192. - Parking. 
    The person, firm, or corporation conducting the garage sale shall provide for parking of vehicles in such a way as to avoid creation of a hazardous or unsafe condition, or any congestion of public streets as a result of the garage sale. 
(Code 2001, § 13.240.4; Ord. No. 393, 9-26-1979; Ord. No. 589, 9-2-1986; Ord. No. 743, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 878, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1208, 7-17-2007) 
Secs. 14-193-14-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 14-223. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II, of this Code. 
Sec. 14-224. - Hawking, peddling, soliciting, and canvassing prohibited without license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler, solicitor or canvasser, as defined in subsection (1) of this section, to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Definition. 
a.  A hawker, peddler, canvasser or solicitor is defined as any person or persons, whether a citizen or resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, in a residential area, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature or for services to be furnished or performed, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such person is collecting advance payments on such sales, or engaging in any act which directs attention to any of such sales, or other activity, for the purpose of promoting, either directly or indirectly, the interests thereof by sales, including, but not limited to, the distribution of advertising materials, leaflets, flyers and the like, that is accomplished by physically placing same on any portion of the property of a resident of the city. 
b.  This definition shall include any person who hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
c.  Persons and organizations who have obtained an exemption pursuant to 26 USC subsection 501(c) (the Internal Revenue Code), and persons and organizations who are hawking, peddling, canvassing or soliciting for the benefit of, on behalf of, or are affiliated with, persons and organizations who have obtained an exemption pursuant to 26 USC subsection 501(c) are specifically declared not to be hawkers, peddlers, solicitors or canvassers and they are therefore, exempt from the provisions of this section. When requested, those exempt under this provision shall provide evidence of said exemption. 
(2)  State home solicitation permit. If a hawker, peddler, canvasser or solicitor has obtained a home solicitation permit through the clerk of the circuit court pursuant to F.S. ch. 501, such person shall submit the approved permit to the finance department in lieu of the application and application fee required in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. The finance director shall execute a city license addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the specific business as previously permitted pursuant to F.S. ch. 501, and shall return said license, along with the permit from the clerk of the circuit court, to the hawker, peddler, canvasser, or solicitor. The licensee shall be required to otherwise comply with all the requirements of subsections (6) through (8) of this section in addition to the requirements of F.S. ch. 501. Solicitors who are exempt from the state home solicitation permit requirements pursuant to F.S. § 501.022(1)(b) are hereby exempt from this section. 
(3)  Applications. To apply for a license under this section, a written sworn application shall be submitted in duplicate on a form to be furnished by the finance department, which shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, business and agent representing business; 
b.  Permanent address and local address of the applicant, business and agent representing business; 
c.  A brief description of the nature of the business, goods and services to be sold or advertised; 
d.  The name and address of each employee or agent who will be engaged in the door-to-door activities for which the license is being applied; 
e.  The length of time during which the door-to-door activity is desired; provided, however, that no permit shall be issued for longer than one hundred eighty (180) days; 
f.  A clear, distinguishable photograph of each employee who will be engaged in the door-to-door activity being requested, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant; 
g.  The applicant's sworn affidavit whether or not the applicant and/or employees who will be engaged in the door-to-door activities have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance and specifying the nature of the offense; and 
h.  The applicant's sworn affidavit dated not more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying that the applicant is free of contagious, infectious or communicable diseases. 
(4)  Nonrefundable administrative fee. At the time of filing the application, a nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid for each employee who will be engaged in the door-to-door activity. 
(5)  Issuance of license. The license shall be issued within three (3) days of the submittal of a complete application and payment of the administrative fee or within three (3) days of the submittal of a state home solicitation permit to the finance department. 
(6)  Badge. At the time of delivery of the license, the finance department shall issue a badge, which shall contain the expiration date of the license, the name of the business conducting the door-to-door activity, and a picture of the individual who is conducting the door-to-door activity. A separate and identical badge shall be worn in a conspicuous place on the front of the outer garment by each person who is engaged in the door-to-door activity. 
(7)  Exhibition of badge. Hawkers, peddlers, solicitors and canvassers shall exhibit their badge at the request of any citizen. 
(8)  Posting of no solicitation signs. Private homeowners and businesses may post a "No Solicitation" sign or a similar sign which communicates that hawking, peddling, canvassing, or soliciting is not desired. Hawking, peddling, canvassing, or soliciting is prohibited when a "No Solicitation" or similar sign is posted, and violators will be subject to a revocation of license and the penalties of this article. 
(9)  Enforcement. Any police officer or other authorized code enforcement official of the city shall require any person seen hawking, peddling, soliciting or canvassing, who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce the person's solicitor's or canvasser's license and to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(10)  Revocation of licenses. (Criminal penalties might also apply.) 
a.  Licenses issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by the city manager or designee, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on business as solicitor or as canvasser; 
3.  Any violation of this section; or 
4.  Conducting the business of hawking, peddling, soliciting or canvassing, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a nuisance as defined in section 10-4(a). 
b.  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at the local address specified in the person's license application at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(11)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager or designee in the denial or revocation of a license may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within fourteen (14) days after written notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's local address as specified in the person's license application, by filing a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal with the city clerk, who shall set a time for a hearing by the city council on such appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant by mailing notice to the licensee at the local address specified in the person's license application. The decision and order of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 2001, § 14.140; Ord. No. 40, 11-5-1957; Ord. No. 652, 4-5-1988; Ord. No. 875, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 894, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 917, 4-16-1996) 
Sec. 14-225. - Solicitation in public rights-of-way prohibited. 
    Solicitation for donations and sales, as well as any type of dissemination of information, tracts, documents, literature, merchandise, flowers, objects and any type of printed or non-printed matter is prohibited on the public rights-of-way, thoroughfares and streets of the city. Persons advertising for events, services or goods, including but not limited to, car washes, sales and charitable fund raisers, shall not be permitted on the public rights-of-way, thoroughfares and streets of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 14.145; Ord. No. 652, 4-5-1988) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; criminal code, F.S. chs. 775-899; obscenity, F.S. ch. 847; lost or abandoned property, F.S. ch. 705. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit within the city, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor, civil infraction or criminal violation, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
State Law reference- Criminal code, F.S. chs. 775-896. 
Sec. 16-2. - Juveniles; curfew. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the welfare of minors by: 
(1)  Reducing the likelihood that minors will be the victims of criminal acts during the curfew hours; 
(2)  Reducing the likelihood that minors will become involved in criminal acts or exposed to drug trafficking during curfew hours; 
(3)  Aiding parents in carrying out their responsibility to exercise reasonable supervision of minors entrusted to their care; and 
(4)  Aiding parents in carrying out their responsibility to ensure mandatory school attendance of minors entrusted to their care. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Minor means any person under the age of sixteen (16), also stated as any person fifteen (15) years or less years of age. 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor: 
(1)  As a natural or adoptive parent; 
(2)  As a legal guardian; 
(3)  As a person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)  As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court. 
(c)  Curfew for minors. The mayor and city council impose a curfew on minors in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday. 
(d)  Exceptions. Subsection (c) of this section shall not apply under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by a parent; 
(2)  When a minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parents' place in accompanying said minor during specified curfew hours; 
(3)  When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and right of assembly, provided the minor participating in such activity is carrying a statement signed by such minor's parent or by an adult specified in subsection (d)(2) of this section, specifying the nature, purpose and hours of such activity; 
(4)  When returning home, by direct route from an activity authorized under subsection (d)(3) of this section; 
(5)  When the minor is, with parental consent, traveling in a motor vehicle. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through the city. This also exempts interstate travel beginning or ending in the city; 
(6)  When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor; 
(7)  When the minor carries a card of employment renewable each calendar month, signed by such minor's employer, stating such minor's home address and place, hours and address of employment, a reasonable time shall be allowed for travel to and from work during curfew hours; 
(8)  When the minor is engaged in an emergency errand with consent of such minor's parent or other adult as specified in subsection (d)(2) of this section, if practicable; 
(9)  When otherwise authorized by such minor's parent or other adult specified in subsection (d)(2) of this section when the minor carries proof of such authorization, including the address and hours of the authorized activity. 
(Code 2001, § 14.150; Ord. No. 686, 4-4-1989; Ord. No. 696, 7-18-1989) 
State Law reference- Local juvenile curfew ordinances, F.S. § 877.20 et seq. 
Sec. 16-3. - Public buildings; injure, deface, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, mar, injure or deface any public building or property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The city council, in its sole discretion, may offer a reward up to $500.00 to be paid to any person whom the city council determines to have provided substantial information to the city police department leading to an arrest and conviction for violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14.160; Ord. No. 40, 11-5-1957; Ord. No. 621, 7-21-1987) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, F.S. § 806.13. 
Sec. 16-4. - Swimming in Hillsborough River prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in the Hillsborough River from any public property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 14.165; Ord. No. 40, 11-5-1957; Ord. No. 48, 9-2-1958) 
Sec. 16-5. - Discharging or abandoning unused hypodermic syringe or hypodermic syringe needle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to abandon or discard any hypodermic syringe or hypodermic syringe needle which has not been first rendered permanently unusable as a hypodermic syringe or hypodermic syringe needle by demolishing, obliterating or otherwise rendering it permanently useless before abandoning or discarding same. 
(Code 2001, § 14.175; Ord. No. 267, 7-11-1972) 
Sec. 16-6. - Use of off-highway motor vehicles on private property or on public property not open for vehicular use. 
(a)  Findings and purpose. 
(1)  The city council finds that the driving, riding and use of motorcycles, motor bikes, mini-bikes, dirt bikes, trail bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters, jeeps or other forms of off-highway motor vehicles on public and private property within the limits of the city is and can be the cause of noise and dust and of the destruction of plants, other ecological damage, and damage to landscaping and other personal and real property, which conduct adversely affects the comfort and privacy of occupants and residents of the city. Because said conduct may be intermittent, fleeting, moving and/or caused by persons who are minors, the noise and public nuisance provisions of this Code, as well as other legal remedies, are inadequate to control said conduct and its adverse effects. The provisions of this section relating to the regulation of motorcycles, motor bikes, mini-bikes, dirt bikes, trail bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters, jeeps, or other forms of off-highway motor vehicles are therefore necessary for the public welfare. 
(2)  The city council declares that the purpose of this section is to exercise the general police power in order to protect the enjoyment and use of public and private property, to protect the rights of privacy, to preserve property and personal values, and to promote peace and quiet within the city by regulating the use of motorcycles, motor bikes, mini-bikes, dirt bikes, trail bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters, jeeps, or other forms of off-highway motor vehicles on public and private property within the city. 
(b)  No person shall operate upon the private property of another or upon any public property which is not held open to the public for any vehicular use and which is not subject to the provision of the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law (F.S. ch. 316), a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, motor bike, mini-bike, dirt bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep, or other forms of off-highway motor vehicle. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not prohibit the operation of off-highway motor vehicles upon the property of another when said motor vehicles are: 
(1)  Authorized emergency vehicles; 
(2)  Used for ingress to and egress from, and parking upon, parking lots or structures open to the public or private parking lots; 
(3)  Motor vehicles operated upon property used for a motor vehicle riding area which has received approval from the city and is being operated as a business; 
(4)  The property of any governmental agency; including any motor vehicle riding facility operated by the city; 
(5)  Used by the owner of the land or the owner's family, provided the property is zoned for such use; 
(6)  Upon private property for ingress and egress only. 
(d)  The operation of any motorcycle, motor bike, mini-bike, dirt bike, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep or other forms of an off-highway motor vehicle upon any vacant or unimproved lands within the city limits shall constitute a prima facie violation of this section unless the operator is able immediately to exhibit signed written permission by the owner of the land for such use. 
(e)  Each parent and/or guardian of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years may be charged under this section with having permitted a violation of any of the provisions of this section. Subsequent to receipt of a written warning from a police officer of the city, each parent and/or guardian so warned shall be assumed knowingly to have permitted any subsequent violation and shall be subject, upon conviction, to penalties identical to those provided for the violator for having permitted a violation of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14.180(a)-(f)) 
Sec. 16-7. - Noise control. 
(a)  Loud and raucous noise prohibited. No person shall willfully make, or cause to be made or continue to make any loud and raucous noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume level, duration and character annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the corporate limits of the city. The term shall be limited to loud and raucous noise heard upon the public streets, in any public park, in any school or public building or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any church, other house of worship, hospital, or upon the grounds thereof while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of the public or invitees or licensees, or in any occupied residential unit which is not the source of the noise or upon the grounds thereof, and in any event from a location not less than fifty (50) feet from the source of the noise, measured in a straight line from the noise source. 
(b)  Enumerated. The following acts, subject to the limitations provided above and the exceptions contained within this section, are declared to be in violation of subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine or stationary internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud and raucous noises therefrom. 
(2)  Pile drivers, etc. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday or any time on Sunday of any earth mover, loader, crane, pile driver, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoists or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud and raucous noise. 
(3)  Blowers, etc. The operation of blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, which causes loud and raucous noise, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled or such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(4)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any whistle, horn or other audible device so as to create a loud and raucous noise. 
(5)  Radios, amplifiers, boom boxes, etc. The use, operation, or playing of any radio, amplifier, tape recorder, receiving set, boom box, musical instrument, or other device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to cause loud and raucous noise, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day. 
(6)  Sound trucks. No amplifier or loudspeaker in, upon, or attached to a sound truck or other device for amplifying sound shall be operated or permitted to operate within the city for advertising purposes or to attract the attention of the public. 
(7)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day. 
(8)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which habitually causes a loud and raucous noise. 
(9)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded in such manner as to create loud grating, grinding, rattling or other loud and raucous noise, or which is not equipped with a muffler in good working order so as to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(10)  Loading and unloading. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of a vehicle or with the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day. 
(11)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday or any time on Sunday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, the city manager or designee may issue a permit for such work to be done during non-designated hours. 
(12)  Noises heard within schools, public buildings, churches, etc. The creation of any loud and raucous noise heard within any school, public building, church or other place of worship, or the grounds thereof, while in use, which interferes with the workings of such institution. 
(13)  Noises to attract attention. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors or the use of any drum or other instrument or device which creates a loud and raucous noise. 
(14)  Lawn maintenance equipment. The use or operation of mowers, edgers, blowers, chain saws, or other similar equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(c)  Persons responsible. Any person, owner, agent or supervisor in charge of operating, ordering, directing or allowing the operation or maintenance of a device or machine creating noise as prohibited in this section shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. 
(d)  Exceptions. The following events, activities and actions shall not be considered "loud and raucous noise" under this section: 
(1)  Events, activities, and actions for which a permit has been issued by the city manager or designee; 
(2)  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls; 
(3)  Radios, sirens, horns, and bells on police, fire, and other emergency response vehicles; 
(4)  Parades, fireworks displays and other special events for which authorization has been obtained from the city manager or designee; 
(5)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm; 
(6)  Religious worship activities, including but not limited to the ringing of bells and playing of organs; 
(7)  Activities and repairs in response to natural disasters, weather conditions, or other public emergencies when coordinated by the city or a public utility; 
(8)  Road construction or repair required to minimize impact of activities during peak traffic periods. 
(Code 2001, § 14.190; Ord. No. 975, 4-7-1998) 
State Law reference- Florida Motor Vehicle Noise Prevention and Control Act of 1974, F.S. § 403.415; liability of sport shooting ranges for noise violations, F.S. § 823.16. 
Sec. 16-8. - Roller skates and skateboards. 
(a)  Public property. 
(1)  No person shall use or operate roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices on any public street, road, alley, right-of-way or sidewalk within any commercial zoning district in the city or upon posted city public property, unless specifically permitted and posted for such purposes. In addition, upon determination that the use of roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare at any particular location, the city council may direct the city staff to post signage prohibiting the use of roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices on any public property. 
(2)  No person using or operating roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices on a sidewalk owned by the city shall pass a pedestrian at a distance closer than three (3) feet. If such sidewalk is not sufficiently wide to allow the roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices to pass the pedestrian while maintaining the three (3) foot distance, use or operation of the roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices shall cease and the user or operator shall walk past the pedestrian until such time as the three (3) foot distance can be maintained. 
(3)  Roller skates, skateboards and other similar devices shall only be used or operated in the upright position and no person shall ride, use, or operate roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices in a prone, crouching, other than upright position. 
(4)  Roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices shall be used or operated only during the daylight hours. No person shall use or operate roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices later than one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. 
(5)  Wheelchairs and other such devices to assist handicapped or physically impaired persons are excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(6)  Violation of this section may result in the temporary confiscation of the violator's roller skates, skateboard or other similar device. 
(b)  Private property. No person shall use or operate roller skates, skateboards or other similar devices on private property, zoned for either residential or commercial use, that is posted to prohibit such operation. 
(Code 2001, § 14.196; Ord. No. 695, 7-18-1989) 
Secs. 16-9-16-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 

Sec. 16-35. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Temple Terrace Fireworks Ordinance." 
(Code 2001, § 14.205) 
Sec. 16-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the Temple Terrace Fire Department. 
    Fireworks, sparklers, retailer, wholesaler, distributor, and manufacturer shall have the same meaning as specified in F.S. § 791.01. 
(Code 2001, § 14.220) 
Sec. 16-37. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 16-38. - Administrative sanctions. 
(a)  The fire department has the authority to immediately order the cessation of the sale of fireworks at any business or location that is selling fireworks without all required permits until such time as corrective action is taken and the missing permits are obtained. Upon notification by the fire department that sales are to cease, the seller shall take appropriate action to secure its fireworks inventory immediately and to prevent the further sale by securing the fireworks in an appropriate off-premises locked facility that meets state and local fire code standards. As an alternative to securing the fireworks off site, the business may cease operations until such time as the required permits are obtained and during this time store the inventory on site if the location is secure and meets state and local fire code requirements. It shall be the obligation of the seller to ensure that adequate security is in place during any period they cease operations. Prior to resuming the sale of fireworks, the seller shall notify the department of its intent to resume sales and of the corrective action taken. 
(b)  If a seller has been convicted of a violation of this article or of F.S. ch. 791, and within twelve (12) months of that conviction is convicted again of a violation of this article or F.S. ch. 791, its permit to sell fireworks under section 16-43 shall be suspended. The suspension shall be in addition to any sanction otherwise available under state law or this Code. The first suspension shall be for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(c)  In the event of any successive conviction of a violation of this article or the provisions of F.S. ch. 791 occurring within twenty-four (24) months of a suspension of permit under this section, the seller's permit to sell fireworks shall be suspended for a period of one year. Upon notification of a suspension of the permit to sell fireworks, the seller shall immediately remove their fireworks inventory from their premises and store them in a secure off-site location which meets all appropriate state and local fire codes. Alternatively, the seller may cease operations during the period of suspension if their premises are secure and otherwise meet the requirements of state and local fire codes. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a conviction includes the payment of the assessed fine by not contesting the notice of violation where there is no court appearance. 
(e)  Parents or guardians are responsible for the violations of minors. 
(Code 2001, § 14.225) 
Sec. 16-39. - Storage and sale of sparklers. 
    Sparklers shall be stored and/or sold in the corporate areas in accordance with the zoning ordinance, the fire code, and all related fire prevention regulations, city license laws, permits issued by the local fire official having jurisdiction, and all other state and local laws. 
(Code 2001, § 14.230) 
Sec. 16-40. - Prohibition against fireworks; exceptions; permits and regulations. 
(a)  Except as provided in F.S. § 791.02, 791.04, or 791.07, or under this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to offer for sale at wholesale or retail, expose for sale at wholesale or retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the city. 
(b)  The department shall develop an affidavit which all sellers of fireworks within the city shall use to determine the entitlement of any purchaser at retail or wholesale to buy fireworks. 
(c)  The purchaser of any fireworks must furnish to the seller, at the time of sale, proof of identification and, if applicable, proof that the purchaser is registered with the division of the state fire marshal and is otherwise in compliance with F.S. ch. 791. The seller shall retain a copy of any proof of registration presented. 
(d)  The seller must maintain an on-site record of all sales, including the name and address of each purchaser, the form of the purchaser's identification presented, along with any unique identifier associated with the identification (e.g., driver's license number), and where required, proof of registration and compliance with F.S. ch. 791. If the seller determines that registration under F.S. ch. 791 is not required, then the basis for such exception or exemption shall be recorded on a form approved by the department. 
(e)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who is not registered with the division of the state fire marshal and who, pursuant to F.S. § 791.04, purchases fireworks for shipment directly out of the state, shall not be allowed to take possession of such fireworks. The seller shall retain the possession of such fireworks and shall be responsible for shipping all fireworks purchased to the purchaser or other recipient at an out-of-state point of delivery. 
(f)  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who, pursuant to rules promulgated by the department of agriculture and consumer services under F.S. § 791.07, purchases firecrackers for frightening birds must provide to the seller a copy of the statement that has been filed with and stamped as received by the county sheriff's office pursuant to the rules prescribed by the state department of agriculture and consumer services. The seller shall be required to maintain the stamped copy of the statement in addition to the information required in subsection (d) of this section. 
(g)  The purchaser of fireworks to be used by a railroad or other transportation agency must provide a copy of the business license or other government-issued document evidencing that the purchaser is a legitimate railroad or transportation agency. A commercial driver's license, by itself, does not meet the requirements of this section. The seller must maintain a copy of such document. 
(h)  The purchaser of fireworks to be used in quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use must produce a copy of the quarry or mine permit or business license or other governmentally-issued document showing that the purchaser is operating a mine, quarry, or other industrial enterprise. The seller shall maintain a copy of such proof and note the use for which the fireworks shall be used. The seller shall also record the location where the fireworks will be used. 
(i)  The purchaser of fireworks to be used in a public display such as those authorized by the department must produce a copy of the current permit from a county or municipality, and the seller must keep a copy of this permit with the record of sale. 
(j)  All appropriate local and state permits, registrations, certificates, and licenses must be displayed at all retail, wholesale, distributing, or manufacturing sites. 
(k)  The seller must maintain copies of the records required by this section at the location where the sale took place for a period of four (4) years from the date of the sale. If the location of the sale was in a temporary facility, the record must be maintained at that site for the duration of the existence of the temporary facility and thereafter for the remainder of the four (4) years in a location within the county, which location shall be listed on the application for the permit from the department. These records must be available and provided immediately upon request for inspection by fire or law enforcement officials. In the event that the sales location, other than a temporary site, closes or moves, the records required by this section to be retained must be stored at a location in the county where they will be readily available for inspection by the department, fire officials or law enforcement. The seller shall advise the department of any change in the location of these records. 
(Code 2001, § 14.235) 
Sec. 16-41. - Vendor receipts. 
    Every vendor of fireworks or sparklers shall be required to provide to each purchaser of such item a receipt showing the vendor's name and address. Such receipt shall be provided at the time of purchase. Failure to do so at the time of the transaction shall constitute a violation of applicable law and shall be punishable in accordance therewith. 
(Code 2001, § 14.240) 
Sec. 16-42. - Labeling requirements. 
    Any device permitted by this article shall have printed in English on the label or container thereof the total weight of combustible substance, the name of the chemical composition, and a brief statement describing its action when ignited. 
(Code 2001, § 14.245) 
Sec. 16-43. - Fire department to issue permits governing the sale of fireworks. 
(a)  The fire department is authorized to issue permits, which shall be required for all sales of fireworks within the city. 
(b)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaging in the sale, at retail or wholesale, or in the distributing or manufacturing of fireworks must first apply for and secure a permit from the department. Any sale of fireworks without first obtaining a permit is a violation of this article. 
(c)  In order to obtain a permit, the applicant must provide proof of compliance with all state and federal regulations regarding the storage, display for sale, and sale of fireworks at each location listed on the application, and payment of the permit fee established by the city to cover the city's costs of administering this article. 
(d)  The application for such permit shall include proof that the applicant is registered with the division of the state fire marshal as a wholesaler, distributor or manufacturer of fireworks pursuant to F.S. § 791.01. 
(e)  The applicant must show evidence of financial responsibility pursuant to section 16-44. 
(f)  The applicant must disclose the names and addresses of all persons or entities having an interest (financial, security or otherwise) in the inventory that will be offered for sale. 
(g)  Each location at which the applicant intends to display fireworks for sale or sell fireworks must be listed on the application. The application must also list the name and address of the manager in charge of each location. The permit shall be issued in the name of the applicant only and shall not be transferable. 
(h)  The application for the permit shall also list the nature of any other sales or business operations of the applicant which are to take place at the permitted premises. 
(i)  Once a permit is issued, the permit holder shall have a continuing obligation to notify the department of any change in the information set forth in the application for the permit including, but not limited to, any changes in physical address or closure of the permit holders operations at any location where the permit holder does business in the city. 
(j)  As a condition of maintaining the permit, the permit holder must comply with all federal, state, and local regulations governing the sale and storage of fireworks, and must maintain all necessary permits required by federal, state, and local law, ordinance or regulation. The permit holder must also comply with the recordkeeping provisions of this article. 
(k)  The department is authorized to issue temporary fireworks sales permits which shall be in force for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days and annual fireworks sales permits which shall remain in effect for no longer than twelve (12) months. 
(Code 2001, § 14.250) 
Sec. 16-44. - Evidence of financial responsibility. 
    In furtherance of the provisions of this article, all sellers of fireworks, must keep in force an insurance policy showing general, comprehensive, liability and property damage insurance coverage on an occurrence basis with minimum limits in the policy of not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit coverage for each loss that may result from the activities of the sellers. Sellers must maintain workers' compensation coverage as required pursuant to F.S. ch. 440. A failure to maintain this required coverage after the procurement of a permit shall be a violation of this article and grounds for suspension of their permit from the department, and the sale of the permitted goods as set forth in this article shall cease until such time as the required insurance is obtained. 
(Code 2001, § 14.255; Ord. No. 1107, 12-2-2003) 
Secs. 16-45-16-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Electrical and alarm system contracting, F.S. § 489.501 et seq.; alarm verification calls required, F.S. § 489.529; audible alarm shutoff, F.S. § 489.530. 

Sec. 16-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any mechanical, electrical or radio-controlled device which is designed for detection of any fire or unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others of a fire or the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Excluded from the definition of alarm systems are devices which are designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible in or from any motor vehicle and auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone systems from damage or disruption of service. 
    Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation, excluding such telephone lines exclusively dedicated to an alarm system which are permanently active and terminate within the communication center of the Temple Terrace fire or police department, or that of any other fire or law enforcement agency. 
    Commercial premises means any structure or area other than a residential premises. 
    False alarm means any activation of an alarm system not caused by a fire or by forced entry or attempted forced entry, robbery or attempted robbery. 
    Fire officer means the fire chief of the City of Temple Terrace Fire Department. 
    Law enforcement officer means the chief of police of the City of Temple Terrace Police Department. 
    Residential premises means a structure or combination of structures which serve as dwelling units, including both single-family and multi-family units. 
    Response means the dispatch of fire units or a police officer or other law enforcement personnel pursuant to an alarm. 
(Code 2001, § 6.600) 
Sec. 16-63. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 16-64. - Registration of alarm systems. 
    Every person who owns, operates or leases any alarm system within the city or who shall own, operate or lease an alarm system in the future, shall, within thirty (30) days of the installation of the alarm system, register the system on a form to be provided by the police or fire department, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The type, make and model of the alarm system; 
(2)  Whether installed in residential or commercial premises; 
(3)  The name, address, business and/or home telephone number of the owner, operator or lessee of the alarm system; 
(4)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of not less than two (2) persons to be notified in the event of an alarm activation. 
(Code 2001, § 6.605) 
Sec. 16-65. - Procedure and penalties following false alarms; corrective action. 
(a)  The following procedure and/or penalties shall be prescribed for each response to a false alarm: 
(1)  First through third false alarm. The occupant of the premises or, if it is unoccupied, the owner of the premises, shall, within ten (10) days after the response to the false alarm, file a written report, on forms provided by the police or fire department, whichever responds to the alarm, setting forth the cause of such false alarm and the corrective action taken. 
(2)  Fourth and succeeding false alarm response. For each response to a false alarm occurring within six (6) months after such third response to a false alarm and for each succeeding response within six (6) months of the preceding response, the occupant of the premises or, if it is unoccupied, the owner of the premises will be charged a fee established by the city and shall be required to take corrective action. 
(b)  If such fourth false alarm or any succeeding false alarm results from the failure to take necessary corrective action, the law enforcement officer or fire officer may order disconnection of such alarm system; provided, however, that no disconnection shall be ordered on any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. An order of disconnection shall be rescinded by the law enforcement officer or fire officer upon presentation of evidence of corrective action, subsequent inspection, and finding by the law enforcement officer or fire officer that adequate corrective action has been taken. 
(Code 2001, § 6.610) 
Sec. 16-66. - Right to hearing upon assessment or disconnection. 
    Any person who shall be assessed a penalty for multiple false alarms or who shall be ordered to disconnect any alarm system shall be entitled to an administrative hearing before the fire officer or law enforcement officer or designee to show cause why such assessment or disconnection should not be made. 
(Code 2001, § 6.615) 
Sec. 16-67. - Notification and return to premises upon alarm activation; penalty for failure to return. 
    The persons listed on the registration form shall be notified of any activation of an alarm system. Any persons so notified, who knowingly or purposefully fails or refuses to return to the premises within one hour after notification of the activation of an alarm system, whether false or not, will be charged a fee in the amount established by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 6.620) 
Sec. 16-68. - Automatic dialing devices. 
    No person shall install, maintain, own, possess or operate any automatic dialing devices regulated or programmed to make connection with any telephone number installed in any fire or law enforcement facility for more than one minute, except to such telephone number as determined and designated by the fire officer or law enforcement officer. In addition thereto, the law enforcement officer or fire officer may establish a reasonable fee to defray the installation and recurring charge for such special telephone equipment. 
(Code 2001, § 6.625; Ord. No. 424, 10-6-1981) 
Secs. 16-69-16-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1369 , § 2, adopted June 16, 2015, repealed article IV, §§ 16-95-16-101, which pertained to civil rights. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 16-95-16-101. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - PARKS, RECREATION, LEISURE SERVICES AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park property means and covers all areas, buildings, locations and facilities defined in this section. 
    Parks, parkways, recreational areas means parks, wayside parks, parkways, playgrounds, recreation fields, auditoriums, ranges, and buildings, lakes, streams, canals, lagoons, waterways, water areas, and beaches therein, and all public facilities conducted on grounds, buildings and structures in the city which are under the control of or assigned for upkeep, maintenance or operation by the leisure services department. 
(Code 2001, § 15.150) 
Sec. 18-20. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of the article are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Sec. 18-21. - Authority of police chief and park officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the police chief and the leisure services director to enforce all provisions of permits issued. 
(b)  Besides the rules and regulations as set out in this article, the leisure services director shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for regulation of park use pursuant to the preservation of health, safety and/or welfare of the public in furtherance of keeping with the mandates and provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this article or any violation of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto shall authorize the park personnel to remove the violator from the park area. Said removal shall be effectuated by park personnel requesting the violator to leave the park area. Failure of any such violator to leave the park area after direction and request has been made by park personnel, shall constitute a trespass. 
(Code 2001, § 15.255) 
Sec. 18-22. - Traffic ordinances and state vehicle laws. 
    The traffic laws of this state and applicable state vehicle laws shall apply in and about all park property and in addition thereto the following traffic regulations shall be applicable: 
(1)  Speed limit in park areas is ten (10) miles per hour or as posted. 
(2)  No person driving, operating, controlling, or propelling any vehicle, motorized, horse-drawn, or self-propelled, shall use any other than the regularly designated paved or improved park roads or driveways except when directed to do so by law enforcement officers or leisure services department employees. 
(3)  No driver or operator of any vehicle shall obstruct traffic or park or stop on any road or driveway except at places so designated or in case of an emergency beyond the driver or operator's control. At places so designated a vehicle may be stopped for a period of no more than fifteen (15) minutes in order for the occupant to view the scenic features. 
(4)  No truck, commercial vehicle, or bus of any type shall be driven on any park road or property without authorization from the leisure services department, except that those trucks and buses used for transporting persons to a park for recreation purposes will be afforded use of ingress and egress to park roads and parking facilities as provided for conventional passenger vehicles. 
(5)  No person shall ride, drive or propel any bicycle, tricycle, motorcycle, scooter, or similar vehicle being motor propelled or self-propelled on any but the regular vehicular park roads and/or designated areas for that class vehicle, except such vehicles with motors off, may be pushed by hand not faster than a walk over grassy areas, wood tracts or specially designated paved areas normally reserved for the use of pedestrians. 
(6)  No person shall park a vehicle any place on park property other than in the regular designated facilities provided for that particular type of vehicle, unless directed otherwise by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  No person or organization shall accept any fee or gratuity for any service concerning the parking of a vehicle except those employees assigned to areas where a stated fee is charged by the leisure services department. 
(Code 2001, § 15.155) 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, F.S. chs. 316-324. 
Sec. 18-23. - Preservation of property. 
(a)  No person shall damage or remove plants or plant materials, trees or parts thereof or any flowers whatsoever from any leisure services department property, except that park personnel may be empowered to make such removals, and scientists and students of botany may be given special written specimen collecting permits by the leisure services department, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the leisure services department. 
(b)  No person or agency shall make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means, or shall construct or erect any building or structure whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public utility into, upon, across or over any park or recreation lands unless authorized by easement or by permit issued by the leisure services department in accordance with the rules and regulations of the leisure services department. 
(c)  No fires shall be built by any person against or adjacent to any park building, structure, tree or plant or near the property of others or in any area of any park except in such areas as are specifically designated for fire building, nor shall any person drop, throw or permit to be scattered by any means lighted matches, burning tobacco products or any other inflammable material within any park area or any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Code 2001, § 15.160) 
Sec. 18-24. - Protection and preservation of wildlife. 
(a)  No person shall molest, harm, frighten, kill, net, trap, snare, hunt, chase, shoot, throw or propel by any means missiles at any wildlife creature (except in self-defense) be it animal, bird, or reptile roaming free about a park or in captivity in a zoo cage, nor shall any person remove or possess the young of any wild animal or the nest or eggs of any reptile or bird or collect, remove possess, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift any specimen dead or alive of any of the group, including tree snails. 
(b)  No person shall disobey posted notice prohibiting feeding to animals, birds or reptiles. 
(c)  No person shall place, dump, abandon or leave any animal, reptile or bird, either wild or domestic, in an effort to find a home for such creature, on the grounds of any park. 
(Code 2001, § 15.165) 
Sec. 18-25. - Bathing and swimming. 
    No person shall swim, wade, or bathe in waters or waterways of any park other than at such places as are provided for such activities and in compliance with the rules of these areas. 
(Code 2001, § 15.170) 
Sec. 18-26. - Boating. 
    No person shall bring into or operate any boat, yacht, cruiser, canoe, raft or other watercraft (except toys too small for human occupancy) into any park property watercourses, bays, lagoons, lakes, canals, rivers, ponds, or sloughs other than those so designated for such use or purpose by the leisure services department and then only in strict confirmation with the leisure services department boating regulations. 
(Code 2001, § 15.175) 
Sec. 18-27. - Picnic area; use. 
(a)  No person shall picnic, lunch or cook in any park area not specifically designated for such usage. 
(b)  No person shall build, light, or cause to be lighted any fire upon the ground or other object in any park area except in an approved grill, stove, fireplace or other suitable container, nor shall any person starting a fire leave the area without extinguishing the fire. 
(c)  No person shall use a grill or other device in such a manner as to burn, char, mar or blemish any bench, table or other object of park property. 
(d)  The leisure services department shall regulate activities in picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. 
(Code 2001, § 15.185) 
Sec. 18-28. - Games, etc. 
(a)  No person shall engage in an activity within any park that is not consistent with the intended use of the facility. 
(b)  No person shall engage in any activity within the park areas that is dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of others, and no person or persons shall engage in any activity within the park area that interferes with the use and equipment of the park and its facilities by others. 
(c)  No person or organization shall conduct raffles, bingo games, card games for money or drawings for prizes or participate in any other forms of gambling in unauthorized areas whether for charity or otherwise. 
(d)  No person shall engage in an organized athletic activity in any park or parks and recreation area without first obtaining a permit from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules provided therefor. 
(Code 2001, § 15.190) 
Sec. 18-29. - Horseback riding. 
    No person shall engage in horseback riding in any park or leisure services department area other than those where provisions for such is provided by clearly marked bridle paths, trails, and other necessary features and then only upon thoroughly broken and properly restrained animals that are ridden with care, prevented from grazing, straying unattended, untethered to any rock, tree or shrub and not ridden or led on any parkland other than that so designated. 
(Code 2001, § 15.195) 
Sec. 18-30. - Toy firearms, fireworks and explosives. 
(a)  No person may bring into or possess or set off or otherwise cause to explode in any building or in any park area any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, toy firearms or cannons or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material or any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound may explode, discharge or burn, unless the person first obtains a written permit from the fire chief. 
(b)  Parents or guardians shall be held responsible and accountable for the actions of minors in regards to the prohibitions in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 15.200) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 
Sec. 18-31. - Pollution of waters. 
    Using the fountains, ponds, lakes, streams, bays or any other bodies of water within the parks, or the tributaries, storm sewers or drains flowing into them as dumping places for any substance or matter or thing which will or may result in the pollution of said waters is prohibited. 
(Code 2001, § 15.205) 
Sec. 18-32. - Refuse and trash. 
    No person shall deposit or drop or place any refuse including, but not limited to, bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste garbage, tobacco products or containers or foil upon the ground or in or on any park property except in the receptacles provided for trash disposal. Such disposition of refuse in the park receptacles can only be used by those persons using the park area for recreational and park activities. 
(Code 2001, § 15.210) 
State Law reference- Littering, F.S. § 403.413 et seq. 
Sec. 18-33. - Times of closing, exceptions, activity. 
(a)  No person shall be or remain in any city park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as follows: 
(1)  Persons may remain in the areas designated as twenty-four-hour boat-launching areas at any time for the sole purpose of boat launching; 
(2)  Persons may remain in lighted city parks solely to engage in the activity for which lighting after 10:00 p.m. has been provided; 
(3)  At any time, pedestrians and vehicles may pass through city parks, without stopping, on the most direct walk or driveway leading from their point of entrance to the exit nearest to their point of destination. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers or city employees in the discharge of their duties or to persons having a written permit issued by the city manager or designee allowing them to be or remain in any part of a city park between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The city manager or designee may establish exceptions to the closing hours as set forth above when it is in the interest of public health, safety or welfare; however, any such exceptions shall be conspicuously posted at the park. 
(b)  No operator of any vehicle shall park, or permit to remain parked, any vehicle on any driveway, parkway, parking area or other park property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., or as otherwise posted, except for in conjunction with designated twenty-four-hour boat-launching facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 15.215; Ord. No. 570, 1-7-1986) 
Sec. 18-34. - Unfinished or withheld parks. 
    No person, except as authorized by the leisure services department, shall enter upon any part of any park which is in an unfinished condition or under construction or withheld from the general public usage in the interest of public safety, health and/or welfare. 
(Code 2001, § 15.220) 
Sec. 18-35. - Use of vehicles. 
(a)  No operator of a vehicle shall tow another vehicle or wheeled device on park roads except when the towed vehicle is used in transporting authorized recreational vehicles or small boats into a designated area or when necessary to remove a disabled vehicle. 
(b)  No vehicles, except those legally authorized to carry passengers for hire or for fare, shall operate in the parks, and such vehicles shall be the only ones which pedestrians may hail for rides. 
(c)  No person shall change any parts, repair or lubricate a vehicle on any park roadway, parkway, driveway, parking lot or other park property. 
(Code 2001, § 15.225) 
Sec. 18-36. - Merchandising, vending, peddling, etc. 
    No person, persons, organization or firm, except concessionaires who have obtained a permit from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules provided therefor, shall expose or offer for sale, rent or trade, any article or thing or station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or merchandise within the limits of any park or recreation area. 
(Code 2001, § 15.230) 
Sec. 18-37. - Advertising and publicity and signs. 
    No person shall advertise or obtain publicity through any means whatsoever within or upon any park property, without obtaining a permit in advance, from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules provided therefor. Such approval shall prohibit damage to or marring of park property or vegetation, disturbance of park patrons, or erection, painting or displaying of anything unsightly or in disharmony with park beauty. 
(Code 2001, § 15.235) 
Sec. 18-38. - Public demonstrations, gathering, performances, speeches, etc. 
(a)  No band, procession, military company, or any company or group with flags, banners, or transparencies, shall be allowed upon any park or parkway or within any park without obtaining a permit in advance from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules provided therefor. Said permit shall clearly define the nature of the activity, the limit of its scope and time and setting forth such other restrictions and requirements as provided by the rules. 
(b)  No entertainment or exhibition shall be given in any park or recreation area without obtaining a permit in advance from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules provided therefor. 
(c)  No public meeting of any kind nor any public speeches by any person, persons, representatives of any political party, social club or society, officer aspirant, religious sect, theatrical or circus group, act, rite or ceremony, or other public exhibition shall be held in any park, parkway, playground or other recreational area without obtaining a permit in advance from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules provided therefor. 
(d)  No permit required by this section shall abridge any First Amendment rights. 
(Code 2001, § 15.240) 
Sec. 18-39. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, drink, consume or possess any opened or unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage at any time in any public park. 
(Code 2001, § 15.245) 
Sec. 18-40. - Loitering in or around certain facilities prohibited. 
    No person shall loiter in or around any leisure services department restroom, dressing room, or bathhouse. 
(Code 2001, § 15.250) 
Sec. 18-41. - Camping. 
    Camping in privately owned trailer units or tents shall be allowed only if a permit has been obtained in advance from the leisure services department in accordance with the rules and regulations provided therefor. 
(Code 2001, § 15.260; Ord. No. 371, 10-17-78; Ord. No. 904, 11-21-1995) 
Secs. 18-42-18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 18-71. - Established. 
    The library board is hereby established as a continuing advisory board. 
(Code 2001, § 12.125; Ord. No. 388, 8-14-1979) 
Sec. 18-72. - Membership, term; filling of vacancies. 
    The library board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city, who shall serve without pay and who shall be appointed by the city council. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years or until their successors shall have been appointed. Any vacancy which occurs shall be filled in accordance with the appointment procedure for the unexpired term. In addition, there are hereby established positions of member emeritus which positions shall be filled by any and all retired head librarians of the city who desire to serve in such position. Members emeritus shall not have voting power. 
(Ord. No. 388, 8-14-1979) 
Sec. 18-73. - Officers. 
    The board shall elect from its membership a chair and vice-chair, both of whom shall serve for one year or until their successors are elected. The vice-chair shall assume all the duties and authority of the chair during chair's absence. 
(Code 2001, § 12.135; Ord. No. 388, 8-14-1979) 
Sec. 18-74. - Meetings minutes, official action. 
    In the performance of its duties as set forth in this article, the board shall hold at least one regular meeting each quarter of the calendar year. Special meetings may be called by the board chair or by the city council. Minutes shall be kept during all meetings with a copy submitted to city council. Three (3) members in attendance shall constitute a quorum; however, all official action of said board shall be by affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members. 
(Code 2001, § 12.140; Ord. No. 388, 8-14-1979) 
Sec. 18-75. - Powers, duties. 
    Subject to the supervision and control of the city council, the board shall: 
(1)  Make and adopt rules, bylaws and regulations for its own guidance and recommend the adoption of rules and regulations for the operation of the library. 
(2)  Participate in efforts to secure adequate funds to carry on the library's program. 
(3)  Know the program and needs of the library and the community; keep abreast of standards and library trends; assist in planning the library program. 
(4)  Establish, support and participate in a planned public relations program. 
(5)  Advise the leisure services director in the preparation of the budget. 
(6)  Support library legislation in the state and nation. 
(7)  Cooperate with the leisure services director in developing policies dealing with book and material selection. 
(8)  Report regularly to the governing body and to the general public. 
(Code 2001, § 12.145; Ord. No. 388, 8-14-1979) 
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; traffic generally, F.S. chs. 316-324; powers of local authorities, F.S. §§ 316.007, 316.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions in F.S. § 316.003 apply to this chapter. 
Sec. 20-2. - Speed restriction. 
    The speed limit at which vehicles can be driven upon the streets, roads or highways of the city shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour, except those state highways and connecting links or extensions thereof under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation, unless otherwise posted after investigation (pursuant to the applicable state statutes) determines that a greater or lesser speed is reasonable and in conformity with criteria promulgated by the department of transportation. 
(Code 2001, § 20.210; Ord. No. 276, 12-19-1972; Ord. No. 692, 5-16-1989) 
State Law reference- Local speed limits, F.S. §§ 316.008(1)(e) and (j), 316.189. 
Sec. 20-3. - Parking. 
    Except as provided in sections 12-859 and 12-923, all noncommercial vehicles may be parked only under the following conditions, otherwise, they are prohibited from residentially-zoned districts: 
(1)  Title. This section may be cited as the "Temple Terrace Parking Ordinance." 
(2)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, except where the context otherwise requires: 
    Access aisle means an area beside or adjacent to a designated disabled parking space, which is striped diagonally to designate it as a no-parking zone, and which is reserved for the temporary exclusive use of persons who have disabled parking permits or license plates and who require extra space to deploy a mobility device, lift, or ramp in order to exit from or enter a vehicle parked in an adjacent designated disabled parking space. 
    Authorized vehicle means a vehicle which has been designated by a city, county, state, or other government as authorized to park within a reserved parking space tow-away zone pursuant to procedures established by the chief of police. 
    Civil penalty means an amount of money imposed by this chapter for a violation which is deemed to be a parking infraction. 
    Clerk means the police patrol division secretary or other person designated by the chief of police as the clerk of parking court and all parking issues. 
    Designated disabled parking space means any parking space prominently outlined with blue paint and posted with a permanent above-grade sign of a color and design approved by the state department of transportation, which is placed on or at a distance of eighty-four (84) inches above the ground to the bottom of the sign, and which bears the international symbol of accessibility and the caption "Parking by Disabled Permit Only." Signs erected after October 1, 1996 shall have the penalty for illegal use of the space, as defined in F.S. § 553.5041(6). 
    Designated official means a county judge, or civil traffic infraction hearing officer, or other official authorized by law to preside over a court or hearing adjudicating traffic infractions. 
    Disabled person means any person who is currently certified: 
(1)  To have any of the disabilities listed in F.S. § 320.0848 that render the person unable to walk two hundred (200) feet without stopping to rest; or 
(2)  As being legally blind pursuant to F.S. § 320.0848; and who has been issued a disabled parking permit or license plate pursuant to F.S. § 316.1958, 320.084, 320.0842, 320.0843, 320.0845 or 320.848. 
    Officer means an employee or volunteer working for the city who is authorized to enforce parking regulations who has successfully completed a training program for parking enforcement as approved by the chief of police and conducted by a criminal justice standards and training certified instructor. This includes anyone designated and trained by the chief of police or designee. 
    Parking ticket means an official form used by the chief of police or designee used to notify the owner of a vehicle that said vehicle is parked, stopped, or standing in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Reserved parking space tow-away zone means a parking area located on property owned or leased by the city that has been designated as "Reserved Parking Space, Tow-Away Zone" under procedures established by the chief of police, from which an unauthorized vehicle may be removed at the owner's expense. 
    Unauthorized vehicle means a vehicle which has not been designated by a county, state, or other government as authorized to park within a reserved parking space tow-away zone, pursuant to procedures established by the chief of police. 
(3)  Stopping, standing and parking in specified locations. Within the city, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions, of a police officer or official traffic control device: 
a.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
1.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
2.  On a sidewalk; 
3.  Within an intersection; 
4.  On a crosswalk; 
5.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the department of transportation indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
6.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
7.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure on a highway; 
8.  On a bicycle path; 
9.  At any place where an official traffic control device prohibits stopping; 
10.  On the roadway or shoulder of a limited access facility, except as provided by regulation of the department of transportation, or on the paved portion of a connecting ramp; except that a vehicle which is disabled or in a condition improper to be driven as a result of mechanical failure or crash may be parked on such shoulder for a period not to exceed six (6) hours. This provision is not applicable to a person stopping a vehicle to render aid to an injured person or assistance to a disabled vehicle in obedience to the directions of a law enforcement officer or to a person stopping a vehicle in compliance with applicable traffic laws; or 
11.  For the purpose of loading or unloading a passenger on the paved roadway or shoulder of a limited access facility or on the paved portion of any connecting ramp. This provision is not applicable to a person stopping a vehicle to render aid to an injured person or assistance to a disabled vehicle. 
b.  No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
1.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
2.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
3.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
4.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, or official traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
5.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrances to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrances (when property sign is posted as a fire station); 
6.  On an exclusive bicycle lane; or 
7.  At any place where an official traffic control device prohibits standing. 
c.  No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, and at any place where an official traffic control device prohibits parking. 
d.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked: 
1.  With the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway and shall not remain in the same location for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
2.  Parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of the authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
e.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all commercial vehicles, including self-propelled vehicles with or without trailers, having a weight class of one ton or more, individually or combined, and all commercial trailers, are prohibited from parking on residentially zoned streets except while standing on a temporary basis for the purpose of loading or unloading or providing other services common to residential areas. 
(4)  Parking spaces for certain disabled persons; report of outstanding violations. 
a.  Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1955, no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in, or obstruct any designated disabled parking space located in the city or on property owned or leased by the city, whether such parking space is located on public or private property, unless such vehicle displays a disabled parking permit or a license plate issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.1958, 320.084, 320.0842, 320.0843, 320.0845, or 320.0848 and such vehicle is transporting the person to whom the displayed permit is issued. 
b.  Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1955, no person shall obstruct the path of travel to a designated disabled parking space, curb cut, or access aisle located in the city or on property owned or leased by the city, whether such parking space is located on public or private property, by standing or parking a vehicle within any such designated area. The violator is subject to the same penalties as are imposed for illegally parking in a space that is designated as an accessible parking space for persons who have disabilities. 
c.  Any person who is chauffeuring a person who has a disability is allowed, without need for a disabled parking permit or a special license plate, to stand temporarily in any such parking space, for the purpose of loading or unloading the person who has a disability. A penalty may not be imposed upon the driver for such temporary standing. 
d.  Pursuant to F.S. § 316.1967(6), the clerk shall supply the department of highway safety and motor vehicles with a magnetically encoded computer tape reel or cartridge or send by other electronic means data which is machine readable by the installed computer system at the department, listing persons who have any outstanding violations of F.S. § 316.1955 or this section regulating parking in spaces designated for use by disabled persons. The provisions of F.S. § 320.03(8), which restricts renewal of license plate or revalidation decal, shall apply to each person whose name appears on said list. 
(5)  Parking in fire lanes. No person shall park or stand a vehicle in an area designated by the fire marshal of the city to be a fire lane and marked as such as defined in chapter 8, article III of this Code. 
(6)  Parking on city property; reserved parking space, tow-away zones. 
a.  Council hereby authorizes the chief of police to issue and designate reserved parking space tow-away zone parking spaces, in consultation with members of the city council and other officials, to be utilized by city, county, state, or other governmental personnel for use in connection with their functions and duties. Council further authorizes the chief of police or designee to promulgate rules and procedures governing the designation of such spaces, the enforcement of the provisions related thereto, and to effectuate the purposes of this section related to parking on property owned or leased by the city. 
b.  No person shall park an unauthorized vehicle in parking areas located on property owned or leased by the city, on the right-of-way, or that are marked with an official traffic control device designating a reserved parking space tow-away zone. 
c.  No person shall park a vehicle in such a way as to block entry or exit from parking areas located on property owned or leased by the city, which are marked with an official traffic control device designating a reserved parking space tow-away zone. 
d.  Parking of an unauthorized vehicle in a reserved parking space tow-away zone located on property owned or leased by the city shall subject the vehicle's owner to civil penalties and to removal of the vehicle at the owner's expense pursuant to subsections (7) and (8) of this section. 
(7)  Civil penalties. 
a.  Any person who parks or stands a vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsections (3) or (6) of this section shall be guilty of a separate noncriminal violation and shall be assessed a civil penalty of $30.00. 
b.  Any person who parks or stands a vehicle in violation of the provisions of the subsection (4) of this section shall be guilty of a separate noncriminal violation and shall be assessed a civil penalty of $250.00; however, this fine will be waived if a person provides proof to the clerk, within ten (10) days of the date of the violation that the person committing the violation has a valid parking permit or license plate issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.1958, 320.084, 320.0842, 320.0843, 320.0845, or 320.0848 or a signed affidavit that the owner of the disabled parking permit or license plate was present at the time the violation occurred, and that such a parking permit or license plate was valid at the time the violation occurred. Upon provision of proof of such a valid parking permit or license plate and payment of a $5.00 dismissal fee, the clerk shall dismiss the citation. 
c.  Any person who parks or stands a vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsection (e) of this section shall be guilty of a separate noncriminal violation and shall be assessed a civil penalty of $100.00, payable to the city, two-thirds of which shall be used to fund fire department educational programs. One-third ( 1/3 ) of the costs shall be payable to the clerk for the police administration fund to defray the costs incurred in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
d.  Each day any violation occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. 
e.  The amount of any civil penalty specified in this section shall be increased by $15.00 if payment is not received by the director of finance within the described ten-day period from the date of issuance of the parking ticket. 
f.  Unless otherwise provided herein any civil penalties received by the director of finance for violation of the provisions of this section shall be paid monthly to the city. 
g.  Notwithstanding subsection (7)f of this section, and unless otherwise provided herein, any civil penalties received by the director of finance for violation of the provisions of subsection (4) of this section, shall be deposited in a separate account to be distributed in the following manner: 
1.  One-third to the police administration fund, to defray the costs incurred in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
2.  Two-thirds to the chief of police for the crime prevention account to improve accessibility and equal opportunity for disabled persons in the city, to provide funds to conduct public awareness programs in the city concerning disabled persons, and for educational materials, enforcement, and information on designated disabled parking spaces to the apartments and businesses located within the city. 
(8)  Enforcement. 
a.  Officers discovering a vehicle parked in violation of this section shall issue a parking ticket approved for use by the chief of police and shall attach such ticket to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Any person who is issued a city parking ticket by a designee of the chief of police is deemed to be charged with a noncriminal violation and shall comply with the directions on the parking ticket. Such parking ticket shall contain language providing notice of the following: 
1.  The type of violation and the amount of civil penalty imposed by this section. 
2.  That the person receiving the parking ticket or the owner of such vehicle has ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the parking ticket to either: 
(i)  Make payment of the civil penalty amount listed on said ticket to the director of finance; or 
(ii)  Elect to personally appear before a designated official to contest the violation by requesting a court date. Such election shall be made by the execution of a statement prepared by the clerk, indicating the person's willingness to appear at a hearing at the time and place specified thereon; and 
3.  The consequences of the failure to comply with directions contained on the parking ticket. 
b.  Any person who elects to appear before a designated official to present evidence waives the right to pay the civil penalty provisions on the parking ticket. 
c.  The officer shall determine the registered owner of the vehicle for which a parking ticket has been issued and shall complete the parking ticket form. The original and a copy of the parking ticket form shall be forwarded to the clerk within five (5) days from the date of issuance of the parking ticket. 
d.  An officer that discovers a vehicle parked in violation of subsections (3) through (6) of this section is hereby authorized to issue a parking ticket pursuant to this subsection (8). In addition thereto, the officer is authorized to instruct a person regularly engaged in the business of transporting vehicles by wrecker, tow truck, or car carrier, to recover, remove, and store the unauthorized vehicle, if said vehicle is causing a safety hazard, blocking traffic or is not removed in five (5) days. Such vehicle shall be removed, transported, and stored in such a manner as to comply with all statutory requirements, allowing for a lien to attach upon the vehicle for towing, transportation and storage fees pursuant to F.S. § 713.78. 
(9)  Procedures governing payment of civil penalties and proceedings to enforce payment for city parking violations. 
a.  If no payment or request for a hearing has been received after ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the parking ticket have elapsed, the clerk shall notify the registered owner of the vehicle that was cited on the parking ticket by mail to the address given on the motor vehicle registration. Mailing the notice to this address constitutes notification. Upon notification, the registered owner shall comply with the court's directive. The notice shall state that the owner has fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing of said notice in which to either: 
1.  Make payment of the stated civil penalty amount; or 
2.  Elect to personally appear before a designated official to contest the violation, for reasons including, but not limited to, those described in subsection (9)(b) of this section. 
Such notice shall inform the owner that any person who fails to satisfy the court's directive waives the right to pay the applicable civil penalty. 
b.  The owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, leased or rented to another person. 
1.  In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required to furnish to the law enforcement authority having issued the ticket a sworn affidavit setting forth the name, address, and the driver's license number of the person who leased or rented the vehicle. The owner must submit such sworn affidavit within fourteen (14) days after the mailing of the notice by the clerk. 
2.  The sworn affidavit submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be admissible in a court proceeding charging a parking ticket violation and shall raise the rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the sworn affidavit is responsible for payment of the parking ticket violation. 
3.  Additionally, the owner of a vehicle shall not be responsible for a parking ticket violation if the owner submits to the law enforcement authority having issued the parking ticket a sworn affidavit stating that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle. 
c.  A designated official, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed and may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $250.00, plus court costs for violations of the provisions of subsection (4) of this section, or a civil penalty not to exceed $150.00, plus court costs for all other violations of this section. Any person who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed by the designated official is deemed to have been convicted of a parking ticket violation, and the court shall take appropriate measures to enforce collection of the civil penalty. 
d.  Florida Rules for Traffic Courts 6.350, 6.360 and 6.370 will govern the computation of time, enlargement of time, and additional time after service by mail, respectively, with regards to the notice referenced in this section. 
(10)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable in the city, and to areas owned or leased by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 20.215; Ord. No. 1036, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 1168, 4-4-2006) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of parking, F.S. §§ 316.008(1)(a), 316.195 et seq. 
Secs. 20-4-20-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RED LIGHT CAMERA ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Use of cameras for traffic enforcement, F.S. §§ 316.0076, 316.008(8), 316.083. 

Sec. 20-27. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the Statutory Red Light Camera Enforcement Program ("Program") is to authorize and implement the use of traffic infraction detectors to promote compliance with red light signal directives as defined in, and prescribed by, Laws of Florida, Chapter 2010-80 and Chapter 2013-160, as they may be amended from time to time (the "State Act")., Consistent with Florida general law, this Program will also supplement law enforcement personnel in the enforcement of red light signal violations and shall not prohibit law enforcement officers from issuing a citation for a red light signal violation in accordance with other statutory traffic enforcement techniques. 
(Code 2001, § 20.230.1; Ord. No. 1347, § 3, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 20-28. - Use of image capture technologies. 
    Effective July 1, 2010, the city shall utilize traffic infraction detectors to enforce violations of F.S. §§ 316.074(1) and 316.075(1)(c)1 pursuant to the authority granted under the State Act. The program shall not supersede, infringe, curtail or impinge upon state statutes relating to red light signal violations or conflict with such laws. 
(Code 2001, § 20.230.2) 
Sec. 20-29. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in F.S. ch. 316 shall apply to the program. In addition, the following definitions shall apply to the program: 
    Notice of violation means initial notification from the city to the registered owner of a motor vehicle involved in a violation, as defined herein, notifying the registered owner of the violation, sent in compliance with, and containing information required by, the State Act. 
    Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic infraction detector, which include, but are not limited to, photographic or electronic images or streaming video, that satisfy the requirements of the State Act. 
    Traffic citation means notification to the registered owner of a motor vehicle involved in a violation who failed to timely pay a fine pursuant to a notice of violation, sent in compliance with, and containing all information required by, the State Act. 
    Traffic infraction enforcement officer means the city police department employee designated pursuant to section 20-31, who meets the requirements of the State Act and who is authorized to review recorded images and issue notices of violation and traffic citations pursuant to the requirements of the State Act and otherwise perform responsibilities required by the State Act. 
    Violation means any violation of F.S. § 316.074(1) or 316.075(1)(c)1. 
(Code 2001, § 20.230.3) 
Sec. 20-30. - Violation. 
    Violations shall be enforced pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083. 
(Code 2001, § 20.230.4) 
Sec. 20-31. - Traffic infraction enforcement officer. 
    The City's Police Chief shall designate Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officers ("TIE Officer"), who shall meet the qualifications set forth in the State Act. TIE Officers shall be responsible for enforcement of the City's Red Light Camera Enforcement System in conformance with applicable provisions of F.S. Ch. 316, including, but not limited to F.S. § 316.0083, as such provisions may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 2001, § 20.230.5; Ord. No. 1347, § 3, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 20-32. - Designation of local hearing officer. 
    As of the effective date of this ordinance, the city authorizes the implementation of the provisions of the State Act to appoint a local hearing officer to hold hearings and take all actions required under the State Act. As of the effective date of this ordinance, the city shall utilize a special magistrate appointed pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162 to serve as the city's local hearing officer, in accordance with the provisions of the State Act. 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 3, 7-2-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1347, § 2-3, adopted July 2, 2013, repealed the former § 20-32, and enacted a new § 20-32 as set out herein. The former § 20-32 pertained to transition. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Secs. 20-33-20-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF GOLF CARTS UPON CITY STREETS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of golf carts on certain highways, F.S. § 316.212; authority to allow golf carts on sidewalks, F.S. § 316.008(7). 

Sec. 20-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Calendar year means the period between January 1 and December 31, during which a golf cart registration is valid. 
    Driver means the person driving and having physical control over the golf cart. 
    Golf cart means a motor vehicle that is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of twenty (20) miles per hour as described by F.S. § 320.01(22). 
    Golf cart registration means a privilege granted, upon compliance with the terms of this article, to legally operate a golf cart upon public streets or roadways within boundaries of the city during the year granted. 
    Golf cart registration decal means the certificate for attachment to the golf cart which indicates the serial number associated with the owner's registration. 
    Golf cart registration fee means the administrative charge imposed for the granting of a golf cart registration and the issuance of a golf cart registration decal. 
    Owner means the person holding the bill of sale to the golf cart and authorized to register the golf cart with the city. 
    Street means a public roadway of the city by any name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.1), 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 20-62. - Operation of golf carts. 
(a)  The operation of golf carts upon city streets is prohibited unless the golf cart is registered, operated and equipped in full compliance with this Code. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of F.S. § 316.212, which are applicable to the operation of golf carts, the following restrictions shall also apply to the operation of golf carts on city streets. 
(1)  Golf carts must be registered in compliance with section 20-63 and properly equipped in compliance with section 20-64. 
(2)  Golf carts may not be operated on city streets by persons under fifteen (15) years of age. Drivers of golf carts on city streets must have in their possession either a valid driver's license, or a valid learner's driver's license. If the driver holds a learner's driver's license, then the golf cart must be operated in accordance with F.S. § 322.1615. 
(3)  Every driver of a golf carts on city streets must, while transporting a child under the age of six, provide for the protection of the child by properly using a federally approved child restraint device. 
(4)  Drivers of golf carts on city streets must observe state and local traffic laws applicable to motor vehicles. 
(5)  Golf carts may only be operated on streets within the incorporated limits of the city. It is unlawful to operate a golf cart across or within any state or county right-of-way or road, unless specifically recognized and identified as permitted by either Hillsborough County or the state department of transportation. Golf carts shall be permitted to cross Bullard Parkway by utilizing underground golf cart tunnels. The intersection of Glen Arven Avenue and Bullard Parkway shall be recognized as a properly identified county surface crossing for Bullard Avenue. 
(6)  It is unlawful to operate a golf cart on any city sidewalks, rights-of-way or any other location in which a motor vehicle is prohibited as proscribed by state statute or city ordinance. 
(7)  The number of occupants in any golf cart being operated on the city streets shall be restricted to the number of seats on the golf cart, not exceeding the number of persons for which the golf cart was designed by its manufacturer. Occupants of golf carts operated on city streets must remain seated at all times the golf cart is in motion. 
(8)  Golf carts may only be operated upon city streets between sunrise and sunset unless the golf cart has all equipment specified in section 20-64(b). 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.2), 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 20-63. - Registration. 
(a)  All golf carts operated upon city streets must be registered with the city and must display the golf cart registration decal affixed to the front driver's side fender of the golf cart. This registration requirement does not apply to golf carts that are not operated on city streets. Incidental crossing of streets involved with playing a round of golf shall not be considered as operation on streets. 
(b)  Registration of golf carts may only be made by the owner of the golf cart. 
(c)  The owner of the golf cart will be charged an initial registration fee in the amount established by the city. The renewal registration fee thereafter shall be as established by the city. Registration with the city must be renewed by January 1 of each calendar year after initial registration occurs. The registration application process must be completed prior to any golf cart being operated on city streets. 
(d)  In order to register a golf cart, its owner must certify that the golf cart is equipped to the standards established herein during the initial registration and every subsequent renewal registration. Certification of compliance with equipment standards and a completed registration application must be provided to the city in order to obtain a registration decal. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.3), 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 20-64. - Required equipment. 
(a)  All golf carts operating on designated city streets must be equipped with the following properly operating equipment: 
(1)  Braking system; 
(2)  Reliable steering; 
(3)  Safe tires; 
(4)  Rear view mirror; 
(5)  Red reflector warning devices (minimum four (4) square inches), both in the front and the rear; 
(6)  Horn; 
(7)  Manufacturer's serial number plate. 
(b)  All golf carts operated on the city streets after sunset or before sunrise must be equipped with the following additional properly operating equipment: 
(1)  Rear stop lamps; 
(2)  Turn signals; 
(3)  Head lamps, reflex reflectors and tail lamps; 
(4)  Windshield. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.4), 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 20-65. - Enforcement. 
    Violations of this article shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures established by chapter 1, article II, division 3, and in accordance with the provisions of F.S. chs. 162, 316, and 318 by law enforcement officers and code compliance officers as their legal authority and jurisdiction allow. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.5), 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 20-66. - Licensed use; revocable. 
(a)  The operation of golf carts on city streets shall be deemed to be a licensed use of those streets revocable upon the will of the city council in its legislative capacity based on its consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public arising from such use. 
(b)  The issuance of a registration for the operation of golf carts on city streets shall not limit or otherwise preclude the city council from amendment or revocation of this article, contracting or expanding the streets or roads on which golf carts can be operated. 
(c)  All persons operating golf carts on city streets under registration with the city shall do so on the condition that there shall be no claim made against the city for any monetary loss or other claims for any loss by allowing golf cart operation on city streets or any monetary loss therefore based on a claim for action in reliance on the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.6), 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 20-67. - Waiver of claim. 
    Any person operating a golf cart on city streets and all persons who are passengers in such golf carts shall be deemed to have waived any claim against the city for its legislative decision to allow the operation of such golf carts on city streets as permitted herein. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 2(20.225.7), 5-1-2012) 
Chapter 22 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Service area means the city limits and the designated area outside the city where potable water and sanitary sewer service is provided under contract with the county and/or other applicable provisions of state statutes. 
    Sewer system means the sanitary sewage collection system owned and operated by the city. 
    Water system means the potable water treatment and distribution system owned and operated by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.100) 
Sec. 22-2. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
Secs. 22-3-22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE APPLICATIONS, RATES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-23. - Application for service. 
    All applications for water connections, sanitary sewer, and/or solid waste service to any premises shall be made to the city in writing on forms provided for that purpose, and shall state fully all the purposes for which such water, sanitary sewer, and/or solid waste service is required and the location of the premises to be supplied, and shall be signed by the owner, tenant, or agent. Such application when accepted by the city or upon its performance of the service applied for, shall constitute a contract between the applicant and the city, which shall bind such applicant to pay to the city for the services rendered its prescribed rates therefor and to comply with all rules and regulations as prescribed and fixed hereby or as hereafter adopted. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410; Ord. No. 954, 10-21-1997) 
Sec. 22-24. - Service contract; water, sanitary sewer and solid waste. 
    The contract for water, sanitary sewer and solid waste service shall be in substantially the following form: 
CITY OF TEMPLE TERRACE WATER, SANITARY SEWER AND SOLID WASTE SERVICE CONTRACT Customer Number  _____ Name  _____ Deposit  _____ Date  _____   The undersigned, as owner, agent, resident or occupant, of the residence or building located at:   _____ hereby applies for water, sanitary sewer and solid waste services to said premises and agrees to pay for said services at the rates specified by the Temple Terrace Code of Ordinances.   The undersigned agrees to comply with and to be bound by all rules, regulations and ordinances of the City of Temple Terrace respecting water, sanitary sewer and solid waste service, and specifically agrees to pay all charges related to said service and prescribed by the Temple Terrace Code of Ordinances. The undersigned further agrees that the City shall have a lien upon said property for all overdue water, sanitary sewer and solid waste charges and fees related to services rendered to said property. If the charges and fees for said services are not paid by the specified due date, the City may institute legal proceedings to enforce its rights and to collect such charges and fees. In any such proceeding, the City shall be entitled to recoup its costs and fees, including attorneys' fees. _____
Owner's Name _____
Applicant's Signature _____
Owner's Address _____
Mailing Address Accepted by:  _____ Date:  _____  
(Code 2001, § 21.410.1; Ord. No. 954, 10-21-1997) 
Sec. 22-25. - Article deemed part of water and/or sewer service contract. 
    The provisions of this article shall be deemed a part of the city's contract with every person who takes water supplied by the city or who has sewage or solid waste service supplied by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.2) 
Sec. 22-26. - Termination of contract for services. 
    A customer for water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste service may terminate the contract for such service at any time by giving notice to the city and by paying all amounts due for services up to the date of termination of service by the city, but in case notice is not given or the bills due for service not paid, then the customer shall continue to be liable for service thereafter and for the minimum monthly rate or charge in case no water is consumed, even though the premises are vacated or occupied by other parties who fail to make application for service and sign a contract. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.3; Ord. No. 954, 10-21-1997) 
Sec. 22-27. - Applicant for service solely responsible for bills. 
    Any person signing an application for service and requesting the bill to be sent to a different address for payment by another party does so at the person's own risk, as the city does not act as a collection agency for owner or agent, and takes no responsibility for collection of the account, and should the account become delinquent, it will be charged to the contracting party and handled as any ordinary account. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.4) 
Sec. 22-28. - Schedule of deposits; monthly payment for services; delinquency charges; cut-off; restoration of service. 
(a)  Residential accounts. 
(1)  Upon written application for commencement of water, sanitary sewer, or solid waste service, a deposit shall be made with the finance department. The required deposit shall be as established by the city. 
(2)  The city shall have the right, however, to increase a deposit to an amount equal to three (3) times the highest monthly combined water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste bill from the customer's preceding year, whenever the same is deemed necessary to guarantee customer payment of future water, sanitary sewer, and/or solid waste bills. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to require proof of ownership to determine the amount of the applicable deposit. 
(4)  An owner-occupied unit that has a service history with the city for a minimum of two (2) consecutive years and has a satisfactory payment history for that two-year period shall not be required to pay a deposit. This provision shall apply to only one account per customer. A satisfactory payment history shall be defined as a payment history that consists of fewer than two (2) penalties, no returned checks, and no delinquencies. 
(5)  Deposits shall be returned to the depositor when all service provided and any delinquencies have been paid in full and further services are not required. 
(6)  The city may from time to time refund utility deposits to any customer of an owner-occupied unit who has established a satisfactory payment history with the city for a period of two (2) years. 
(7)  Bills for water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste service or any other authorized billings shall be prepared and forwarded monthly to customers. Such bills shall set forth the separate charge for water service, sanitary sewer service, solid waste service, and each additional authorized service. 
(8)  The fact that a customer does not receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for late payment, discount or adjustment. A bill shall not be considered paid until remittance for same has been received at the office of the finance department, and the department shall not be responsible for delays or losses in transportation in the mails or otherwise. 
(9)  If the rates or charges for all or any part of the services provided are not paid by the specified due date of any bill rendered, a late payment charge in the amount of one and one-half (11/2) percent of the outstanding balance or $10.00, whichever is greater, shall be imposed and collected. 
(10)  If the rates or charges for all or any part of the services provided are not paid by the specified disconnect date or as otherwise provided by state law after the date of any bill rendered, service to the delinquent customer may be immediately discontinued unless satisfactory payment arrangements have been made. Such utility service shall not be restored until the delinquent bill and any reconnection charges are paid. Where water services are not provided, the city, at its option, may discontinue other services until the delinquent bill and reconnection charges have been paid. Any part of a utility bill that is delinquent shall constitute the entire bill being delinquent. 
(11)  Any depositor whose service is discontinued due to a delinquency for a second time within a twelve (12) month period shall be required to increase the amount of deposit to three (3) times the highest monthly bill and penalty. Said increased deposit shall be returned to the depositor as provided in subsection (5) of this section. When it becomes necessary to remove the water meter to enforce the provisions of this section, a reconnection charge in the amount established by the city shall be paid for each such reconnection in addition to any other applicable charges or delinquent balances. 
(12)  When the city manager, or designee, determines that certain inequities exist with regard to requirement of a deposit from a customer who has previously established satisfactory credit for a water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste account, the deposit requirement may be waived. 
(b)  Commercial accounts. 
(1)  Upon application for commencement of water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste service, a deposit shall be made with the finance department in an amount equal to two (2) times the estimated monthly combined water, sanitary sewer and solid waste bill for service to the account. 
(2)  All money so deposited shall be returned to the depositor when charges for all service provided and any delinquencies have been paid in full and further services are not required. 
(3)  Annually, each deposit shall be reviewed on the basis of actual utilization and if any significant difference is noted, appropriate reduction or increase in the amount of the deposit shall be required accordingly. 
(4)  Bills for the services of water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste and any other authorized billings shall be prepared and forwarded monthly to customers. Such bills shall set forth the separate charge for water service, sanitary sewer service, and solid waste service, and each additional authorized service. 
The fact that a customer does not receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for late payment, discount or adjustment. A bill shall not be considered paid until remittance for same has been received at the office of the finance department, and the department shall not be responsible for delays or losses in transportation in the mails or otherwise. 
(5)  If the rates or charges for all or any part of the services provided are not paid by the specified due date of any bill rendered, a delayed payment charge in the amount of one and one-half (11/2) percent of the outstanding balance or $10.00, whichever is greater, shall be imposed and collected. 
(6)  If the rates or charges for all or any part of the services provided are not paid by the specified disconnect date or as otherwise provided by state law after the date of any bill rendered, utility service to the delinquent customer shall be discontinued immediately unless satisfactory payment arrangements have been made. Such utility service shall not be restored until the delinquent bill and all reconnection charges are paid. Where meter services are not provided, the city, at its option, may discontinue other services until the delinquent bill and reconnection charges are paid. Any part of a utility bill that is delinquent shall constitute the entire bill being delinquent. 
(7)  Any depositor whose service is discontinued due to delinquency for a second time within a twelve-month period shall also be required to increase the amount of deposit to three (3) times the highest monthly bill and penalty. Said increased deposit shall be returned to the depositor as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section. When it becomes necessary to remove the water meter to enforce the provisions of this section, a reconnection charge in the amount established by the city shall be paid for each reconnection in addition to any other applicable charges or delinquent balances. 
(c)  Governmental agencies. A governmental agency shall not be required to pay a deposit for water, sanitary sewer, or solid waste services. 
(d)  Interest on deposits. All utility deposits held by the city that were placed by customers of any utility service provided by the city shall earn interest and the customers shall receive a credit for the interest so earned, in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Deposits will earn interest from the date of posting forward to the date of final disbursement. 
(2)  Deposits shall earn interest at a rate adjustable monthly and equal to the rate promulgated by the account where the deposits are held for the month which is two (2) months prior to the month for which the rate is being computed. For example, the interest rate on deposits in the month of May will be the rate set by the interest earned for the month of March. 
(3)  Interest will be compounded monthly and credited to the customer's account annually in September. For accounts which are terminated, interest will be credited as of the date of termination on a daily, prorated basis. 
(4)  At the time a utility account is terminated, the deposit and any interest earned thereon will be applied to the customer's final bill to the extent necessary to pay that bill. Any amount of the deposit plus earned interest then remaining shall be refunded to the customer. 
(5)  Only cash deposits shall earn interest. Any deposits held in the form of a bond or letter of credit shall not earn interest or receive any credit for interest. 
(6)  No customer shall be eligible for the interest credit unless and until the customer has furnished the city with the customers' Social Security number, or a Federal Taxpayer Identification Number. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.5; Ord. No. 954, 10-21-1997; Ord. No. 1213, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 1229, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 1246, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 22-29. - Collection of charges; additional remedy. 
    All owners of property accepting services from the city do, by such acceptance, consent that any lawful charge made for such service or services, together with the costs of collection, including attorney's fees, shall constitute a lien upon and against the property receiving such service or services, such lien to be enforced and collected by the city as provided by law. This remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the city for the collection of such charges. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.15) 
Secs. 22-30-22-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER AND SEWER CHARGES 

Sec. 22-47. - Water meter and connection charges. 
(a)  Water connection. 
(1)  Charges for tapping water mains including the cost of labor and materials related to the meter, meter box, corporation stop, valves and appurtenances thereto shall be as established by the city. All meters and appurtenances thereto shall be and remain the property of the city. 
(2)  The director of the public works department or designee shall determine charges of the installation of meters larger than two (2) inches. 
(3)  Responsibility for damage to meters. Where meters are broken or damaged by the negligence of the owners, tenants or occupants of the premises, the cost of repair or replacement shall be paid by the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises; and if the same is not paid upon repair or replacement of a meter, the water supply shall be turned off and shall not be turned on again until payment of such amount due is made. If it cannot be determined whose negligence is responsible for the damage to the meter, the owner is responsible. 
(b)  Refund of meter or installation charges. When a consumer has made application for water service and paid the installation or meter charges, the city shall not be required to refund these charges if the consumer withdraws application after a connection has been installed to the premises, but shall retain such payments as liquidated damages. 
(c)  Sewer connection. Charges for sewer connections shall be as established by the city. There shall be no charges for sewer connections in subdivisions when the subdivider or developer has provided the minimum improvements required under the provisions of chapter 12, Land Development, and has made sanitary sewer service available to each plot or lot in the subdivision. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.6; Ord. No. 1246, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 22-48. - Improvement charge: water and sewer. 
(a)  In addition to the other charges levied by this article, there is hereby imposed on all new connections to the water or sewer system, an improvement charge based on the equitable portion of the cost of financing the extension of the city's water or sewer system upon the person creating the need for additional system financing. All persons with property which is to be connected to the city's water distribution or sewer collection systems shall pay the improvement charge established by the city. 
(1)  Combination residential and commercial/industrial connection. If a single connection is installed to service a facility containing both residential and commercial/industrial units, the improvement charge shall be in the sum of the charge for the meter size needed to service the commercial/industrial units and the per unit charge for the residential units based on the multifamily rates. 
(2)  Disputed charges. In the event of a dispute as to the appropriate classification and improvement charge, the city manager or designee shall have the right to final determination of the appropriate meter size and charge. 
(3)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Commercial/industrial connection means any utility connection to a structure not used as a dwelling unit, and all utility connections to motels, hotels and roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
    Multifamily residential connection means a utility connection to a structure or group of structures, on one individual, defined parcel of property (zoning lot) which contains or may contain residential dwelling units for more than one family, e.g. multifamily connections for duplexes, triplexes, apartments, condominiums, mobile home parks, campsites and related uses but not those for motels, hotels and roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
    Single-family residential connection means a utility connection to a structure which is intended for occupancy by a single family and which is situated on an individual, defined parcel or property (zoning lot), irrespective of whether the structure has common walls with an adjacent structure. 
    Unit means each room, combination of rooms, or prepared mobile home space that includes connection points for sewer and/or water service that are owner occupied, offered separately for rent as a rental unit or vacant. Multi-unit apartments, condominiums, office buildings, shopping centers, hotels, motels, and similar multi-unit structures or complexes are defined to consist of multiple units, regardless of whether or not a single water or sewer connection serves the entire complex. 
(4)  Laterals. The fees, as computed, are based upon costs relating to the plant and main lines and do not include costs related to laterals and other lines installed by the owner and/or developer of the property to be connected. 
(5)  Irrigation meters. The improvement charge regarding water shall not apply to separate meters installed for irrigation purposes only; the prevailing tap and meter fees only will apply to irrigation meters. 
(b)  The total improvement charges for water and sewer service shall be determined by the computation as set forth in this division. The above figures are for the computation of the improvement charge only and do not establish the number of units properly served by a particular meter size. Each additional connection subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be subject to an improvement charge computed in accordance with whichever of the foregoing criteria is applicable. If a new connection is requested subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the improvement charge shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  If the improvement charge previously paid was less than the charge imposed pursuant to this article, then the applicant for the new connection shall pay the difference between the improvement imposed by this article and the improvement charge previously paid; 
(2)  If the improvement charge previously paid was more than the charge imposed pursuant to this article, then said new connection may be installed without payment of any additional improvement charge. 
(c)  The amount of the improvement charge shall be reviewed periodically to determine whether the current fee is an appropriate amount. 
(d)  Improvement charges shall be assessed prior to approval of the application for service for either water or sewer service; provided, however, that upon a showing of hardship, arrangements for the payment of the improvement charge over a period of time may be made with the city manager or designee in accordance with the administrative memorandum prevailing at the time of assessment. Since the improvement charge is comprised of two (2) separate charges, water and sewer, in areas where only one of these services is available, the applicant shall be charged only for the service provided. When the other service is made available, the applicant shall be charged therefor. 
(e)  Improvement charges for all units within a subdivision or other multi-unit development shall be entirely due and payable prior to final acceptance of the subdivision plat or before either water or sewer service is provided to any unit within said subdivision or other multi-unit development, whichever occurs first, unless an agreement is approved by the city council establishing alternate due dates for the payment of said charges. The improvement charges for all other construction shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of a building permit for the unit for which water and/or sewer service is available. 
(f)  The proceeds accumulated by reason of the establishment of an improvement charge can be used only for water system or sanitary sewer system projects which meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Each project must be needed because of the present or projected addition of customers; or 
(2)  Each project must serve a transmission, treatment or pumping function for a number of new connections. Projects whose functions are limited to providing service to abutting properties are not included; or 
(3)  Projects which are needed for public health, safety or welfare for a large group of people can be built from improvement charge funds. 
(g)  Two (2) trust funds are hereby established. One shall be designated as the improvement charge capital improvement trust fund for the expansion of the water system, and the other shall be designated as the improvement charge capital improvement trust fund for the expansion of the sanitary sewage system. All improvement charges paid to the city shall be recorded in the appropriate trust fund to be used only for the purpose of the expansion of the city's water and sewer systems. Any funds on deposit in the said trust funds which are not immediately necessary for expenditure may be invested as provided by law for investment of municipal funds. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.7) 
Sec. 22-49. - Customer service charges. 
    Water customer service charges shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.8; Ord. No. 1060, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 1213, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 22-50. - Fire sprinkler system; annual service charge. 
    The service charge for non-metered fire sprinkler systems in the service area shall be as established by the city. No water is to be used from sprinkler systems at any point on the line except in case of fire; nor are any fixtures whatsoever to be connected with such fire line. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.9) 
Sec. 22-51. - Fire hydrants on private property; annual service charge. 
    The service charge for non-metered fire hydrants on private property in the service area and utilized for private fire protection shall be as established by the city. No water is to be used from fire hydrants or from the service line on which they are situated unless metered, except in case of fire; nor are any other fixtures whatsoever to be connected with such fire line. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.10) 
Sec. 22-52. - Hose racks on private property; annual fee. 
    Non-metered hose racks on private property in the service area, connected to the city mains, shall pay a service charge in the amount established by the city. No water shall be used from such hose or from the line upon which they are situated unless metered except in case of fire, nor are any other fixtures whatsoever to be connected with such fire line. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.11) 
Sec. 22-53. - Basic rate schedule for water and wastewater service. 
(a)  The minimum monthly rates for water and wastewater service will be as reflected in the most recent water and wastewater rate schedule adopted by resolution of the city council and annually adjusted, by resolution of the city council, pursuant to section 22-56, Annual rate adjustment. Said schedule is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  A ten (10) percent utility tax will be added to all water charges within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Any charge levied on the volume of water consumption will be based on one thousand (1,000) gallons, or fraction thereof, of water use. 
(d)  Single-family residences and other places where public potable water is not supplied will be charged a flat rate in the amount established by the city for wastewater service. 
(e)  The city council may negotiate or authorize the city manager or designee to negotiate rates other than those provided in this section for public or governmental agencies when it is in the best interest of the city. In all such cases, due consideration shall be given to the number of persons using the facility, size or purpose of building, number of rooms and the estimated amount of sewage discharged into the wastewater sewer system of the city. 
(f)  Wastewater charges will not apply to consumption on an irrigation meter at a single-family residence. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.12; Ord. No. 918, 4-16-1996; Ord. No. 1106, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1246, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 22-54. - Transfer of delinquent bill to new address of consumer; discontinuance of service for nonpayment of transferred bill. 
    The finance department shall have the right to transfer a delinquent water bill at one address to the account of the same consumer at another address, provided the consumer is receiving service at the latter address, and shall have the right to discontinue service at the latter address for nonpayment of the transferred bill. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.13) 
Sec. 22-55. - Collection of charges for sewer service when water is not supplied by the city. 
    If any bill for sanitary sewer service charges rendered in connection with any premises not connected with the water system of the city shall not be paid when due, the owner, tenant or occupant of such premises shall cease to dispose of sewage or industrial wastes originating from or on such premises by discharge thereof directly or indirectly into the sewer system of the city until such sanitary sewer service charges, plus an additional charge equal to ten (10) percent of such bill which shall be added thereto, shall be paid, and it shall be the duty of any district, private corporation, board, body or person, including the owner of the premises to cease supplying water or selling water for use on such premises within five (5) days after the receipt of notice of such delinquency from the city manager or designee, and if such district, private corporation, board, body or person shall not, at the expiration of such five-day period, cease supplying water to or selling water for use on such premises, then the city manager or designee, unless the city shall have theretofore contracted to the contrary, shall shut off the supply of water to such premises by any legal process, and shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer service charges, together with all costs of collection, including attorney's fees, in such lawful manner as the city manager or designee may deem advisable. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.14; Ord. No. 954, 10-21-1997) 
Sec. 22-56. - Annual rate adjustment. 
    The minimum monthly rates for water, irrigation, and wastewater service may be adjusted annually on October 1 based on the percentage change in the U.S. CPI-Water and Sewerage Maintenance Series, published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, from January to January each year. The annual adjustment will be no greater than five (5) percent or the year over year growth in the U.S. CPI-Water and Sewerage Maintenance Series, whichever is less, and will be no less than zero (0) percent. Rates so adjusted shall go into effect as of the next billing cycle following October 1 of each year, but no earlier than permitted by state law. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.16; Ord. No. 1246, 6-02-2009; Ord. No. 1375, § 1, 9-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-57. - Drought surcharge. 
    A surcharge amount of fifteen (15) percent greater than the discretionary water or irrigation rate, based on the metered service, shall be placed on usage in excess of eight thousand (8,000) gallons per month for all water and wastewater customers of the city, to pay for the cost to implement water conservation measures and to recover lost revenue as a result of drought conditions. The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the first month following the declaration of a Phase III "Extreme" Water Shortage Alert by the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD) and shall remain in effect until the first day of the month following the termination of the declared Phase III alert by SWFWMD. 
(Code 2001, § 21.410.17; Ord. No. 1246, 6-02-2009) 
Secs. 22-58-22-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLID WASTE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Charges for solid waste management, F.S. § 403.7049. 

Sec. 22-88. - Fees; containers for mechanical lifting. 
(a)  Fees. The fees for city collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables shall be as established by the city. Commencing in fiscal year 2016-2017, the minimum monthly rates for city collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables service may be adjusted annually on October 1 based on the percentage change in the U.S. CPI-Garbage and Trash Collection Series, published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, from January to January each year. The annual adjustment will be no greater than four (4) percent or the year over year growth in the U.S. CPI-Water and Sewerage Maintenance Series, whichever is less, and will be no less than zero (0) percent. Rates so adjusted shall go into effect as of the next billing cycle following October 1, 2016 and October 1 of each year thereafter, but no earlier than permitted by state law. 
(b)  Special trash pickups. Refuse not in prescribed containers, such as trash rooms or refuse loose on the ground, shall be charged by the hour or fraction thereof and said charge shall be as determined by the director and shall not exceed the operational cost per hour of the sanitation division. If the above-described conditions exist constantly, the city may make a survey for thirty (30) days, after which an average monthly charge will be established. 
(c)  Accounts payable. All refuse accounts are payable monthly along with other payments for municipally operated utilities. Delinquent accounts shall be treated the same as for other municipally operated utilities. 
(d)  Basis for determination of charges. All charges are based on maximum number of cans and/or cubic yard capacity of commercial type containers retained on premises from day to day, and each dwelling or occupied unit and/or business and/or collection time required. 
(e)  Containers for mechanical lifting. Containers rigged for mechanical lifting are to fit municipal refuse units, and shall be approved by the director. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.9; Ord. No. 1374, § 1, 9-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-89. - Delinquent charges; penalty. 
    If any charges for solid waste and/or trash/refuse collection service are not paid within thirty (30) days after an invoice has been rendered therefor, the city may cease service to the premises or parcel of land for which such delinquent charges are due and payable until such charges and penalty shall be paid; and, if such premises or parcel of land for which such charges shall be delinquent are served by the city's water system, the city may cease to serve such premises with water until such delinquent charges and penalty shall be paid. These are cumulative and nonexclusive remedies and the city may enforce this section by any and all other means provided by law. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.10) 
Sec. 22-90. - Services charges to constitute debt. 
    The service charges hereinabove prescribed shall be and constitute a debt to the city for which the owner, tenant or occupant shall be jointly and severally liable. The records of the city shall be kept open for inspection by the owner, tenant or occupant and it shall be the responsibility of each of them to ascertain that the prescribed service charges are paid or being paid. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.11) 
Sec. 22-91. - Occupation of premises prima facie evidence of solid waste. 
    The fact that municipal utilities and/or electrical services are connected and being used shall be prima facie evidence that solid waste is being produced and accumulated upon such premises and that service charges for the collection and disposal thereof are due the city. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.12) 
Sec. 22-92. - Appeal from charges; resurvey of premises. 
(a)  Any person paying or who shall be responsible for paying the service charges, computed under section 22-88, and amendments thereto, for service to any commercial premises who feels that the volume of garbage and trash, or either, for which the person is being charged is incorrect, may file a written application with the director not more than once each year requesting a resurvey and computation of the volume of garbage and trash, or either, produced upon such premises. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the director to promptly resurvey such premises at such time as the director shall select, and to ascertain the average monthly production of garbage and trash upon said premises; provided, however, no refund or extra charge shall be made for the month in which such application is filed. The director shall have the right at any time without request to recheck or resurvey any premises and to reduce or increase the charge for the following months according to the volume of garbage or trash found to be produced or accumulated upon such premises. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.13) 
Secs. 22-93-22-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 22-113. - Water and sewer extensions. 
    None of the sections of this article shall be construed as prohibiting the further expansion of the water system or the sewer system by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.415) 
Sec. 22-114. - Extension by others. 
    Requests for the extension of water or sewer systems to serve properties not currently served must be processed in accordance with the provisions of the city's land development code, section 12-419. At the city's discretion, a development agreement may be required to detail the terms and conditions of said water and sewer extensions. 
(Code 2001, § 21.420) 
Sec. 22-115. - Extensions serving applicant's property solely. 
(a)  The cost of water and sewer extensions intended to serve the applicant's property solely shall be paid entirely by the applicant. 
(b)  At the city's discretion, a water and sewer line may be oversized to serve possible future development. The additional cost of said oversizing shall be determined by the city and the determination of cost pro-ratio shall be established in a development agreement. 
(Code 2001, § 21.425) 
Sec. 22-116. - Extensions serving multiple property owners. 
    The cost of water and sewer extension projects resulting in service availability to more than one property owner will be allocated as follows: 
(1)  For projects approved for funding in the city's six-year capital improvement program, the applicant shall receive credit on the applicable water and/or sewer improvement fees up to the amount of said improvement fees. 
(2)  For projects unfunded, or not contained in the city's six-year capital improvement program, the applicant shall receive credit on the applicable water and/or sewer improvement fees up to the amount of said improvement fees for the oversizing of a project as required by the city, above what is required to serve the applicant's project. 
(Code 2001, § 21.430) 
Sec. 22-117. - Construction responsibility. 
    The city shall determine whether the applicant shall be responsible for the construction of said extensions or whether the applicant shall deposit with the city a sum equivalent to the projected cost of the applicant's share, at which time the city will be responsible for the construction of the extension. At the conclusion of the construction by the city, a final cost allocation shall be made and a refund or charge made to the applicant. 
(Code 2001, § 21.435) 
Secs. 22-118-22-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-148. - Right of entry. 
    The officers and employees of the public works department and code compliance department shall have the right of access to the premises of a consumer at any reasonable hour for the purpose of conducting the normal business of the public works department, such as reading meters and making tests and inspections. 
(Code 2001, § 21.255; Ord. No. 1219, 2-19-2008) 
Sec. 22-149. - City not responsible for water loss from leaks, etc., on private property. 
    The city shall not be responsible for any loss of water from leaks or otherwise on the private property of a consumer, and shall be under no obligation to make adjustments for such leaks. 
(Code 2001, § 21.250) 
Sec. 22-150. - Water pressure not guaranteed; right of city to turn off water; fee for restoration of water. 
(a)  The city does not guarantee an uninterrupted supply of water or water at any particular pressure for any purpose, but reserves and shall have the right to shut off the water in its mains at any time for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purpose incidental to a public water supply, and will not be responsible for any damage resulting from a consumer leaving a faucet open or otherwise caused by low pressure. 
(b)  The public works department shall have the right to disconnect water service from a parcel at the main for the protection of the city or the consumer in cases where a private water system has been illegally installed, or a building has been burned or torn down or where the consumer has been found to be using water illegally, and to assess the regular schedule of fees for restoration of service. 
(Code 2001, § 21.215) 
Sec. 22-151. - Stop and waste cock or cutoff valve. 
    A stop and waste cock or cutoff valve must be placed by the property owner at the property line or at some convenient point on the premises. Such cock or valve shall be under the control of the tenant or owner and be used in case of break in the building or structure, or other necessity, so that repairs can be made without the necessity of using the shutoff valve maintained and installed by the city at the meter. 
(Code 2001, § 21.220) 
Sec. 22-152. - Persons using hot water heaters or steam boilers responsible for damage. 
    Persons using hot water heaters or steam boilers which take supply of water directly from the service lines of the public works department will do so at their own risk, as the public works department shall not be responsible for accidents or damages resulting in such cases, and should the hot water back up in the water pipes, damaging the meter or other connections, the cost of all necessary repairs to such equipment shall be paid by the consumer responsible therefor. 
(Code 2001, § 21.225) 
Sec. 22-153. - Maintenance and testing of meters. 
    The public works department shall maintain all meters and may test any meter without notice to or permission from the consumer and assess the cost of meter repairs and replacement parts to the consumer if the consumer owns said meter. Whenever any such meter becomes incapacitated or otherwise wears out so that the public works department cannot repair it, the public works department may install a new meter and assess the cost of same to the consumer. Except when approved in writing, only the public works department may repair or replace water meters. 
(Code 2001, § 21.230) 
Sec. 22-154. - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  Cross connections are prohibited and are considered a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to create a cross connection or otherwise allow a cross connection to exist, and any person creating a cross connection and any owner of property upon which a cross connection is located shall be responsible for violating this section. 
(b)  The term "cross connection," means any physical arrangement whereby the city water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the city water supply as the result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections. 
(c)  Adoption of cross connection control manual. The City of Temple Terrace Cross Connection Control Manual dated December 1, 2015 attached hereto as exhibit "A" and made a part hereof is hereby adopted as law as if fully set forth herein. The cross connection control manual shall be liberally construed in the interest of protecting the city's potable water supply and protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the users of the city water supply system. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to discontinue service in cases where an illegal connection is found and to assess an average water bill back for the period of time during which water has been consumed without payment, when it has been established that the consumer has been receiving water service for such period of time without payment for same, provided that any bill for such service shall not exceed a period of twelve (12) months. 
(Code 2001, § 21.240; Ord. No. 1381, § 2, 12-1-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-155. - Dual system of pipes required on property where water furnished by city and by private supply. 
    If any person as the owner of the property, shall have upon such property a supply of water other than the supply of water furnished by the public works department, and also have upon such property a water supply furnished by the public works department, such owner shall have and is hereby required to have a dual system of pipes upon the property; one system of pipes being for water supplied by the public works department, and the other system of pipes being for the supply of water from the private supply. It shall be unlawful for the two (2) systems to be connected together in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 2001, § 21.240.1) 
Sec. 22-156. - Location and construction of tanks into which city water is discharged. 
    It is hereby required that tanks into which water furnished by the public works department is discharged shall be at such distance below the discharge pipes that at no time can the water in such tanks rise to a level as to come in contact with the discharge pipe, that the installation shall be constructed so that the outlet of the discharge pipes shall be at least six (6) inches above the maximum possible height of the water in the tanks, and that the pipes shall be so constructed in conjunction with the discharge of water into the tanks which shall create an atmospheric gap to prevent any possible siphonage or siphoning effect. It shall be unlawful to construct or erect the pipes or tanks otherwise than prescribed in this section. 
Code 2001, § 21.245) 
Sec. 22-157. - Use of fire hydrants by builders and contractors. 
    The city may permit the use of water from a fire hydrant by contractors or builders for special purposes, provided the applicant applies for permission therefor to the public works department and makes the necessary payment for such services. 
(Code 2001, § 21.260) 
Sec. 22-158. - Consumer furnishing water to another person. 
    No consumer shall furnish water to any other person either by use of pipes or fixtures on the consumer's premises or by extending pipes to the premises of other persons without first obtaining written permission from the public works department. 
(Code 2001, § 21.265) 
Sec. 22-159. - Tampering with property of city water valves, meters, etc., prohibited. 
    No person, unless authorized by the city, has the right to turn off or turn on water at a valve, or to in any way disconnect or remove any water meter or otherwise tamper with any water connection, meter, or water main belonging to the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.270) 
Sec. 22-160. - Annual examination of water wells; discontinuation of use. 
    It shall be the duty of the owners of all potable water wells in the service area to have made by a certified state laboratory of the state department of health an examination of all wells at least once a year, and if upon such laboratory examination, it is found that the water in any well is detrimental to health, the owner or person maintaining such well shall be notified that it is detrimental to health and required to discontinue use of the water from said well for human consumption. 
(Code 2001, § 21.275) 
Sec. 22-161. - Mandatory water use restrictions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    District means the Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water shortage condition means the condition that exists when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resources, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resources from serious harm. 
    Water shortage plan means F.A.C. ch. 40D-21, the codification of the Water Shortage Plan adopted and published by the Southwest Florida Water Management District, or any modification or derivative of F.A.C. ch. 40D-21 which may be current at the time a water shortage emergency is declared, with the exception that irrigation shall not be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons using the water resource, whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells or private connections with surface water bodies. This section shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(c)  Declaration of water shortage emergency. The declaration of a water shortage emergency affecting all of the city by the governing board of the district has invoked the provisions of this section. All water use restrictions or other measures imposed by the district pursuant to F.A.C. ch. 40D-21, applicable to the city or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. Every police officer shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this section. In addition, the city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this section to other city employees in accordance with state and local law. Law enforcement officials may attempt to provide violators with no more than one written warning. 
(e)  Water users to accept provisions of section. No water service shall be furnished to any person unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this section. The acceptance of water service or the withdrawal of water from a private source shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions contained herein. 
(Code 2001, § 21.280; Ord. No. 1049, 9-13-2001) 
Secs. 22-162-22-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 22-191. - Connection to the water system required. 
    The owner of each and every parcel of land heretofore or hereafter developed within the service area shall be required to connect to the water system when service is adjacent to the parcel. For purposes of this section, the term "adjacent" means that a service lateral abuts the parcel. 
(Code 2001, § 21.210) 
Sec. 22-192. - Connection period. 
(a)  Any parcel with an existing building shall be required to connect to the water system within ninety (90) days after written notification of service availability is provided to the property owner by the city. 
(b)  Any new building hereinafter erected shall be connected to the water system prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said building. 
(Code 2001, § 21.210.1) 
Sec. 22-193. - Connection to be made by the city. 
    All connections to the water system shall be made by city employees or persons authorized by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.210.2) 
Sec. 22-194. - Illegal connections. 
    The city shall have the right to discontinue service in cases where an illegal connection is found, and, when it has been established that the consumer has been receiving water service without payment for same, the city shall have the right to assess against the consumer an amount equal to the estimated average water bill for said consumer for the previous twelve-month period, less any payments received during that period. 
(Code 2001, § 21.210.3) 
Secs. 22-195-22-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS AND SYSTEMS 

Sec. 22-212. - Private fire hydrants, sprinkler systems, etc.; owners to pay cost of pipes, etc. 
    Fire hydrants, fire sprinkler systems or hose racks may be established on private property by the owner thereof at the owner's cost for pipe, valves, fittings and connection to water mains, etc., provided the same shall be done under the supervision and subject to the inspection of and in accordance with the requirements of the public works department, and the maintenance of such mains, valves and hydrants shall be at the cost and expense of the owner of the property. The regularly established rate for such connection for such fire hydrants, fire sprinkler systems and hose racks shall be paid, and, if not, the same shall be disconnected from the city's water system. 
(Code 2001, § 21.235.1) 
Sec. 22-213. - Connection to city water system; meter; charge for water service; attachment of other fixtures on fire line. 
    Upon approval by the city, any property owner installing fire hydrants, fire sprinkler systems or hose racks may connect them to the city's water system and have installed and maintained at the owner's cost by the public works department a water meter, and to pay therefor the regularly established charge for water service as listed in the published rates, whether water has been used for the fire or any other purpose. No fixture whatsoever, other than fire hydrants, sprinkler connections and hose racks, used for fire only, shall be connected on such fire line. 
(Code 2001, § 21.235.2) 
Sec. 22-214. - Liability of city for damage due to low pressure, etc. 
    The city guarantees no certain water pressure and shall in no case be in any way liable or responsible to any persons whatsoever in case of fire, for any damage that may result from any alleged insufficiency of such fire protection, either from want of pressure or volume, accessibility, or for any other cause. 
(Code 2001, § 21.235.3) 
Secs. 22-215-22-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-237. - Standards for industrial and special users. 
    The provisions of the City of Tampa Wastewater Department Technical Manual (Manual of Standards for Industrial and Special Users), as updated April 2006, and all subsequent duly adopted amendments thereto, are incorporated by reference into this Code, as setting forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works of the City of Tampa and enables the city to comply with applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(Code 2001, § 21.330; Ord. No. 1218, 2-19-2008) 
Secs. 22-238-22-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 22-268. - When required. 
    The owner of each and every parcel of land heretofore or hereafter developed within the service area shall be required to connect to the sewer system when any of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Existing development. 
a.  Single-family residential, multi-family or commercial flow under five hundred (500) GPD. A gravity main exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property and gravity flow can be naturally or artificially maintained from the residence's or establishment's drain to the gravity main; or a low pressure sanitary sewer system abuts the property. 
b.  Multi-family or commercial flow over five hundred (500) GPD. A gravity main, force main, or lift station exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property of the establishment and is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of the establishment as accessed via rights-of-way or easements. 
c.  Industrial/manufactured zoned areas. A public sanitary sewer system exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property of the establishment and is within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of the establishment as accessed via existing easements or rights-of-way. 
(2)  New development. 
a.  Single-family residential, multi-family or commercial flow under five hundred (500) GPD. A gravity main exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property and gravity flow can be naturally or artificially maintained from the residence's or establishment's drain to the gravity main; or a low pressure sanitary sewer system abuts the property. 
b.  Multi-family or commercial flow over five hundred (500) GPD and less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) GPD. A gravity main, force main, or lift station exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property of the establishment and is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of the establishment as accessed via rights-of-way or easements. 
c.  Multi-family or commercial flow over one thousand five hundred (1,500) GPD. A gravity main, force main, or lift station exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property of the establishment and is within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of the establishment as accessed via rights-of-way or easements. 
d.  Industrial/manufactured zoned areas. A public sanitary sewer system exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property of the establishment and is within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the property line of the establishment as accessed via existing easements or rights-of-way. 
(3)  Exceptions. When the city engineer determines that a connection to the system cannot reasonably be completed due to system hydraulics or other limitations, the city manager or designee may grant a waiver of this section until such time as conditions reasonably permit said connection. 
(Code 2001, § 21.310.1) 
Sec. 22-269. - Connection required. 
(a)  Any parcel with an existing building shall be required to connect to the sewer system within ninety (90) days after written notification of service availability is provided to the property owner by the city. 
(b)  Any new building hereafter erected shall be connected to the sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said building. 
(Code 2001, § 21.310.2) 
Sec. 22-270. - Private lift station maintenance responsibility. 
    When a lift station is required on private property to connect a parcel to the sewer system, the owner of the parcel is responsible for the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of said private lift station. 
(Code 2001, § 21.310.3) 
Sec. 22-271. - Houses built below street level. 
    Houses or buildings built or to be built with a floor or basement elevation such that a connection to the city sewer system requires the use of a lift station, shall, at their own expense, construct, own, operate and maintain any necessary lift stations or other devices to pump the sewage up to the sewers. Plans for said lift stations or other pumping devices must be submitted to the city for approval before the connection to the city sewer system is made. 
(Code 2001, § 21.310.4) 
Sec. 22-272. - Connection to be made by the city. 
(a)  All connections to the sewer system shall be made by city employees or persons authorized by the city. 
(b)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with, or openings into, use, alter or disturb any sanitary sewer or appurtenances thereof, including house connections, without first obtaining written permission from the city. 
(Code 2001, § 21.310.5) 
Sec. 22-273. - Pre-treatment requirement for extreme waste. 
    The city shall have the right to require any producer of extreme waste to install necessary pre-treatment requirements at producer's own expense, prior to connecting to the city sewage facilities. No substance will be discharged into the sanitary sewers which could be injurious thereto or potentially dangerous to the public. 
(Code 2001, § 21.315) 
Sec. 22-274. - Connection of any non-sanitary waste prohibited. 
    There shall be no connections for surface drainage, stormwater or any non-sanitary waste to the sanitary sewage line facilities. 
(Code 2001, § 21.320) 
Secs. 22-275-22-296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GREASE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-297. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Temple Terrace Grease Management Ordinance." 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.1) 
Sec. 22-298. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Food service facility or facility means any business or food service facility which prepares and/or packages food or beverages for sale or consumption. This does not apply to private residences. Food service facilities may include, but are not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, grocery stores, bakeries, lounges, meat markets, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools, cafeterias, delicatessens, coffee shops, concession stands and all other food service facilities not specifically listed above. 
    Food service facility owner or owner, in the case of individual food service facilities, means the owner or proprietor of the food service facility. Where the facility is a franchise operation, the owner of the franchise is the responsible person or entity. Where the facility is owned by a partnership, corporation, or other type of business entity, the individual who is authorized to legally act on behalf of the business entity under state law shall be the responsible person. Where two (2) or more food service facilities share a common grease interceptor, the owner shall be the individual who owns or assumes control of the grease interceptor or the property on which the grease interceptor is located. Owner shall also mean the owner's duly authorized representatives, employees or agents. 
    GMP inspector means the City of Temple Terrace code compliance director and/or designee. 
    Gray water means all liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the food solids layer. 
    Grease means a material either liquid or solid, composed primarily of fats, oils or grease from animal or vegetable sources. 
    Grease hauler means a person who collects the contents of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to an approved recycling or disposal facility. 
    Grease interceptor means an interceptor whose rated flow exceeds fifty (50) gpm or has a minimum storage capacity of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons or more and is a device located underground and outside of a facility. It is designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes or grease from the wastewater while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
    Grease trap means an interceptor whose rated flow is fifty (50) gpm or less and is a device located inside a facility and/or under a sink designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the wastewater while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
    Notice of violation (NOV) means a written notice informing a food service facility owner or grease hauler that a violation of the City of Temple Terrace Grease Management Ordinance has occurred. 
    Registered hauler means a grease hauler registered with the City of Temple Terrace in accordance with this article who is authorized to perform inspection, cleaning, and grease disposal for food service facilities. 
    Sanitary facilities means bathrooms, bathroom fixtures, bathroom groups, hand sinks or other similar fixtures or facilities. 
    Treatment works means any part of the city's wastewater system. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.4) 
Sec. 22-299. - Purpose; objectives. 
(a)  This division establishes uniform maintenance and monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of grease from food service facilities discharging into the city's treatment works and for regulation of grease haulers operating within the city limits. 
(b)  The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the municipal treatment works, either in the City of Temple Terrace or the City of Tampa. 
(2)  To prevent clogging or blocking of the city's sewer lines due to grease build-up causing sanitary sewer overflows onto streets, into stormwater systems or waterways and into residences and commercial buildings, resulting in potential liability to the city. 
(3)  To prevent maintenance and odor problems at wastewater pumping stations due to grease build-up. 
(4)  To implement a process to recover costs for any liability incurred by the city for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in sanitary sewer overflows. 
(5)  To establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(6)  To register grease haulers operating within the city. 
(7)  To establish enforcement procedures for violations of the article. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.2) 
Sec. 22-300. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall apply to all food service facilities discharging into the city's treatment works and to all grease haulers doing business within the city. 
(b)  Where there is a conflict between this article and the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition), the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition) shall be applicable. 
(c)  The city currently regulates the improper discharge of grease into water or wastewater pursuant to the City of Tampa Technical Services Manual, on file in the office of the city clerk, as adopted by the city, and as updated and revised from time to time by the City of Tampa. Where there is a conflict between this article and the Technical Services Manual, as amended, this division shall be applicable. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.3) 
Sec. 22-301. - Authority. 
    The municipal code enforcement board, the code compliance director, and the GMP inspector shall have the power, duty and responsibility to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.5) 
Sec. 22-302. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Search or inspection warrant. The director of the public works department or designee, or the GMP inspector, through the city attorney, may seek to obtain a search or inspection warrant from the appropriate authority to gain access to a facility for the purposes of inspection and monitoring is such lawful entry under section 22-303 has been denied by the owner. 
(b)  Referral to code enforcement board. The director of the public works department or designee, or the GMP inspector, may enforce the violation of any provision of this division against an owner or grease hauler, pursuant to and in the manner provided by section 1-41 and the provisions of F.S. ch. 162. 
(c)  Injunctive and other relief. The city may file an action in the circuit court, or any other courts having jurisdiction, seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, and other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this article or applicable state or federal law or regulations. 
(d)  Recovery of damages. When the discharge from a food service facility causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to the treatment works, or causes any expenses, fines, penalties or damages of whatever character or nature to the city, the director of the public works department or designee shall invoice the owner for same incurred by the city. If the invoice is not paid, the director of the public works department or designee shall notify the city attorney to take such actions as shall be appropriate to seek reimbursement. 
(e)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this division are not mutually exclusive. The director of the public works department or designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant person. 
(f)  Appeal of revocation or denial of grease hauler registration. Any revocation or denial of grease hauler registration may be appealed to the city council, which shall conduct a quasi-judicial hearing and enter an order either upholding the revocation or denial, or over-turning such decision. The grease hauler shall have fifteen (15) days from receipt of written notice of denial or revocation of the registration to file an appeal. Failure of the grease hauler to file an appeal within the fifteen-day time limit shall constitute acceptance of the decision to deny or revoke the registration. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.11) 
Sec. 22-303. - Facility inspections. 
(a)  Entry. Pursuant to section 22-148 each facility shall allow the director of the public works department or designee or the GMP inspector access at all reasonable times to all parts of the facility premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, and sampling in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Inspections. The GMP inspector shall inspect food service facilities on either an unannounced or scheduled basis to verify continued compliance with the requirements of this article. The GMP inspector shall inspect all grease traps or interceptors, plumbing connections, the logbook and file, other pertinent data or take samples as necessary. The GMP inspector shall record all observations in a written report. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Failure to properly maintain the grease interceptor or trap in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Failure to report changes in operation, or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Failure to maintain logs, files, records or access for inspection or monitoring activities. 
(4)  Inability of existing grease interceptor or trap to prevent discharge of grease into the city's treatment works. 
(5)  Any other inconsistency with or violation of this article. 
(c)  Reinspections. The GMP inspector shall inspect any repairs, replacements or other deficiencies and shall provide written notice of compliance or noncompliance. In the event of continuing noncompliance, reinspections will be performed. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.6) 
Sec. 22-304. - Grease traps and interceptors. 
(a)  Permit required. Any food service facility that intends to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any grease trap or interceptor is required to make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. The facility shall submit with its permit application the appropriate design criteria in accordance with the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition). 
(b)  Requirements. All food service facilities are required to have a grease interceptor or trap properly installed in accordance with any and all applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition). 
(1)  New facilities. On or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing food service facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such a food service facility did not previously exist, shall be required to install a grease interceptor or trap according to the requirements of the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition), and to operate and maintain the grease interceptor or trap according to the requirements contained in this division. 
(2)  Existing facilities. 
a.  Food service facilities existing prior January 20, 2009, shall be permitted to operate and maintain existing grease interceptors or traps provided their grease interceptors or traps are in good operating condition. 
b.  The city may require an existing facility to install a new grease interceptor or trap that complies with the requirements of the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition) or to modify or repair any noncompliant plumbing or existing grease interceptor or trap when any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The facility is found to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the wastewater collection system. 
2.  Grease concentrations exceed four hundred (400) mg/l on wastewater effluent as determined by sampling performed by the GMP inspector. 
3  The facility does not have a grease interceptor or trap. 
4.  The facility has an irreparable or defective grease interceptor or trap. 
5.  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the city. 
6.  The facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership. 
7.  The facility does not have plumbing connections to a grease interceptor or trap in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Plumbing connections. Grease interceptors or traps shall be installed in accordance with Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition). Wastewater from sanitary facilities shall not be introduced into the grease interceptor or trap under any circumstances. 
(d)  Records maintenance. Each food service facility shall maintain a bound logbook in which a record of all interceptor maintenance is entered. Maintenance information shall include, but not be limited to, date and time of the maintenance, gallonage removed from interceptor or trap, any defects in the grease interceptor or trap, details of any repairs required and dates of repair completion, changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics, receipts from grease haulers, plumbers, parts suppliers, etc., and any other records pertaining to the interceptor. This logbook shall be made available for review upon request. Records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years. Each facility shall provide, upon request of the GMP inspector within ten (10) days, drawings of sufficient detail to depict the plumbing layout of the facility. 
(e)  Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition) and shall be operated and maintained as follows: 
(1)  Pumping and maintenance. 
a.  Each food service facility shall be responsible for the costs of pumping, cleaning, and maintaining its grease interceptor. All food service facilities that have grease interceptors shall utilize a registered grease hauler. Pumping services shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, gray water, bottom sludge and solids from the interceptor. Grease interceptor cleaning shall include scraping excessive solids from the walls, floors, baffles and all piping. 
b.  It shall be the responsibility of the grease hauler to inspect an interceptor during, or immediately after the pumping procedure to ensure that the interceptor is clean and that all fittings and fixtures inside the interceptor are in working condition and functioning properly. If the interceptor is not functioning properly, the grease hauler shall notify the owner in writing. The notice shall include a sufficient description of the malfunction. 
(2)  Interceptor pumping frequency. Each food service facility shall have its grease interceptor pumped according to the following criteria: 
a.  When the settled solids layer exceeds the invert of the outlet pipe (typically eight (8) inches in depth); 
b.  When the total volume of captured grease and solid material displaces more than twenty-five (25) percent of the capacity of the interceptor; or 
c.  When the interceptor is not retaining or capturing oils and greases. 
(3)  Inspection. Grease interceptors shall be inspected by a GMP inspector as necessary to assure compliance with this article. 
(4)  Disposal. Wastes removed from each grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. Grease, solid materials, or gray water removed from interceptors shall not be returned to any grease interceptor, private sewer line or to any portion of the city's treatment works, except for food service facilities that use a two (2) compartment pump truck where the compartments are fully separate with their own valve system, so there is no cross contamination between the gray water with the solids and grease. With this type of equipment, gray water may be re-introduced back into the interceptor as long as the wastewater effluent grease concentrations do not exceed four hundred (400) mg/l. 
(f)  Grease traps. Grease traps shall be installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition), and shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Flow control device. Grease traps shall be equipped with a device to control the rate of flow through the unit. The rate of flow shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity recommended in gallons per minute for the unit. Each food service facility is responsible for maintaining appropriate flow control devices. 
(2)  Venting. The flow-control device and the grease trap shall be vented in accordance with the Florida Building Code-Plumbing, as amended (current edition). The vent shall terminate not less than six (6) inches above the flood-rim level or in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Each facility is responsible for maintaining appropriate venting of the grease trap. 
(3)  Cleaning and maintenance. Each food service facility shall be solely responsible for the cost of grease trap cleaning and maintenance. Each facility may contract with a registered grease hauler or it may develop a written protocol and perform its own grease trap cleaning and maintenance procedures. Cleaning and maintenance must be performed when the total volume of captured grease and solid material displaces more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total volume of the grease trap. Each facility shall determine the frequency at which their grease trap shall be cleaned, but all grease traps shall be opened, inspected, cleaned, and maintained at a minimum of once per week. 
(4)  Inspection. Grease traps shall be inspected by a GMP inspector as necessary to assure compliance with this division and to assure proper cleaning and maintenance is being performed. 
(5)  Disposal. Grease and solid materials removed from a grease trap shall be removed by a registered grease hauler unless the grease is in a solid waste disposal system, dry form, mixed with an oil absorbent in an enclosed bag or container, and does not exceed five (5) pounds. 
(g)  Additives. Any chemicals, enzymes, emulsifiers, live bacteria or other grease cutters or additives used for the purpose of grease reduction shall be approved by the GMP inspector prior to their addition to grease interceptors or traps. Applicable information concerning the composition, frequency of use and mode of action of the proposed additives shall be sent to the city together with a written statement outlining the proposed use of the additives. The city may request a sampling port installed by the food service facility at the facility's expense to demonstrate the additives will work. The city, upon evaluation of all of the information received, shall permit or deny the use of the additives in writing. Permission to use additives may be withdrawn by the city at any time. 
(h)  Alternative grease removal devices or technologies. Alternative devices and technologies such as automatic grease removal systems shall be subject to written permission by the director of the public works department or designee prior to installation. Permission to use the device shall be based on demonstrated and proven removal efficiencies and reliability of operation. The city may permit these types of devices depending on manufacturer's specifications on a case-by-case basis. The food service facility may be required to furnish analytical data demonstrating grease removal effectiveness, or perform effluent monitoring. Permission to use alternative devices and technologies may be withdrawn by the city at any time. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.7) 
Sec. 22-305. - Grease interceptor and trap enforcement. 
    Whenever the GMP inspector determines that a grease interceptor or trap is in need of pumping, repairs, maintenance, or replacement, enforcement shall be as follows: 
(1)  Notice of violation (NOV). The GMP inspector conducting the inspection shall immediately notify the food service facility owner that a violation exists and issue the owner an NOV stating the nature of the violation. 
(2)  Inspection and reinspection. If a grease interceptor or trap has to be re-inspected because of deficiencies found during a previous inspection, and all of the deficiencies have been corrected, there shall be no charge for the reinspection. If all of the deficiencies have not been corrected, a reinspection fee shall be charged to the food service facility. 
(3)  Sampling fees. Fees for any sampling and analysis of wastewater discharges deemed necessary for the protection of the treatment works shall be charged to the food service facility owner in the amount per sampling event. 
(4)  Pump-out and cleaning. A violation involving the lack of proper cleaning and maintenance of a grease trap shall require the food service facility owner to clean out the trap within twenty-four (24) hours of the NOV. If interceptor pumping frequency is not being met, the owner shall be required to have the interceptor pumped out within seventy-two (72) hours of the NOV. 
(5)  Repairs and replacement. The food service facility owner shall be responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to or replacement of its grease interceptor or trap. Repairs and replacements required by a GMP inspector shall be completed within a reasonable time as established in written guidelines prepared by the director of the public works department or designee. The time for corrective action shall commence on the date of receipt of the NOV. Written guidelines shall include provisions for time extensions if the owner responds with an acceptable plan for rectifying the situation. 
(6)  Noncompliance. If the food service facility owner continues to violate the provisions set forth in this article, or fails to initiate or complete corrective action in response to an NOV, or a city approved plan to rectify a violation, the director of the public works department or designee may pursue one or more of the following options at the sole discretion of the director of the public works department or designee: 
a.  Pump the grease interceptor and seek reimbursement of the costs from the food service facility owner; 
b.  Assess further inspection fees as provided; 
c.  Terminate sanitary sewer service; 
d.  Refer any violation by any food service facility or its owner for enforcement for any or all applicable remedies, including, but not limited to, the city's municipal code enforcement board. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.8) 
Sec. 22-306. - Grease haulers. 
(a)  Grease hauler registration. 
(1)  Any person, firm, or business desirous of collecting, pumping or hauling grease interceptor or trap wastes from businesses located within the city limits shall be required to register with the city. It shall be unlawful for any grease hauler to clean or pump out grease interceptors or traps within the city limits without being registered. 
(2)  Registrations shall be effective for a period of three (3) years. The registration required by the city shall be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or occupational licenses required by federal, state, and local agencies having lawful jurisdiction. The registration is not transferable. The director of the public works department or designee shall issue stickers to all city registered grease haulers. The stickers shall be displayed in a visible location on all vehicles used to clean interceptors or traps. 
a.  Application. To register with the city, a grease hauler shall submit a completed application form to the director of the public works department or designee. The director of the public works department or designee shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions all applications by written notice within forty-five (45) calendar days of the city's receipt of the completed application form. The grease hauler shall be registered prior to providing grease hauling services within the city limits. The application shall require, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  List of all trucks or vehicles used to clean interceptors or traps, which include vehicle make, model, year, identification number, color, tank capacity, proof of insurance and tag number. 
2.  List of all drivers or personnel used to clean interceptors or traps, including proof of valid driver's licenses. 
3.  List of all disposal sites. 
b.  Information update. Registered grease haulers shall update application information annually from date of issuance of registration. 
c.  Registration renewal. An application for registration renewal shall be submitted on the appropriate renewal form at least forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the existing registration by each applicant wishing to provide grease hauling services in the city limits. 
(b)  Spill reporting. Any accident, spill, or other discharge of grease, solids or gray water which occurs within the city shall be reported to the city by the grease hauler as soon as possible but not longer than twenty-four (24) hours after the incident. The grease hauler shall comply with all procedures and reporting requirements contained in federal, state and local regulations. The grease hauler shall be responsible for all clean-up procedures and costs. 
(c)  Recordkeeping. Grease haulers shall retain and make available for inspection and copying, all records related to grease interceptor or trap pumping and grease disposal. A city grease hauler manifest or approved form shall be required to be signed by the grease hauler certifying the accuracy of the information on the manifest. The manifest shall include, but not be limited to, name, location, date and time of the facility serviced, gallonage removed from interceptor or trap, disposal times, dates, locations, and amounts. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. The failure to provide information to the city within ten (10) days of a written request is a violation of this article. 
(d)  Vehicle inspection. Grease haulers shall permit the city to inspect grease hauler's registered vehicles. 
(e)  Disposal. Wastes removed from each grease interceptor or trap shall be disposed of at a grease disposal facility permitted to receive such wastes. Grease, solid materials, or gray water removed from interceptors or traps shall not be returned to any grease interceptor, trap, private sewer line, or to any portion of the city's treatment works, except for food service facilities that use a two-compartment pump truck where the compartments are fully separate with their own valve system, so there is no cross contamination between the gray water with the solids and grease. With this type of equipment, gray water may be reintroduced back into the interceptor as long as the wastewater effluent grease concentrations do not exceed four hundred (400) mg/l. 
(f)  Grease hauler enforcement. Enforcement actions against grease hauler in violation of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Notice of violation (NOV). An NOV will be issued to any grease hauler that is found to be in noncompliance with this article. Response to this NOV must be received by the city within ten (10) calendar days of its receipt by the grease hauler. The grease hauler will be required to describe how the violation occurred, verification that the violation has been corrected, and shall provide assurance that steps will be taken to prevent the re-occurrence of the violation. 
(2)  Registration revocation. Any registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this division may be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part during its term for cause shown including, but not limited to any one of the following: 
a.  Falsification of any information. 
b.  Discharging any grease, liquid, or solid waste into a non-authorized location. 
c.  Failure to comply with this division. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.9) 
Sec. 22-307. - Fees. 
    Fees associated with this division will be established pursuant to the provisions of section 22-23. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.10) 
Sec. 22-308. - Damaging city property; falsifying information. 
(a)  Damage to city property. Pursuant to section 16-3, it is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break damage, destroy or deface, tamper with or remove any city property. 
(b)  Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 2001, § 21.325.12; Ord. No. 1219, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 1241, 1-20-2009) 
Secs. 22-309-22-334. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; local government solid waste responsibilities, F.S. § 403.706; littering, F.S. § 403.413 et seq. 

Sec. 22-335. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Solid Waste Service Ordinance of Temple Terrace." 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.1) 
Sec. 22-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
    Biohazardous/medical waste shall be construed to mean all biological material that poses a threat to humans or their environment. 
    Building/construction materials means and includes sand, wood, stone, brick, cement, concrete, construction blocks, roofing and other refuse building materials usually generated from a construction or remodeling project. 
    Commercial type containers means large containers, dumpsters, open-topped roll-off containers and compactors used for solid waste, trash/refuse, building/construction materials. 
    Hazardous waste materials means all chemicals including, but not limited to, paints and solvents, automotive products and automotive batteries, household cleaners, hobby and craft supplies, pool chemicals, lawn and garden supplies, outdated medicines, tires, propane/gas cylinders, smoke detectors, and other potentially toxic substances or as may be modified in the future and/or outlined in the city's "Residential Sanitation and Recycling Guidelines" brochure. 
    Recycling materials means all recyclable commodities including but not limited to aluminum drink cans, steel/tin food cans, green, brown and clear glass bottles/jars, cardboard, plastic household bottles or containers, and mixed paper or as may be modified in the future and/or outlined in the city's "Residential Sanitation and Recycling Guidelines" brochure. 
    Solid waste means any and all animal, fruit and vegetable refuse matter whether cooked or raw or other material from which any animal, fruit or vegetable matter has been removed which might become sour, spoiled, rotten or putrid and from which obnoxious odors are liable to be emitted or to which flies, other insects, or rodents are liable to be attracted, as well as any other items not as biohazardous/medical waste, hazardous water, building/construction materials or recyclables. 
    Special trash pick up means collection of larger items that do not meet regular collection requirements. 
    Trash/refuse means all larger items that do not meet regular solid waste or recycling collection requirements as outlined in the city's "Residential Sanitation and Recycling Guidelines" brochure. 
    Yard waste means any yard clippings, leaves, tree limbs, tree trunks, palm fronds, mulch, and shrubbery/brush materials. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.2) 
Sec. 22-337. - City not to pick up building/construction materials. 
    The city shall not collect building/construction materials, as defined in section 22-336, created, collected or disposed of either by contractors, occupant or owner as part of ordinary solid waste collection service. Building/construction waste will be picked up and disposed of via a commercial type of container service. 
(Code 2001, § 11.120.8) 
Sec. 22-338. - Collection by city. 
    All solid waste and recyclables generated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city. No person shall collect, convey over any city streets or alleys, or dispose of, any solid waste or recyclables generated in the city without a written contract or permit approved by the director of public works in accordance with the standards, terms and conditions provided in this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall, in any way, alter, impair or restrict the exclusive right of the city council to issue franchises and other such contracts concerning the collection of solid waste in the city. 
(1)  Exception for actual producers. This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of building/construction materials, trash/refuse, or recyclables, or the owners of premises upon which building/construction materials, trash/refuse or recyclables have been generated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such, provided such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this article and with all other governing laws and ordinances. 
(2)  Exception for outside collectors. This article shall not prohibit collectors of building/construction materials, trash/refuse or recyclables from outside the city from hauling such over city streets prescribed by the director, provided that such collectors shall comply with the provisions of this article and with all other governing laws and ordinances. 
(3)  Exception for haulers of source separated recyclables. Nothing in this Code prohibits private haulers from services related to source separated recyclables, providing they meet the permit requirements of this Code. 
(4)  Requirements for vehicles used by actual producers and/or outside collectors. Vehicles must be designed to prevent spillage of liquids or items from being blown, dropped or spilled. The director shall have the authority to approve all vehicles used to transport/convey materials. 
(5)  Disposal of building/construction materials, trash/refuse and/or recyclables by actual producers and/or outside collectors. Disposal by persons so permitted shall be made at an approved disposal site, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the director. 
(6)  Rules and regulations. The director shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over city streets by outside collectors as the director shall find necessary subject to the right of appeal as set forth in section 22-339. 
(7)  Private incinerator. Owners or lessees of premises desiring to incinerate their refuse on their respective premises shall be permitted to do so subject to the incinerator and its operation meeting all city regulations and having the written approval of the city fire marshal. A refuse incinerator to be operated within the city shall cause no smoke, no offensive odors, no sparks and no nuisance. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.1) 
Sec. 22-339. - Collection supervised by director of public works; appeal to city manager. 
(a)  All solid waste and recyclables generated in the city shall, unless otherwise permitted, be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city under the supervision of the director. The director shall have authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as the director shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a regulation or fee charged by the director shall have the right to appeal to the city manager or designee who shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or fee. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.2) 
Sec. 22-340. - Collection practices for solid waste. 
    The following practices for curbside collection of solid waste are hereby established: 
(1)  Solid waste. Solid waste shall be drained and wrapped before placing in containers or bags. 
(2)  Solid waste containers. Solid waste containers shall be made of metal or plastic and equipped with suitable handles and with tight-fitting covers. Containers shall not have a capacity of more than thirty-two (32) gallons and shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight when collected. Plastic garbage bags of one and one-half (11/2) mil thickness (minimum) and suitably tied are acceptable. 
(3)  Duty to provide and maintain in a sanitary condition. Solid waste containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises. Solid waste containers shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Any container which does not conform to the provisions of this section or which may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be replaced promptly upon notice. The director shall have the authority to refuse collection service for failure to comply herewith. 
(4)  Hazardous waste. Hazardous waste shall not be placed in containers for regular collection nor collected by the city for disposal. 
(5)  Biohazardous/medical waste. Biohazardous/medical waste shall not be placed in containers for regular collection nor collected by the city for disposal. 
(6)  Solid waste removal. It shall be the city's policy to collect all solid waste two (2) times each week with the exception of weeks in which a city holiday falls. Containers and bags should be at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on collection day. Garbage containers and bags shall not be placed at curbside earlier than sunset the day prior to collection, and shall be removed by sunset the day of collection. 
(7)  Exceptions. Exceptions to these requirements due to age, health, physical infirmity, handicap or similar incapacity shall be approved by the director. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.3; Ord. No. 1353, § 7(exh. F), 12-3-2013) 
Sec. 22-341. - Collection practices for yard waste. 
    The following practices for curbside collection of yard waste recycling are hereby established: 
(1)  Yard waste. Any leaves, yard or hedge clippings, tree trimmings, shrubbery should be bagged or containerized. 
(2)  Tree branches/limbs. Tree branches should be bundled or containerized. Tree limbs should be shorter than three (3) feet in length and less than five (5) inches in diameter. 
(3)  Yard waste removal. Yard waste that is bagged, containerized or bundled should be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on yard waste recycling collection day only. Disposal regulations prohibit the city from collecting yard waste with normal household solid waste. 
(4)  Exceptions. Exceptions to these requirements due to age, health, physical infirmity, handicap or similar incapacity shall be approved by the director. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.4) 
Sec. 22-342. - Collection practices for recyclables. 
    The following practices for curbside collection of recyclables are hereby established: 
(1)  Recyclables. All recyclables including, but not limited to, aluminum drink cans, steel/tin food cans, green, brown and clear glass bottles/jars, cardboard, plastic household bottles or containers, and mixed paper should be placed in a city-issued recycling bin/container or as may be modified in the future and/or outlined in the city's "Residential Sanitation and Recycling Guidelines" brochure. 
(2)  Recyclables removal. City-issued recycling bins/containers should be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on recycling bin/container day only. 
(3)  Exceptions. Exceptions to these requirements due to age, health, physical infirmity, handicap or similar incapacity shall be approved by the director. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.5) 
Sec. 22-343. - Collection practices for commercial collection services. 
    The following collection practices for commercial collection services are hereby established: 
(1)  Solid waste. Solid waste shall be drained and wrapped before placing in containers . 
(2)  Commercial type or larger containers. Commercial type containers shall be located in such a manner that the city's collection vehicle may service them safely and efficiently. 
(3)  List of containers; commercial type containers. The director shall at all times keep a complete list of illustrations, specifications, diagrams and sizes of such containers acceptable to the city for refuse collection purposes. Each commercial type container shall have the approval of the director before its contents are collected. 
(4)  Solid waste removal. Commercial type containers will be serviced by the city based on a pre-established servicing schedule. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.6) 
Sec. 22-344. - Storing of solid waste/trash/refuse. 
    The following practices regarding storing of solid waste/trash/refuse are hereby established: 
(1)  Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, unless it is in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the director. No person shall place any solid waste/trash/refuse at the curb for collection except on the person's own property, at the front and behind the curb line, except that on a corner lot the owner or tenant may use the side rather than the front, subject to the approval of the director. No person shall throw or deposit any solid waste/trash/refuse in any stream or body of water. 
(2)  Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste/trash/refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any accumulation of refuse shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(3)  Scattering of solid waste/trash/refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any solid waste/trash/refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(4)  Shopping carts, shopping baskets and related items. Any shopping carts, shopping baskets and related items abandoned on public property, including, but not limited to, streets, rights-of-way, bus stops and park areas, creating a public nuisance and/or traffic and safety hazards, shall be removed and returned to the appropriate owners of said items by the city. The cost for removal and return of said items, not to exceed the operational cost per hour of the sanitation division, shall be assessed against the owners of said items. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.7) 
Sec. 22-345. - Special solid waste/trash/refuse. 
    The following practices regarding special solid waste/trash/refuse disposal are hereby established: 
(1)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the proper county health officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collections and shall not be a municipal collection. 
(2)  Inflammable or explosive refuse. Highly inflammable or explosive materials and ashes shall not be placed in containers for regular collections but shall be disposed of as directed by the director at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(3)  Biohazardous/medical waste. Biohazardous/medical waste shall not be placed in containers for regular collections but shall be disposed of by a properly permitted biohazardous/medical waste collection service. 
(4)  Hazardous waste materials. Hazardous waste materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collections but shall be disposed of at a properly permitted hazardous waste collection site. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.8) 
Sec. 22-346. - Service by private hauler contractors. 
(a)  When allowed. A private hauler contractor may provide services within the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  The director determines that the city is unable to collect, remove, or dispose of certain solid wastes, garbage, or other accumulations; or 
(2)  The private hauler contractor performs services related to source-separated recyclables; and 
(3)  The private hauler contractor obtains a city permit as a condition of providing the services. 
(b)  Permit requirements. Every person requesting to procure a permit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall submit an application for such permit to the director of public works. The application shall include: 
(1)  A signed, sworn written statement, including an affidavit, upon forms provided by the city; 
(2)  Disclosure of all information the city deems necessary to assure compliance with this section; 
(3)  Payment of the fee established by the city for such permit; 
(4)  A complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant; 
(5)  The names of all management, administrative and supervisory employees responsible for operation of applicant's business including the amount of experience possessed by each such employee. If such employees are not partners, officers or directors of the applicant, then each such employee must complete a city police department background information report executed under oath and must submit the background investigation, photograph and fingerprints; and 
(6)  The following additional information: 
a.  Number, type and size of waste collection vehicles to be used; 
b.  Number of employees to be assigned to each waste collection vehicle; and 
c.  Name and location of commercial and industrial establishments where containers are to be placed and serviced. 
(c)  Prerequisites to issuance. In determining whether to issue a permit, the director shall consider and base the decision on the following: 
(1)  A review of the material submitted pursuant to this section; 
(2)  A review of all convictions of the applicant and its partners, officers, directors and employees, the reasons therefor and the conduct of such persons subsequent to the convictions and release; 
(3)  The license history of each such applicant; 
(4)  The adequacy of the equipment to be used; 
(5)  The applicant's agreement to remit the city each month a fee equal to fifteen (15) percent of the gross revenue, excluding disposal fees and all service fees related to source separated recyclables, received by the applicant for the preceding calendar month, supported by a duplicate copy of the applicant's monthly billings; 
(6)  The applicant's agreement to make all books and records applicable to business conducted under the permit available to the city for inspection and audit; 
(7)  The applicant's provision of a certificate of insurance demonstrating that all of the applicant's employees performing work pursuant to the permit are covered by workers' compensation insurance. 
(d)  Liability insurance. The holder of a permit issued under this section shall maintain in effect at all times public liability insurance in the minimum amounts of liability of the city under F.S. § 768.28, and shall furnish the city a certificate evidencing such insurance and naming the city as an additional named insured. 
(e)  Termination, denial and renewal; restrictions on issuance or renewal. 
(1)  All permits issued under this section shall be expressly made terminable at will and without cause by the city and shall provide that the permits shall terminate on the earlier of the last day of the city's current fiscal year, or on thirty (30) days' written notice by the city. 
(2)  Each permit holder shall make a written application for renewal on forms provided by the director on or before October 1st of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application and shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(3)  Applications for renewal shall be processed in the same manner as an initial application. 
(Code 2001, § 11.130.14; Ord. No. 144, 2-16-1965; Ord. No. 169, 10-4-1966; Ord. No. 182, 6-6-1967; Ord. No. 207, 11-5-1968; Ord. No. 218, 10-7-1969; Ord. No. 311, 3-18-1975; Ord. No. 368, 9-19-1978; Ord. No. 395, 10-4-1979; Ord. No. 405, 5-20-1980; Ord. No. 413, 11-18-1980; Ord. No. 418, 2-24-1981; Ord. No. 595, 9-16-1986; Ord. No. 630, 9-22-1987; Ord. No. 705, 10-3-1989; Ord. No. 829, 3-2-1993; Ord. No. 883, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 1091, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 22-347-22-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - USE OF AND COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 1426 , adopted August 15, 2017, which added Art. VII, §§ 22-350-22-375, as setout herein, provides that said ordinance shall take effect on July 1, 2017, and shall apply to any applications for facilities in the city's public rights-of-way filed on or after that date. 

Sec. 22-350. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Temple Terrace Use of and Communications Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-351. - Right-of-way and easement use permit required. 
    No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, pave, or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, driveway, parkway, or street within a public right-of-way or easement without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer as provided by this division. No structure or obstruction of any kind shall be planted, built, installed, placed or otherwise created within the limits of the public right-of-way or easement without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer as provided by this division. In accepting a permit under this division, the permittee shall assume responsibility for and in a manner reasonably acceptable to the city, restore without delay the public rights-of-way so disturbed to its original condition immediately prior to the placement or maintenance work, replacing fill, sidewalks and pavement in a good and satisfactory condition at the time of completion of the work. The permittee shall further assume all liability for injury or damage to persons or property that may occur in the course or because of such work. Work shall be completed within the time specified in the permit and shall be carried on expeditiously without undue inconvenience to the public. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-352. - Right-of-way use permits. 
(a)  Permits for paving, grading, or use of any portion of a public right-of-way for any purpose may be granted by the city engineer, when, in his or her discretion, the safety and convenience of the city can be protected. The city engineer may impose conditions upon said permit, consistent with state and federal law, which are deemed necessary to protect the safety and convenience of the city. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, permits shall indicate that they are revocable at the will of the city, and that their issuance in no way grants to the permittee or his successors any right to the continued use of such right-of-way. 
(c)  If any person undertakes any activity as a result of an emergency within a public right-of-way without a permit as required under this article, a permit shall be obtained within forty-eight (48) hours of the emergency activity. An emergency shall exist if, without undertaking activity in the right-of-way or easement, there is an immediate danger of damage occurring to life or property. If it is determined by the city engineer that no emergency existed at the time of the activity, the city engineer may require removal of any objects placed within the public right-of-way or easement and/or deny the requested permit. Additionally, the person shall be subject to enforcement action as provided for in the Temple Terrace Code of Ordinances or as otherwise provided for by law. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-353. - Application procedure. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the city engineer an application showing: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner, or agent, in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area; 
(2)  Name and address of the party doing the work; 
(3)  Detailed location of the work area; 
(4)  Attached sample drawing showing necessary details of the proposal; and 
(5)  Such other information as may be required by division 2 of this article, or as the city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(b)  In determining whether to issue a permit for a new or expanded structure in the right-of-way, and subject to such limitations and requirements as may arise under division 2 of this article, the city engineer shall consider the following: 
(1)  The technical need for the structure and the need to locate the structure at the proposed location; 
(2)  Whether the structure would create an unacceptable sight obstruction or other safety hazard; and 
(3)  Whether a location outside of the right-of-way is reasonably available and whether the utility has made reasonable efforts to secure such a location. This subsection shall be applied to the extent not otherwise prohibited by Florida and federal law, and shall not apply to expansions of existing equipment already located in the right-of-way or the location of auxiliary equipment adjacent to existing structures already located in the right-of-way. 
(c)  In approving a permit for a new or expanded structure, the city engineer may impose reasonable screening, appearance, and other conditions to minimize the impact of the structure. Structures shall not interfere with the operation and maintenance of existing utilities, facilities, signs, traffic signals, roadways or walkways within the public right-of-way. If at any time city determines that a structure is at a location that is deemed to be unsafe, the city may require the structure to be relocated at the permittee's expense. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-354. - Bonding, insurance and other requirements and exemptions. 
    The following may be required to accompany an application for a permit hereunder: 
(1)  Bonds and insurance. In cases where the estimated cost of the project shall exceed $500.00, the city engineer may require an applicant to provide bonding and insurance consistent with division 2 of this article. 
(2)  Indemnity. The permittee shall be required to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the city arising out of the work performed in the right-of-way and placement or maintenance of a structure in the right-of-way. 
(3)  Exemptions. Utility companies serving the public through a franchise agreement with the city shall be exempt from posting bonds for construction. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-355. - Fee. 
    Permit applications shall be accompanied by a fee, established by the city council by resolution for filing, engineering and inspection. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 22-356. - Findings, intent and scope. 
(a)  The city hereby makes and declares the following findings and declares its legislative intent as follows: 
(1)  The public rights-of-way within the City of Temple Terrace are a unique and physically limited resource and important amenity that are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the city. 
(2)  The demand for telecommunications services has grown exponentially in recent years, requiring the continual upgrading of telecommunications equipment and services to satisfy such demand. 
(3)  The placement of utilities including telecommunications equipment and facilities in the public rights-of-way to satisfy the demand for telecommunications services raises important issues with respect to the city's responsibility to manage its public rights-of-way. 
(4)  The public rights-of-way must be managed and controlled in a manner that enhances the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its citizens. 
(5)  The use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by utilities and providers of communications services must be subject to regulation which can ensure minimal inconvenience to the public, coordinate users, maximize available space, reduce maintenance and costs to the public, and facilitate entry of an optimal number of providers of cable, telecommunications, and other services in the public interest. 
(6)  F.S. § 166.041 provides for procedures for adoption of an ordinance which is a regulation of general and permanent nature and enforceable as local law. 
(7)  F.S. § 337.401 provides that because federal and state law require the nondiscriminatory treatment of providers of telecommunications services and because of the desire to promote competition among providers of communications services, it is the intent of the Florida Legislature that municipalities and counties treat providers of communications services in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner when imposing rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public roads or rights-of-way. 
(8)  The city finds that, to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, it is necessary to: (i) provide for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city limits, (ii) adopt and administer reasonable rules, regulations and general conditions not inconsistent with applicable state and federal law, (iii) manage the placement and maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers, (iv) minimize disruption to the public rights-of-way, and (v) require the restoration of the public rights-of-way to original condition. 
(9)  The city's intent is that these rules and regulations must be generally applicable to all providers of communications services and, notwithstanding any other law, may not require a provider of communications services to apply for or enter into an individual license, franchise, or other agreement with the city as a condition of placing or maintaining communications facilities in its roads or rights-of-way. 
(10)  It is also the city's intent to exercise the city's retained authority to regulate and manage the city's roads and rights-of-way in exercising its police power over communications services providers' placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner. 
(b)  This article shall apply to any public or private entity who seeks to construct, place, install, maintain or operate a communications system or facilities, as such terms are defined herein, in the public rights-of-way, unless otherwise exempt by operation of applicable state or federal law. This article shall equally apply to a city owned or controlled communications system except to the extent such facilities are utilized on an internal, non-commercial basis by the city or any of its agencies, departments or bureaus. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-357. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The words "shall," "will" and "must" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed thereto under F.S. chs. 202 or 337, as amended, or where none is ascribed shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
    Abandonment means the permanent cessation of all uses of a communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in the public rights-of-way. 
    Affiliate means each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a communications services provider that is registered with the city pursuant to this article; provided that affiliate shall in no event mean any limited partner, member, or shareholder holding an interest of less than fifteen (15) percent in such communications services provider. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services or other communications services. 
    Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement this subsection. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance which may require that a new utility pole replacing an existing utility pole be of substantially similar design, material, and color, or that ground-mounted equipment meet reasonable spacing requirements. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance which may require a small wireless facility to meet reasonable location context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements; however, the city may waive the design standards upon a showing that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the particular location of a small wireless facility or that the design standards impose an excessive expense. The waiver must be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days after the date of the waiver request. 
    Applicant means a person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
    Application means a request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities. 
    Article means chapter 22, article VII of the City Code pursuant to that ordinance [Ord. No. 1426] enacted by city council effective on July 1, 2017, as may be amended or supplemented from time to time. 
    As-built surveys means the final and complete drawings in hard copy signed and sealed by a professional surveyor and mapper (as defined in F.S. § 472.005) and the final and complete electronic overview map (in AutoCAD, microstation, MapInfo or ESRI format) presented in computer input medium such as CD-ROM, DVD or Zip 100/250. As-built surveys, in both the drawings and the electronic overview map, must show the present state of a communications services provider's facilities in the public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, the horizontal and vertical location of facilities located at least every one hundred (100) feet and at any alignment change. Horizontal locations on all points of facilities shall be from street centerline, or section or quarter section lines or corners. Vertical locations on all points of facilities shall consist of elevations in either city datum or United States Geological Survey datum. 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or any other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable service provider means a person that provides cable service over a cable system. 
    Cable system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities use any public right-of-way; a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act of 1934 except such facility shall be considered a cable system other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; or an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 573. 
    City means the City of Temple Terrace, Florida, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Florida. 
    City Code means the Municipal Code of Ordinances of the City of Temple Terrace, Florida. 
    City council means the governing body for the city. 
    City utility pole means a utility pole owned by the city in the right-of-way. 
    Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way, nor does it include interconnection of communications facilities or the sale or purchase of capacity (whether bundled or unbundled). 
    Communications facility, facility or facilities means any portion of a communications system located in the public rights-of-way. 
    Communications services means the definition ascribed thereto in F.S. § 202.11(1), as may be amended, and also includes but is not limited to wireless services as defined herein. 
    Communications services provider means: (i) any person, municipality or county providing communications services through the use and operation of a communications system or communications facilities installed, placed and maintained in the public rights-of-way, regardless of whether such system or facilities are owned or leased by such person, municipality or county and regardless of whether such person, municipality or county has registered with the Florida Department of Revenue as a provider of communications services in Florida pursuant to F.S. ch. 202, and (ii) any person, municipality or county who constructs, installs, places, maintains or operates communications facilities in the public rights-of-way but who does not provide communications services, including for example a company that places "dark fiber" or conduit in the public rights-of-way and leases or otherwise provides those facilities to another company that does provide communications services. 
    Communications system or system means any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way that is occupied or used, or is capable of being occupied or used, by a communications services provider for the purpose of producing, conveying, routing, transmitting, receiving, amplifying, distributing, providing or offering communications services including, but not limited to cables, wires, lines, conduits, fiber optics, antennae, radios and any associated poles, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, and other plant, equipment and pathway. 
    Dealer means any person, municipality or county providing communications services to an end user in Temple Terrace through the use and operation of communications facilities installed, placed and maintained in the public rights-of-way, whether owned or leased, and who has registered with the Florida Department of Revenue as a provider of communications services pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. This definition of "dealer" is intended to include any "reseller." 
    Department means the Florida Department of State. 
    Division 1 permit means the right-of-way utilization permit required under chapter 22, article VII, division 1 of the City Code prior to commencement of work or any placement or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
    Excavation or other similar formulation of that term means the cutting, trenching or other disturbance to the public rights-of-way intended to change the grade or level of land or which causes any cavity, gap, depression, penetration or hole in the surface of the public rights-of-way. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal of an authorization, regardless of whether the authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, to construct and operate a cable system or video service provider network facilities in the public right-of-way. 
    Franchise authority means any governmental entity empowered by federal, state, or local law to grant a franchise. 
    Government means the United States of America, the State of Florida, counties, municipalities, and any of their respective agencies, departments or bureaus. 
    In the public rights-of-way means in, along, on, over, under, across or through the public rights-of-way. 
    Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven (11) inches. 
    Pass-through facilities means the facilities for a communication system that merely pass through the city from one point to another point and from which no revenues are directly attributable to subscribers or other carriers within the city. 
    Pass-through provider means any person, municipality or county that places or maintains a communications system or communications facilities in the public rights-of-way but who does not provide communications services, including for example a company that places "dark fiber" or conduit in the public rights-of-way and leases or otherwise provides those facilities to another company that does provide communications services to an end user. This definition of "pass-through provider" is intended to include any person that places or maintains "pass-through facilities" in the public rights-of-way, but does not provide communications services to an end user within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Person means any individual, firm, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including any affiliate, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the city to the extent that the city acts as a communications services provider. 
    Placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining or other similar formulation of that term means the named actions interpreted broadly to encompass, among other things, erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, inspection, maintenance, placement, replacement, extension, expansion, repair, removal, operation, occupation, location, relocation, grading, under grounding, trenching or excavation. Any communications services provider that owns, leases or otherwise controls the use of a communications system or facility in the public rights-of-way, including the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" a communications system or facility. A person providing service only through buying wholesale and then reselling is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
    Public rights-of-way means land in which the city owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for use as a transportation facility, as that term is defined in F.S. § 334.03(21). "Public rights-of-way" shall not include (a) county, state or federal rights-of-way, (b) property owned by any person other than the city, (c) service entrances or driveways leading from the road or street onto adjoining property or (d) except as described above, any real or personal property of the city, such as, but not limited to, city parks, golf courses, buildings, fixtures, conduits, sewer lines, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
    Public Service Commission or PSC means the agency for the State of Florida charged with the powers and duties conferred upon it by F.S. ch. 364. 
    Record drawings means a final and complete drawing accurately depicting the improvements as constructed. Record drawings are not required to be signed and sealed by a professional surveyor and mapper. 
    Registration or register other similar formulation of that term means the process described in section 22-357 whereby a communications services provider provides certain information to the city. 
    Reseller means any person providing communications services within the city over a communications system, or portion thereof, for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not place or maintain, nor own or control, any of the underlying facilities in the public rights-of-way used for transmission. Instead such person purchases the service, usually at wholesale, from a communications services provider and then resells it at retail or such person uses the public rights-of-way by either interconnecting with the facilities of a communications services provider utilizing the public rights-of-way or by leasing excess capacity from a facility-based communications services provider. 
    Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets the following standards: (a) each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and (b) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
    Utility pole means a pole or similar structure used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights, but does not include any horizontal structures upon which are attached signal lights or other traffic control devices and does not include any pole or similar structure fifteen (15) feet in height or less unless the city grants a waiver for the pole. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(20). 
    Video service means video programming services, including cable services, provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d), video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables end users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
    Video service provider means an entity providing video service. 
    Wireless facilities means equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include (a) the structure or improvements on under within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated, or (b) wireline backhaul facilities, or (c) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
    Wireless infrastructure provider means a person who has been certificated to provide telecommunications service in the state, and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but is not a wireless services provider. 
    Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
    Wireless services means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 
    Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. 
    Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-358. - Registration. 
    Every communications services provider that desires to place or maintain a communications system or any communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, including any pass-through facilities, shall first register with the city in accordance with this section. Subject to the provisions prescribed in this article, a communications services provider that has properly registered may apply for division 1 permits to place or maintain a communications system or facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Every communications services provider that desires to place or maintain communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, including any pass-through facilities, shall register with the city engineer's office and shall submit the following information and documentation: 
(1)  The name of the applicant under which it will transact business in the city and, if different, in the State of Florida; and 
(2)  The address and telephone number of the applicant's principal place of business in the State of Florida and any branch office located in the city or, if none, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's national headquarters and its registered agent in Florida; and 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person and the person to contact in case of an emergency; and 
(4)  The type of communications services that the applicant intends to provide within the corporate limits of the city (if more than one, state all that apply), or, if none, state that the applicant is a pass-through provider or is intending only to place and maintain pass-through facilities, as the case may be; and 
(5)  For registrations submitted on or after October 1, 2017, a copy of both the applicant's resale certificate and certificate of registration issued by the Florida Department of Revenue to engage in the business of providing communications services in the State of Florida; and 
(6)  A copy of the applicant's certificate of authorization, public convenience and necessity or other similar certification issued by the Florida Public Service Commission; and 
(7)  The number of the applicant's certificate of authorization or license to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the department, the FCC, or other federal authority, if any; and 
(8)  For an applicant that is a pass-through provider, in lieu of paragraphs (e), (f) and (g) above, the applicant shall provide a certified copy of the certificate or license issued by the Florida Department of State, or other appropriate state agency or department, authorizing the company to do business in the State of Florida; and 
(9)  Evidence of the applicant's insurance coverage as required under this article. 
(b)  The city shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the city engineer or his or her designee. If it is found that the applicant complied with the requirements in subsection (a) above, the registration shall be effective and the city shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the city determines that the applicant is not in compliance, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the non-effectiveness and denial of registration and the reasons therefor. The city shall so reply to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of the registration and required information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness and denial of registration shall not preclude an applicant from reapplying or filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this section. 
(c)  An effective registration does not, and shall not be construed to, convey equitable or legal title in the public rights-of-way to any communications services provider. Registration under this article governs only the placement or maintenance of a communications system or communications facilities in the public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of facilities that are not part of a communications system. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on those facilities or property belonging to the city or another person. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from complying with all other applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations, including the rules, regulations and general conditions set forth in this article. 
(d)  A communications services provider may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city stating that it will no longer place or maintain a communications system or any communications facilities in the public rights-of-way and will no longer have a need to apply for division 1 permits to perform construction or other work in the public rights-of-way. A communications services provider cannot cancel a registration if it intends to continue placing or maintaining a communications system or any communications facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(e)  Registration, in and of itself, does not establish a right to place or maintain or a priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications system or any facility in the public rights-of-way, but shall establish for the communications services provider a right to apply for a division 1 permit from the city. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional city ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. Registration does not excuse or exempt a communications services provider from having to obtain on occupational license from the city in accordance with the City Code. 
(f)  A communications services provider shall renew its registration with the city by April 1 of even numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this article, except that any communications services provider that initially registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew its registration until the next even numbered year. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (1), a communications services provider shall provide updated information to the city. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of additional division 1 permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(g)  In accordance with applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations, a division 1 permit is required for a communications services provider to place or maintain a communications facility in the public rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining such a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, all permitting requirements shall apply, including the requirement to pay for any such permits unless otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance of the city. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of the communications services provider having an effective registration if all permitting requirements of the city and other provisions of this article are met. 
(h)  A reseller, which by definition does not place or maintain communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, is not required to register with the city. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-359. - Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets. 
    If a communications services provider transfers, sells or assigns its system or any facilities located in the public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the communications services provider's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the provisions set forth in this article. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by the communications services provider to the city within thirty (30) days after the effective date of such transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not currently registered with the city, then the transferee, buyer or assignee must register as provided in section 22-357 within sixty (60) days of the effective date of such transfer, sale or assignment. If any applications for division 1 permits are pending under the communications services provider's name as of the date the city receives written notice of the transfer, sale or assignment, then the city shall consider the transferee, buyer or assignee as the new applicant unless otherwise notified by the communications services provider. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-360. - Rules, regulations and general conditions to placement of communications systems and facilities in the public right-of-way. 
    As a condition of allowing the placement or maintenance of a communications system or any communications facility in the public rights-of-way, and under additional authority granted pursuant to F.S. ch. 337, the city hereby imposes the following rules, regulations and general conditions. Unless otherwise provided in this article, these rules, regulations and general conditions shall apply to all communications services providers, including those that are pass-through providers irrespective of whether they place and maintain only conduit, dark fiber or pass-through facilities. 
(a)  Rules on utilization of the public rights-of-way. 
(1)  Compliance with laws. A communications services provider shall at all times be in full compliance with and abide by all applicable federal, state and local laws, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a communications system and facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Due care. A communications services provider shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(3)  Permits. A communications services provider shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way until all applicable permits have been issued by the city and other appropriate authority, except in the case of an emergency. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or general welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. The communications services provider shall provide prompt notice to the city of the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency and shall, after-the-fact, be required to submit plans and record drawings and as-built surveys, if required by the city engineer, showing the placement or relocation of a communications facility undertaken in connection with the emergency. 
(4)  Application for division 1 permit. Prior to the issuance of a division 1 permit to allow the placement or maintenance of a communications system or facility in the public rights-of-way, the city has the right to first review and consider and the communications services provider shall provide all of the following: 
a.  The expected dates and times when the facility will be installed and the estimated time needed for construction and placement of the proposed facility; 
b.  The location of the proposed facility, the public rights-of-way affected and a description of the facility, including the type of facility (e.g., conduit, fiber, twisted pair, etc.), the number of fibers or other cable being installed, and the approximate size of the facility (e.g., length, height, width and diameter); and 
c.  Plans, drawings, photographs, and schematics (including cross section layout) prepared by a qualified engineer or technician showing where the facility is proposed to be located in the public rights-of-way and showing any known communications facilities or utility facilities in such public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Revised plans. If the plans or drawings submitted showing the proposed location for installation of the facility in the public rights-of-way require revision for any reason prior to commencing construction, the communications services provider shall promptly submit revised plans and drawings to the city engineer. 
(6)  Power to restrict area. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of the public rights-of-way and deny the issuance of a division 1 permit. 
(7)  Limited purpose of division 1 permit. A division 1 permit issued by the city constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create any property right or other vested interest, or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. Division 1 permits shall be granted only for specific routes or locations in the public rights-of-way and for such term as described in the permit. The city's issuance of a division 1 permit shall not be construed as a warranty that the placement of any communications facility is in compliance with applicable codes, regulations or laws. 
(8)  Responsibility for contractors. Every communications services provider that is registered with the city shall be liable for the actions of contractor(s) hired by them to perform the placement or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way and shall be responsible for making sure that such contractor meets and complies fully with the rules, regulations and general conditions set forth in this article. 
(b)  Regulations on the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by Florida law and federal law, the following regulations shall apply to the placement or maintenance of communications facilities: 
(1)  Provision and form of record drawings and as-built surveys. Within forty-five (45) days after completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way, the communications services provider shall provide the city with record drawings showing the final location of such facility in the public rights-of-way. Upon request by the city engineer, the communications services provider shall also provide the city with as-built surveys within forty-five (45) days after completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way. The record drawings and as-built surveys shall be provided to the city at no cost. 
(2)  Production and filing of as-builts. Every communications services provider that is registered with the city shall produce and keep on file at its principal place of business an accurate and complete set of as-builts of all facilities placed and maintained in the public rights-of-way. The location and identification of facilities and the production of as-builts shall be at the sole expense of the communications services provider. Within thirty (30) days of any written request by the city engineer, the communications services provider must provide to the city, at no cost, copies of complete sets of as-builts for the indicated public rights-of-way. The failure of the communications services provider to produce, keep on file, or provide to the city as-builts as required under this article is sufficient grounds for the city to deny the issuance of division 1 permits in the future. 
(3)  Removal of facilities placed without permit. Any communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way by the communications services provider without first having obtained the required division 1 permits shall be removed within thirty (30) days of written notice by the city to remove the same and in default of compliance with such notice, such facilities may be removed by order of the city engineer and the cost of removal shall be borne and paid by the communications services provider upon demand. 
(4)  Underground. The placement or maintenance of all communications facilities shall be underground unless otherwise approved in writing by the city engineer. Communications facilities shall be placed between the property line and the curb line of all streets and avenues and shall not be within the roadway or the roadway recovery area unless specifically approved in writing by the city engineer. All communications facilities shall have consistent alignment parallel with the edge of pavement, a thirty-six-inch depth of cover for and shall have two (2) feet of horizontal clearance from other underground utilities and their appurtenances. Where approved by the city engineer, facilities to be placed in the street shall be laid according to the permanent grade of the street and at a depth below the surface of the permanent grade as each is determined by the city engineer. 
(5)  Above-ground approval. The placement or maintenance of facilities above-ground, including new utility poles and aerial wires, is subject to written approval by the city engineer. Attachment to any utility pole or other above-ground structure must be pursuant to a valid and effective pole attachment agreement or similar instrument. Location on any utility pole or other above-ground structure shall not be considered a vested interest of the communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider and such utility poles or structures, if owned by the communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider, shall be removed or modified by the communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider at its own expense whenever the city or other governmental authority determines that doing so is reasonably necessary to further a municipal purpose, including the convenient use of the right-of-way by the public. The lowest placement of any communications facility on any pole or other above-ground structure in the public rights-of-way shall not be less than twelve (12) feet from the ground. The communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider shall, at such time as the electric utility facilities or other communications facilities are placed underground or are required by the city to be placed underground, concurrently place its communications facilities underground without cost to the city. 
(6)  New utility poles or above-ground structures. The placing of any new utility pole or other above-ground structure to support communications facilities is subject to the approval of the city engineer and shall be done under the supervision of the city engineer or his designee. No such utility pole or other above-ground structure shall be placed in any gutter or drainage area and must be behind the curb to avoid damage to any sidewalk. In areas of the city where either electric utility wires or other communications facilities are above ground and such facilities are moved, either voluntarily or at the direction of the city, to a new utility pole or other above-ground structure, the communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider shall likewise move all its above-ground facilities on such utility poles or structures to such new utility pole or structure within sixty (60) days after receipt of written notice from either the city or the owner of the new utility pole or structure, without cost to the city. All above-ground wireless facilities including utility poles shall be designed to match the style, design, and color of similar facilities in the surrounding area to minimize visual impact so as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. New utility poles installed by wireless infrastructure providers shall be subject to and may avail themselves of the requirements and process set forth in Code section 22-362(b). 
(7)  Placement and maintenance standards. The placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be performed in accordance with standards and requirements of the following, as is applicable and as each is in force at the time of the respective placement or maintenance of a communications system or facility: 
a.  The Florida Department of Transportation Utilities Accommodation Guide; 
b.  The State of Florida Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways; 
c.  The Trench Safety Act (F.S. ch. 553); 
d.  The Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act (F.S. ch. 556); 
e.  The National Electrical Code or the ANSI National Electrical Safety Code; and 
f.  The "Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and Communication Lines" established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards of the United States. 
(8)  Sunshine State One-Call. Every communications services provider shall utilize, and if permissible, maintain membership in the utility notification one call system administered by Sunshine State One-Call of Florida, Inc. 
(9)  Safety and minimal interference. All placement and maintenance of communication facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the City Code and other regulations of the city pertaining thereto, and shall be performed with the least possible interference with the use and appearance of the public rights-of-way and the rights and reasonable convenience of the property owners who abut or adjoin the public rights-of-way and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Florida Department of Transportation. The communications services provider shall at all times employ reasonable care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury or be a nuisance to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. All placement and maintenance shall be done in such a manner as to minimize to the greatest extent any interference with the usual travel on such public rights-of-way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e., microtunneling and horizontal directional drilling techniques) for the installation of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching or the collocation of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever and whenever feasible. 
(10)  Correction of harmful conditions. If, at any time, the city or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines that any communications facility is, or has caused a condition that is, harmful to the health, safety or general welfare of any person, then the communications services provider shall, at its own expense, promptly correct or eliminate all such facilities and conditions. In an emergency, as determined by the city engineer, when the communications services provider is not immediately available or is unable to provide the necessary immediate repairs to any communications facility that is damaged or malfunctioning, or has caused a sunken area or other condition and, in the city engineer's sole discretion, is deemed a threat to public safety, then the city, when apprised of such an emergency, shall have the right to remove, make repairs to or eliminate same with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the communications services provider upon demand. 
(11)  Remedy of hazardous conditions. If, at any time, a condition exists that the city or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines is an emergency that is potentially hazardous or life threatening to any person or is a threat to the health or safety of the general public, and to remedy such condition the city or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines that a communications services provider must temporarily relocate or temporarily shut off service or transmissions through a specific facility, then the city, as an appropriate exercise of its police powers, may order the communications services provider to immediately perform such temporary relocation or shut off until the condition has been remedied, and to do so at its own expense and without liability to or recourse against the city. In such an emergency, when the communications services provider is not immediately available or is unable to provide the necessary immediate relocation or shut off of the specific communications facility, then the city shall have the right to perform, or cause to be performed, such temporary relocation or shut off until the condition has been remedied with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the communications services provider upon demand. 
(12)  Interference with other facilities. A communications services provider shall not, in violation of any applicable laws or regulatory standards, design, place or maintain its communications facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals or facilities of any municipal or county police, fire or rescue department, the facilities of any public utility, or the communications facilities of another communications service provider, including any cable service provider. 
(13)  Relocation or removal of facilities. Except in cases of emergency, a communications services provider, at its own expense, shall: 
a.  Upon sixty (60) days written notice from the city, relocate or remove, as specified in said notice, its communications facility in the event the city finds that the particular facility is unreasonably interfering in some way with the convenient, safe or continuous use, or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of any public rights-of-way. The city shall provide the communications services provider with a notice and order as provided for in F.S. § 337.404, or any subsequently enacted law of the State of Florida, in the event it charges the communications services provider for the cost and expense of relocating or removing such facility pursuant to this paragraph. 
b.  Within a reasonable period of time from the date of written notice from the city, but not more than one hundred twenty (120) days thereafter, relocate or remove, as specified in said notice, its communications facility in the event the city engineer determines it necessary for the construction, completion, repair, relocation or maintenance of a city project, because the particular communications facility is interfering with or adversely affecting the proper operation of street light poles, traffic signals, or any communications system belonging to the city or an agency thereof or because the particular communications facility is interfering with the signals or facilities of the Temple Terrace Police Department, Temple Terrace Fire Rescue, or any municipal public utility. In the event the city issues any such written notice to the communications services provider pursuant to this paragraph, and the communications services provider fails to cause the aforementioned relocation or removal as required herein, the city shall be entitled to relocate or remove such facilities without further notice to the communications services provider and the total cost and expense shall be charged to the communications services provider. 
(14)  Temporary raising or lowering of facilities. A communications services provider, upon request of any person holding a validly issued building or moving permit from the city to temporarily encroach on or perform moving operations in or across the public rights-of-way, shall temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities to accommodate such temporary encroachment or move. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the communications services provider shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The communications services provider shall be given not less than twenty (20) days advance written notice from such person to arrange for the temporary relocation, which notice must detail the time and location of the permitted activity, and not less than twenty-four (24) hours advance notice from the permit holder advising of the actual operation. The city is not subject to, nor shall it be liable for, any such expense or notice requirement for the moving of houses or structures performed by the city or its contractors. 
(15)  Coordination. In an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the public rights-of-way and other municipal improvements, a communications services provider may be required by the city engineer to coordinate the placement or maintenance of its facilities with any work, construction, installation in or repairs of the subject public rights-of-way or other facilities therein that is occurring or is scheduled to occur within a reasonable time from application for a division 1 permit as determined by the city engineer. Every communications services providers shall make space in its trench and/or conduit within the public rights-of-way available to other providers consistent with the federal requirements of 47 U.S.C. 224. Every communications services provider shall utilize existing conduits, pathways and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not place or maintain any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, pathways or other facilities, whether in the public rights-of-way or on privately-owned property, until written approval is obtained from the city or other appropriate governmental authority, and, where applicable, from the private property owner. 
(16)  Collocation and joint use. A communications services provider, in an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the useful life of the public rights-of-way, shall, whenever possible, enter into joint use agreements with the city and other parties who have registered with, or who are expressly authorized by, the city to use its public rights-of-way; provided that the terms of such agreements are satisfactory to the communications services provider. Nothing herein contained shall mandate that the communications services provider enter into joint use agreements with parties other than the city or an agency of the city. However, prior to placement of any new or additional underground conduit in the public rights-of-way, a communications services provider is required to certify in writing to the city engineer that it has made appropriate inquiry to all existing utilities and other entities possessing a right to occupy the public rights-of-way as to the availability of existing or planned conduit that the particular communications services provider could reasonably utilize to meet its needs, and that no such conduit is available or planned at a reasonable cost by any other entity on the time schedule reasonably needed. The communications services provider shall not be permitted to perform any placement or maintenance of facilities in those segments of the public rights-of-way where there exists vacant or available conduit, dark fiber or surplus fiber owned by the city, an agency of the city or another governmental body which is or, through a reasonable amount of effort and expense, can be made compatible with the communications services provider's system or network. Under such circumstances the communications services provider shall have the opportunity to enter into a use agreement or lease arrangement with the city or an agency of the city at or below reasonable and prevailing market rates for such conduit or fiber or, where owned by another governmental body, shall, in good faith, first exhaust all means of obtaining use of such conduit or fiber before applying for a division 1 permit from the city. 
(17)  Maintenance-of-traffic. In the event that placement or maintenance of communications facilities conducted by the communications services provider requires streets or traffic lanes to be closed or obstructed, the communications services provider must, pursuant to the requirements of existing or subsequently enacted city ordinances, obtain all necessary permits from city, and shall obtain approval of its maintenance-of-traffic plan from the city engineer. 
(18)  Restoration of the public rights-of-way. After completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way or each phase thereof, the communications services provider shall, at its own expense and in a manner reasonably acceptable to the city, restore without delay the public rights-of-way so disturbed to its original condition immediately prior to the placement or maintenance work. If the communications services provider fails to make such restoration within thirty (30) days following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the city may perform such restoration and charge the costs of the restoration to the communications services provider in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended. The communications services provider shall, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, maintain and correct any restorations made pursuant hereto for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of its completion. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be deemed sufficient grounds for denial of any future division 1 permits for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(19)  Disruption or destruction of other facilities or property. A communications services provider shall not knowingly place or maintain any facility in a manner that shall in any way disrupt, displace, damage or destroy any sewer line, gas line, water main, pipe, conduit, wires, fiber-optics or other facilities, or property belonging to the city or any other person lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way, without first obtaining the consent of the city. The communications services provider shall bear all responsibility and costs for any such conduct where city consent has not been obtained and shall pay such costs upon demand. 
(20)  Preservation of public rights-of-way for planned public projects. The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of public rights-of-way and may consider, among other things, the sufficiency of space to accommodate all of the present communications facilities and pending applications to place and maintain communications facilities and other structures in that area of the public rights-of-way, the sufficiency of space to accommodate city announced plans for public improvements or projects that the city determines are in the public interest, the impact on traffic and traffic safety, and the impact upon existing communications facilities and other structures in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  General conditions on the utilization of the public rights-of-way and the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(1)  City not liable. Except for acts of willful misconduct or gross negligence and to the extent permitted by applicable law, neither the city nor its officials, boards, commissions, consultants, agents, employees or independent contractors shall have any liability to the communications services provider for any claims for any damages, costs, expenses or losses resulting from the city's breakage, removal, alteration or relocation of any facilities of any communications services provider which arose out of or in connection with any emergency or disaster situation or was, in the sole discretion of the city engineer, deemed necessary to facilitate any public works project, public improvement, alteration of a city structure, change in the grade or line of any public rights-of-way, or the elimination, abandonment or closure of any public rights-of-way or was found by city council to be in the best interest of the health, safety or general welfare of the public; nor shall any charge be made by the communications services provider against the city for any damages, costs, expenses or losses related thereto. 
(2)  No exemption from permits. Nothing in this article shall exempt any communications services provider from obtaining division 1 permits for work done within the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Subject to police powers. The rights of the communications services provider shall be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the city, and to such other reasonable regulation of the public rights-of-way as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Any inconsistency or ambiguity between the provisions of this article and any lawful exercise of the city's police power shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(4)  City inspection. The city shall have the right to make such inspections of a communications system or facilities placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article. This article shall not be construed to create or hold the city responsible or liable for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection by the city of the placement or maintenance of a communications system or facility as authorized herein or failure by the city to so inspect. 
(5)  Access to manholes. The city, in the proper exercise of its municipal powers and duties with respect to the public rights-of-way, shall have access at any time to all hand holes and manholes in the city belonging to a communications services provider. Before accessing any manhole, the city will make a reasonable good faith effort to provide the communications services provider prior notice to afford an opportunity to have trained personnel present, unless determined by the city to be an emergency situation. 
(6)  Compatibility, capacity and interference issues. To properly manage and control the use of the public rights-of-way, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, the city, in its legislative and regulatory role, shall be the final authority on permitting a communications system or facility to be placed in the public rights-of-way and shall exercise such authority in a non-discriminatory manner. It shall be in the sole discretion of the city attorney whether an easement is compatible with or allows for its use by a communications system or facility. It shall be in the sole discretion of the city engineer, based on the nature, design, size, configuration or proposed location of any communications system or facility, whether there is sufficient capacity in a particular section of the public rights-of-way or whether such system or facility will interfere with the facilities or equipment of any municipality, county, public utility, cable operator, or other communications service provider. 
(7)  No warranty of fitness or suitability. The city makes no express or implied warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the public rights-of-way for any communications system or facility or its right to authorize the placement or maintenance of any communications system or facility in the public rights-of-way. Any performance of work, costs incurred or services rendered by a communications services provider shall be at such provider's sole risk. Nothing in this article shall affect the city's authority to acquire or add public rights-of-way, or to vacate or abandon public rights-of-way as provided for in the City Code or applicable law. The city makes no express or implied warranties or representations regarding the availability of any acquired, added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for a communications system or facility. 
(8)  Annexations. Upon the annexation of any territory to the City of Temple Terrace, the provisions of this article and the rules, regulations and general conditions contained herein shall extend to the territories so annexed; and all facilities placed, maintained, owned or operated by any communications services provider extending into or already located in the public rights-of-way of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-361. - Duty to notify city of resellers; conditional use of public rights-of-way. 
    Within thirty (30) days of any registered communications services provider using its facilities to carry the communication services of any reseller, such communications services provider shall notify the city of the name and address of such reseller. A reseller's lease, interconnection or other use of facilities belonging to a communications services provider duly registered in accordance with this article and properly permitted to place or maintain its facilities in the public rights-of-way, does not, and shall not, afford such reseller any right, claim or cause of action to impede the lawful exercise of the city's rights or police powers, including, but not limited to, requiring the registered communications services provider to remove such facilities from the public rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-362. - Wireless facilities. 
(a)  Generally. The placement of telecommunication towers and antennae anywhere in the corporate limits of the city shall in all cases be subject to the city's zoning and land use regulations. Where placement of a wireless antenna in the public rights-of-way has been approved by the city and to the extent not inconsistent with any city zoning, land use or other development regulations, a wireless antenna attached to a permitted and legally maintained vertical structure in the public rights-of-way, such as a light pole or utility pole, shall, unless otherwise agreed to by the city in writing: 
(1)  Not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the vertical structure; 
(2)  Not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, state, or local rule, regulation or law; 
(3)  Comply with any applicable Federal Communications Commission Emissions Standards; 
(4)  Comply with any applicable local building codes in terms of design, construction and installation; and 
(5)  Not contain any commercial advertising thereon. 
(b)  Small wireless facilities in public rights-of-way. The city hereby adopts the following rules that will apply to the collocation of small wireless facilities in public rights-of-way for all applications filed on or after July 1, 2017: 
(1)  General conditions. Applicants seeking permission to collocate or install small wireless facilities within public rights-of-way shall comply with the registration, insurance coverage, indemnification, performance bonds, security funds, force majeure, abandonment, city liability, and city warranties provisions contained in this article; provided, however, that the review timeframes and denial criteria of this subsection shall control. 
(2)  Filing, review, and processing of applications. The city shall accept applications for permits and shall process and issue permits for the collocation of small wireless facilities in public rights-of-way subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall as a part of its application provide information necessary to demonstrate the applicant's compliance with the applicable provisions of this article for the placement of small wireless facilities in the locations identified in the application, and shall bear the burden of demonstrating compliance therewith. 
b.  Within fourteen (14) days after the date of filing the application, the city may request that the proposed location of a small wireless facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative city utility pole or support structure or may place a new utility pole. The city and the applicant may negotiate the alternative location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground-based equipment, for thirty (30) days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify the city of such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted for any new location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the city of such nonagreement and the city must grant or deny the original application within ninety (90) days after the date the application was filed. A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. 
c.  The city hereby limits the height of a small wireless facility to ten (10) feet above the utility pole or structure upon which the small wireless facility is to be collocated. Unless waived by the city, the height for a new utility pole is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017, located in the same public right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility pole within five hundred (500) feet, the city shall limit the height of the utility pole to fifty (50) feet. 
d.  Within fourteen (14) days after receiving an application, the city must determine and notify the applicant by electronic mail as to whether the application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information. An application is deemed complete if the city fails to provide notification to the applicant within fourteen (14) days. 
e.  The city shall process all applications on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the city fails to approve or deny a complete application within sixty (60) days after receipt of the application, the application is deemed approved. If the city does not use the thirty-day negotiation period provided herein, the parties may mutually agree to extend the sixty-day application review period. The city shall grant or deny the application at the end of the extended period. 
f.  A permit issued pursuant to an approved application shall remain effective for one year unless extended by the city. 
g.  The city shall notify the applicant of approval or denial by electronic mail. The city shall approve a complete application unless it does not meet the applicable provisions of this article. 
h.  If the application is denied, the city shall specify in writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial is based, and shall send the documentation to the applicant by electronic mail on the day the city denies the application. 
i.  The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within thirty (30) days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. Failure by the applicant to timely resubmit the application shall result in a final denial of the application. The city shall approve or deny a timely filed revised application within thirty (30) days after receipt or the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
j.  An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the city's boundaries may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application with the city and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to thirty (30) small wireless facilities. If the application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the city may separately address small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. 
k.  The city may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way if the proposed collocation: 
1.  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
2.  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes. 
3.  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
4.  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual. 
5.  Fails to comply with applicable codes and the applicable provisions of this article. 
l.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the city may reserve space on city utility poles for future public safety uses. If replacement of a city utility pole is necessary to accommodate the collocation of the small wireless facility and the future public safety use, the pole replacement is subject to the make-ready provisions of this article and the replaced pole shall accommodate the future public safety use. 
m.  A structure granted a permit and installed pursuant to this subsection shall comply with F.S. ch. 333, including, but not limited to the airport protection zoning regulations adopted by the city pursuant to F.S. § 333.03, and federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace protections. 
n.  The city does not require approval or fees for: (i) routine maintenance, (ii) replacement of existing wireless facilities with substantially similar wireless facilities, or (iii) installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliances with applicable codes by or for a communications services provider authorized to occupy the public rights-of-way and who is remitting taxes under F.S. ch. 202. 
(3)  Collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles. Collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles is subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The city shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for the right to attach equipment to city utility poles. 
b.  The rates and fees for collocations on city utility poles must be nondiscriminatory, regardless of the services provided by the collocating person. 
c.  The city hereby levies, establishes, and sets an annual rate that shall be paid by all those applicants who file an application to collocate small wireless facilities on city utility poles in the amount of $150.00 per pole per year. The initial payment shall be made as a condition of the granting of the permit, with remaining annual payments to be made in all subsequent years on the same date. 
d.  Agreements between the city and wireless providers that are in effect on July 1, 2017, and that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles, remain in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions. The wireless provider may accept the rates, fees, and terms established under this subsection for small wireless facilities and utility poles that are the subject of an application submitted after the rates, fees, and terms become effective. 
e.  For a city utility pole that supports an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service by another, the parties shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. Section 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the person owning or controlling the pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation must include pole replacement if necessary. 
f.  For a city utility pole that does not support an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service by another, the city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation, including necessary pole replacement, within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, must be completed within sixty (60) days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. Alternatively, the city may require the applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant's expense for the work necessary to support the small wireless facility, including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole replacement is required, the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and installation of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. The city may not condition or restrict the manner in which the applicant obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make-ready work subject to usual construction restoration standards for work in the right-of-way. The replaced or altered utility pole shall remain the property of the city. 
g.  The city may not require more make-ready work than is required to meet applicable codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work may not include costs related to preexisting damage or prior noncompliance. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, may not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to communications services providers other than wireless services providers for similar work and may not include any consultant fee or expense. 
(4)  Placement of utility poles by wireless infrastructure providers in the public rights-of-way in support of collocation of small wireless facilities. A wireless infrastructure provider may apply to the city to place utility poles in the public rights-of-way to support the collocation of small wireless facilities. The application must include an attestation that small wireless facilities will be collocated on the utility pole or structure and will be used by a wireless services provider to provide service within nine (9) months after the date the application is approved by the city. The city shall accept and process the application in accordance with the timeframes contained in subsection 22-361(b) and any applicable codes and other local codes governing the placement of utility poles in the public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Special areas of the city. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by Florida law and federal law, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  Downtown. Because the city has undergone great expense to place utility facilities underground in the downtown Community Redevelopment Area ("downtown CRA"), the following provisions are intended to enhance traffic safety and minimize aesthetic impacts associated with an excessive number of structures and unnecessarily high structures in the rights-of-way of the pedestrian oriented downtown area planned for higher densities and intensities. 
1.  No new pole structures are allowed in public rights-of-way in the downtown CRA that are freestanding (poles integral to building construction, such as canopies or balconies, are not prohibited) except street light poles. 
2.  Antennae are allowed to be attached to an existing pole within the downtown CRA provided they are located no lower than twelve (12) feet from the ground as measured vertically from the base of the pole. The size of any such equipment or container holding such equipment shall be the smallest size necessary for the support of the antennae or other service it supports but shall not exceed the size of a small wireless facility. No support facilities (equipment, cabinets, etc.) shall be allowed on the ground. 
b.  Tampa Telecom Park. Development of Regional Impact #116 adopted by Temple Terrace Ordinance No. 544 on March 29, 1985 (DRI 544) for Tampa Telecom Park stipulates that all utilities within the DRI must be installed underground; provided, however, that the Developer may, on showing of extraordinary need, be exempted from this requirement. Pursuant to DRI 544, any above-ground utilities shall be landscaped and fully screened from view. To the extent doing so is consistent with F.S. § 337.401 and other state and federal law, installation of all utilities, utility poles, wireless facilities and other structures in the public rights-of-way within Telecom Park shall comply with the requirements of DRI 544. 
1.  No structures including utility poles are allowed in the public rights-of-way within Tampa Telecom Park except street light poles conforming to DRI 544. 
2.  Antenna may be attached to an existing street light pole within Tampa Telecom Park provided they are located no lower than twelve (12) feet from the ground as measured vertically from the base of the pole. The size of any equipment ancillary to such antenna including the container holding such equipment shall be the smallest size necessary to support the antennae and necessary ancillary equipment, but shall not exceed the size of a small wireless facility. Any support facilities (equipment, cabinets, etc.) placed on the ground shall be landscaped and fully screened from view. 
(6)  Prohibited collocations, attachments, installations, and services not authorized. This subsection does not authorize, and the city hereby prohibits, the following: 
a.  This subsection does not authorize a person to collocate or attach wireless facilities, including any antenna, micro wireless facility, or small wireless facility, on a privately owned utility pole, a utility pole owned by an electric cooperative or a municipal electric utility, a privately owned wireless support structure, or other private property without the consent of the property owner. 
b.  The approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a small wireless facility pursuant to this subsection does not authorize the provision of any voice, data, or video services or the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any communications facilities other than small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way. 
c.  This subsection does not affect provisions relating to pass-through providers contained in this article and contained in F.S. § 337.401(6). 
d.  This subsection does not apply to the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities on any existing and duly authorized aerial communications facilities, provided that once aerial facilities are converted to underground facilities, any such collocation or construction shall be only as provided by the city's underground utilities ordinance. 
e.  This subsection does not authorize a person to collocate small wireless facilities or micro wireless facilities on a city utility pole or erect a wireless support structure in a location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners' association. This paragraph does not apply to the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities on any existing and duly authorized aerial communications facilities. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-363. - Revocation or suspension of division 1 permits. 
    Subject to the requirements of this article, the city may revoke any division 1 permit currently issued to a communications services provider for work in the public rights-of-way or suspend the issuance of division 1 permits in the future to a communications services provider for, in addition to any other circumstances provided for in this article, one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  A violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this article, and other applicable codes or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way; 
(b)  A misrepresentation or fraud made or committed on the part of the communications services provider in the registration process or in the application for a division 1 permit; 
(c)  The failure to properly renew the registration or the ineffectiveness of registration; or 
(d)  The failure to relocate or remove communications facilities as may be required by the city pursuant to this article; 
(e)  The application including sign-off from appropriate city staff is incomplete. 
    The city engineer shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure any violation of (a) through (d) above, each of which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-364. - Involuntary termination of registration. 
(a)  The city may terminate a registration if: 
(1)  A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a communications services provider's certification or license to provide communications services; 
(2)  The communications services provider's placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the communications services provider fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; 
(3)  The communications services provider ceases to use all of its communications facilities in the public rights-of-way and has not complied with section 22-375 herein; or 
(4)  The communications services provider fails to comply with any of the rules, regulations or general conditions set forth in section 22-360 herein. 
(b)  Prior to termination of a registration, the communications services provider shall be notified by the city engineer with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination, including which of (1) through (4) above is applicable as the reason therefore. The communications services provider shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice within which to eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the city engineer, to accomplish the same. If not eliminated or if the plan presented is rejected, the city engineer shall provide written notice of such rejection to the communications services provider and a final determination to terminate registration. A final determination to terminate registration may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 22-365. 
(c)  In the event of termination, following any appeal period, the communications services provider formerly registered shall: (1) notify the city of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the communications services provider's facilities in public rights-of-way, or (2) provide the city with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications facilities in the public rights-of-way. If a communications services provider fails to comply with this subsection (c), which determination of non-compliance is subject to appeal as provided in this division, the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the facilities where another person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities or requiring the communications services provider within ninety (90) days of the termination, or such longer period as may be mutually agreed to between the city and the communications services provider, to remove some or all of the communications facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to their original condition prior to such removal. 
(d)  In any event, a communications services provider whose registration has been terminated shall take such steps as are necessary to render safe every portion of the communications facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way. 
(e)  In the event of termination of a registration, this section does not authorize the city to cause the removal of communications facilities used to provide another service for which the communications services provider or another person who owns or exercises physical control over the communications facilities holds a valid certification or license with the governing federal or state agency, if required for provision of such service, and who is registered with the city, if required. 
(f)  The city's right to terminate a registration shall be in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of the right to terminate registration will affect or preclude any other right the city may have. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-365. - Appeals. 
    Final determinations by appropriate city staff denying an initial registration; denying an application for renewal of a registration; terminating a registration; or denying, revoking or suspending any division 1 permit are subject to appeal. A notice of appeal of such decision may be filed with the city's manager within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. The city manager shall have thirty (30) days from the date the appeal is filed to review the matter and render a written decision to uphold or reverse the final decision made by staff. If the city manager upholds the final decision of staff, the appellant may file a notice of appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the city manager. The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council at any regular meeting of city council scheduled within forty-five (45) days of the date that the notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk, unless waived by the communications services provider. A ruling may be made at the hearing or at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting and the communications services provider shall be notified of the decision in writing within thirty (30) days thereof. Where a notice of appeal to the city manager or the city clerk is not timely filed as provided herein, such right to appeal shall be waived. Upon correction by the communications services provider of the circumstances that gave rise to a suspension or denial of a division 1 permit, the suspension or denial shall be lifted (the same does not apply to the revocation of a division 1 permit). 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-366. - Fees applicable to those not subject to communications services tax. 
    While the Florida Legislature has prohibited municipalities from requiring providers of communications services who have registered with the Florida Department of Revenue from having to enter into franchise agreements or license arrangements as a condition to placing or maintaining communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, the city expressly reserves the right to require the payment of consideration or regulatory fees by persons using or occupying the public rights-of-way in other capacities. The city reserves the right to require such payments based on the type of user and to the extent as follows: 
(a)  Dealer. Except as provided in this article, a communications services provider who meets the definition of dealer and who has duly registered in accordance with this article is not required to enter into a franchise agreement or license arrangement with the city as a condition to placing or maintaining communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, nor is a dealer required to make payment of any franchise fees, license fees or other user fees to the city as consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way for the provision of communication services. 
(b)  Pass-through provider and pass-through facilities. A communications services provider who meets the definition of pass-through provider and who is not subject to a communications services tax imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. §§ 202.19 and 202.20 shall pay the city the maximum annual amount allowed under F.S. § 337.401, as amended. For purposes of calculating payments hereunder, each separate pole or tower installed or maintained by a pass-through provider for purposes of supporting Antennas for other over-the-air radio transmission or reception equipment in the public rights-of-way shall comprise a separate communications facility subject to assessment of a separate permit fee in the amount of $500.00 per linear mile, or portion thereof, up to the maximum amount allowed under F.S. § 337.401, whichever is higher. The annual amount referred to above shall be due and payable on October 1 of every year beginning on October 1, 2017. Fees not paid within ten (10) days after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date due until paid. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the city shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for additional sums due and payable or authorization to install any facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Other persons. All other persons, except government, are required to pay the city, as consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities, an amount based on and in accordance with subsection 2-366(b) of the Code. 
(d)  Government. A government is not required to pay the city consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities, unless such facilities are being used by such government or a communications services provider, including resellers, to offer or provide communication services other than for such government's internal non-commercial use, in which event the government, where not subject to the communications services tax imposed pursuant to F.S. §§ 202.19 and 202.20 is required to pay the city, as consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way by or through its facilities placed therein after October 1, 2017, such amounts to be set by the city council by resolution or such other amount or rate of compensation as mutually agreed to in writing by the government and the city. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-367. - Existing communications facility. 
    A communications services provider with a facility in the public rights-of-way as of the effective date of this article has until October 1, 2017, to comply with the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-368. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way, including any time during placement or maintenance of communications facilities, the communications services provider shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance policies and coverage limits described herein. Nothing contained in this article shall limit a communications services provider's liability to the city to the limits of insurance certified or carried. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance valid in the State of Florida, including contractual liability and products completed operations liability coverage on an occurrence basis, which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, combined single limit, for bodily injury, personal injury or death, or property damage and in an amount not less than $2,000,000.00 policy aggregate for each personal injury liability, broad form property damage (without XCU exclusions), contractual liability and products-completed operations liability. 
(2)  Business automobile liability insurance valid in the state which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit, including bodily injury and property damage covering owned, leased, hired and non-owner vehicles. 
(3)  Workers' compensation valid in the state which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than the statutory limit for workers' compensation. 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance valid in the state which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 each accident for employer's liability. 
(b)  All insurance providers used shall be admitted and duly authorized to do business in the state and shall have assigned by A.M. Best Company a minimum financial strength rating of "A" and a minimum financial size category of "IX" (i.e., a size of $250,000,000.00 to $500,000,000.00 based on capital, surplus, and conditional reserve funds). Insurance policies and certificates issued by non-admitted insurance companies are not acceptable. All liability policies shall name the city, its council members, officers, and employees as additional insureds with respect to any covered liability arising out of the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way or other activities under this article. Each communications services provider shall furnish annually to the city certificates showing proof of all required insurance coverage. All liability coverage must be in occurrence form and in accordance with the limits specified. Claims made policies are not acceptable. No insurance policy shall be canceled, nor shall the occurrence or aggregate limits set forth herein be reduced, until the city has received at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail or facsimile of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in policy coverage. Each communications services provider shall be responsible for notifying the city of such cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in coverage. All certificate(s) of insurance, including all endorsements and riders, evidencing insurance coverage shall be submitted to the city within thirty (30) days after the date of registration with the city in order for a communications services provider to obtain division 1 permits required for construction in the public rights-of-way. Each communications services provider shall, in the event of any such notice described above, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the city, written evidence of the issuance of replacement policies within thirty (30) days following receipt by the city or the communications services provider of such notice. 
(c)  The certificate(s) of insurance forms must be properly executed by the authorized representative of the insurance provider and must include all endorsements, riders and notices. Each communications services provider shall file and maintain with the city on an annual basis the required certificate(s) of insurance. THE certificate(s) of insurance must indicate the following: 
(1)  The policy number; name of insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative; name and address of insured; that the policy coverage "pertains the requirements of chapter 22, article VII of the Temple Terrace Code;" policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts; and 
(2)  Any applicable deductibles or self-insured retentions; and 
(3)  That the city, its council members, officers and employees are additional insureds; and 
(4)  That the city shall receive thirty (30) days' advance written notice of cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in coverage; and 
(5)  That the commercial general liability insurance policy is primary as respects any other valid or collectible insurance that the city may possess, including any self-insured retentions the city may have; and any other insurance the city does possess shall be considered excess insurance only and shall not be required to contribute with this insurance. 
(d)  Under extraordinary circumstances a communications services provider may satisfy the insurance requirements of this article by providing documentation of self-insurance that, in the sole discretion of the director of human resources and risk management, demonstrates incontrovertibly the adequacy to defend and cover claims of any nature that might arise from the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way. The communications services provider must be authorized as a self-insurer by the department of insurance under the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-369. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Except with respect to the willful misconduct, negligence or gross negligence of the city, a communications services provider, by act of registering with the city as such, shall be obligated, at its sole cost and expense, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, commissioners, agents and employees from and against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, liabilities and judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses arising out of or in connection with the placement or maintenance of its communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by the communications services provider or its agent or hired contractor. This indemnification provision shall include, but not be limited to, such damages and penalties arising out of claims: (1) by any person whatsoever on account of (i) bodily injury to a person or persons, (ii) death of a person or persons, or (iii) property damage, where any of the foregoing is occasioned by the operations of the communications services provider, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, or (2) involving the communications services provider's violation of any easement or private property rights. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel if in the city's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. 
(c)  Indemnified costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees in defending against any such claim, suit or proceeding, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any consultants, agents and employees of the city. The city will attempt to notify the communications services provider, in writing, within a reasonable time of the city's receiving notice of any issue it determines may require indemnification. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed or interpreted: 
(1)  As denying the city, the communications services provider or any person any remedy or defense available to them under the laws of the state; or 
(2)  As a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28, as it may be amended. 
(e)  The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-370. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any division 1 permit where the type of work allowed under the permit will require restoration of the public rights-of-way, the communications services provider or the contractor performing such work on its behalf shall obtain, pay for and file with the city a construction bond. The construction bond shall serve to guarantee the timeliness and quality of the construction and restoration work and to secure, and enable the city to recover, all costs related to the restoration of the public rights-of-way in the event the communications services provider or its contractor fails to make such restoration to the city's satisfaction or causes damage to the public rights-of-way during construction. The construction bond must name the city as obligee and be in the face amount of $15,000.00 conditioned upon the full and faithful completion of construction and restoration of the public rights-of-way to its original condition. Six (6) months following completion and inspection of the restoration of the public rights-of-way satisfactory to the city engineer, the communications services provider or its contractor, as the case may be, may reduce the face amount of the construction bond to $5,000.00 and, thereafter, may allow the bond to lapse in accordance with its terms. However, for any subsequent work in the public rights-of-way, the communications services provider or its contractor will be required to replenish any existing construction bond or provide a new construction bond in the face amount of $15,000.00. The construction bond shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and must be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the city engineer and authorized by the department of insurance to issue surety bonds in this state. 
(b)  The construction bond must be issued as non-cancelable and be for a term of not less than twelve (12) months. In the event the term of any construction bond expires, or is reasonably expected to expire, prior to the completion of construction, restoration and city inspection, the communications services provider, or the contractor acting on its behalf, shall immediately obtain, pay for, and file with the city a replacement bond. 
(c)  The city's requirement of a construction bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required under this article or through the permitting process. The city's right to recover under the construction bond shall be in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect or preclude any other right the city may have. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-371. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Before any communications services provider is permitted to begin the placement or maintenance of an initial build, any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its communications system, or when construction plans show that there would be at least one thousand (1,000) feet of open trenching in the public rights-of-way at any given time, the communications services provider is required to obtain, pay for, and file with the city a performance bond. The performance bond must name the city as obligee and be in the face amount of $250,000.00 conditioned upon the full and faithful compliance by the communications services provider with all requirements, duties and obligations imposed by the provisions of the Temple Terrace Communications Right-of-Way Utilization Ordinance during, and through completion of, the placement or maintenance project. The performance bond shall be in a form acceptable to the city Attorney and must be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the city engineer and authorized by the department of insurance to issue performance bonds in this state. 
(b)  The performance bond must be issued as non-cancelable and be for a term consistent with the reasonably expected duration of the particular placement or maintenance project (including restoration and city inspection), but in no event less than eighteen (18) months. In the event the term of any performance bond expires, or is reasonably expected to expire, prior to the completion of such placement or maintenance project, including restoration and city inspection, the communications services provider shall immediately obtain, pay for, and file with the city a replacement bond. 
(c)  The city's requirement of a performance bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required under this article or through the permitting process. The city's right to recover under the performance bond shall be in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the performance bond will affect or preclude any other right the city may have. Any proceeds recovered under the performance bond may be used to reimburse the city for such additional expenses as may be incurred by the city as a result of the communications services provider's failure to comply with the responsibilities imposed by this article, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-372. - Security fund. 
    Every communications services provider shall make a $25,000.00 cash deposit, or shall file with the city an irrevocable letter of credit or acceptable equivalent in the same amount, which shall serve, and be referred to, as the "security fund." The security fund shall be conditioned upon the full and faithful compliance with and performance by the communications services provider of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed by the provisions of the Temple Terrace Communications Right-of-Way Utilization Ordinance at all times. The letter of credit shall be in a form and issued by an institution acceptable to the city's chief financial officer. Should the city draw upon the security fund, it shall promptly notify the communications services provider, and the communications services provider shall promptly restore the cash deposit or letter of credit to the full amount. The security fund shall be maintained until the later of: (a) the effective date of transfer, sale or assignment by the communications services provider of all its facilities in the public rights-of-way, (b) twelve (12) months after the removal or abandonment by the communications services provider of all of its facilities in the public rights-of-way, or (c) six (6) months after the termination of registration, including any appeals undertaken pursuant to this article. Upon the later of these events the cash deposit will be returned without interest or the letter of credit may be cancelled. In the event a communications services provider fails to perform any requirement, duty or obligation imposed upon it by the provisions of this article, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the security fund, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal, relocation or abandonment of any facilities in public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the security fund. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-373. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  No provision of this article shall be deemed to bar the right of the city to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provisions of this article, the registration provisions, or any rule, regulation or general condition provided for hereunder, whether administratively, judicially or both. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this article nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the city to recover fines, penalties or monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the communications services provider. The remedies available to the city shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity. The laws of the state shall govern with respect to any proceeding in law or equity pertaining to the enforcement of this article or any cause of action arising out of or in connection herewith. 
(b)  A communications services provider's failure to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a City Code violation and shall subject the communications service Provider to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in chapter 1, article II, of the City Code, and may be punishable as provided in F.S. ch. 162, as it may be amended. 
(c)  In any proceeding before the city council where there exists an issue with respect to a communications services provider's performance of its obligations pursuant to this article, the communications services provider shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms and conditions of this article. The city may find a communications services provider that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this article in default and apply any appropriate remedy or remedies as authorized by this article. In determining which remedy is appropriate, the city council shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city council determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  The city engineer, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this article, and is authorized to give any notice required herein or by law. 
(e)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-374. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
(a)  Upon abandonment of any facility owned by a communications services provider in the public rights-of-way, the communications services provider shall notify the city within sixty (60) days. 
(b)  The city may direct the communications services provider, by written notice, to remove all or any portion of such abandoned communications facility at the communications services provider's sole expense if the city determines that the abandoned communications facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that such communications facility: (1) compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user; (2) compromises the safety of other persons performing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way; (3) prevents another person from locating other facilities in the area of the public rights-of-way where the abandoned communications facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or (4) creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the use of the public rights-of-way. In the event of (2), the city may require the third person to coordinate with the communications services provider that owns the existing communications facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the communications services provider. 
(c)  If the communications services provider fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned communications facility as directed by the city within the time period specified in the written notice, which time period must be reasonable under the circumstances, the city may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the communications services provider. 
(d)  In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the abandoned communications facility, the communications services provider, by its notice of abandonment to the city, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of such abandoned facility by the city or other person, provided that the cost of the alteration or removal is not borne by the communications services provider. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 22-375. - Reservation of rights. 
    The city hereby expressly reserves all of the following rights: 
(a)  To exercise its municipal home rule powers, now or hereafter, to the fullest extent allowed by law with regard to the access, use and regulation of the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  To amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its municipal authority. 
(c)  To adopt or enact by resolution or ordinance, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in any existing applicable ordinances, such additional reasonable regulations as city council finds necessary in the exercise of the city's police powers. 
(d)  To exercise the power of eminent domain, consistent with applicable federal and state law, to acquire property that may include that property owned or leased by a communications services provider. 
(e)  As and when deemed necessary by the city council to be in the interest of the city or its residents, to abandon portions of the public rights-of-way within the proper exercise of its municipal authority and without notice to or the consent of any communications services provider. The city shall not be responsible for any costs, damages, loss or other expense to the communications services provider as a result of the city's abandonment of any public rights-of-way. 
(f)  To place and maintain, and franchise or permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in the public rights-of-way occupied by any communications services provider. 
(g)  Without limitation, the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of any public rights-of-way within the city limits and within said limits as the same may from time to time be altered. 
(h)  To require a reseller to register in accordance with this article to the extent such reseller wants the right to place or maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way. Any person using or leasing facilities owned by a registered communications services provider is not, therefore, entitled to any rights to place or maintain communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, unless such person themselves registers with the city. 
( Ord. No. 1426 , § 1, 8-15-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2001 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2001 Code, as updated through August 15, 2011, that are included in the Code. 
2001 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.100 1-1 1.105 1-2 1.110 1-3 1.115 1-4 1.120 1-7 1.135 1-5 1.145 1-39 1.150 1-39 1.155 2-62 1.160 2-310 1.165 2-310 1.175 2-311 1.180 2-312 2.200 2-1 2.205 2-2 2.210 2-60 2.215 2-59 2.220 2-58 2.225(a) 2-82 2.230(c)-(e) 2-81 2.235(a) 2-3 2.240 1-41 2.245 2-61 3.300 4-1 3.305 4-3 3.325 4-7 3.330 4-6 3.335 4-8 3.345 4-4 3.360 4-5 4.405 6-1 4.410 6-3 4.415 6-4 4.420.1-4.420.3 6-5-6-7 4.425.1-4.425.5 6-33-6-37 5.500 2-345 5.505 2-346 5.510 2-347 5.515 2-348 5.520 2-349 5.525 2-378 5.530 2-350 5.535 2-377 5.540 2-376 5.545 2-379 6.600 16-62 6.605 16-64 6.610 16-65 6.615 16-66 6.620 16-67 6.625 16-68 7.700 2-25 7.710 2-26 7.720 2-27 ch. 8, art. II 8-1 8.800 8-23 8.805 8-21 8.810 8-24 8.815(a)-(c) 8-25 8.820 8-26 8.825 8-27 8.835 8-29 8.840 8-28 8-30 8.845 8-31 8.850 8-32 8.855 8-22 9.900 8-54 9.905 8-55 9.910 8-57 9.920 8-58 11.110 10-2 11.110.1, 11.110.2 10-2 11.120.1 10-28 11.120.1, 11.120.2 22-335, 22-336 11.120.5 10-30 11.120.6, 11.120.7 10-32, 10-33 11.120.8 22-337 11.120.9, 11.120.10 10-34, 10-35 11.120.11 10-31 11.130.1-11.130.8 22-338-22-345 11.130.9-11.130.13 22-88-22-92 11.130.14 22-346 11.135.1, 11.135.2 10-3 12.125 18-71 12.135 18-73 12.140 18-74 12.145 18-75 13.130 14-136 13.135 14-103 13.140 14-71 13.145 14-137 13.155 14-138 13.235.1-13.235.7 14-161-14-167 13.240.1 14-188 13.240.2-13.240.4 14-190-14-192 14.140 14-224 14.145 14-225 14.150 16-2 14.160 16-3 14.165 16-4 14.175 16-5 14.180(a)-(f) 16-6 14.185 10-4 14.190 16-7 14.196 16-8 14.205 16-35 14.220 16-36 14.225 16-38 14.230 16-39 14.235 16-40 14.240 16-41 14.245 16-42 14.250 16-43 14.255 16-44 15.150 18-19 15.155 18-22 15.160 18-23 15.165 18-24 15.170 18-25 15.175 18-26 15.185 18-27 15.190 18-28 15.195 18-29 15.200 18-30 15.205 18-31 15.210 18-32 15.215 18-33 15.220 18-34 15.225 18-35 15.230 18-36 15.235 18-37 15.240 18-38 15.245 18-39 15.250 18-40 15.255 18-21 15.260 18-41 18.180.1-18.180.6 2-128-2-133 18.185.1-18.185.26 2-255-2-280 18.195.1-18.195.18 2-198-2-215 18.195.18 2-216 18.195.20-18.195.26 2-217-2-223 18.200.1-18.200.8 2-165-2-172 19.190.1 14-19 19.190.2-19.190.6 14-22-14-26 19.190.7 14-21 19.195.1 14-56 19.195.2-19.195.14 14-58-14-70 19.195.16 14-72 20.210 20-2 20.215 20-3 20.220 1-40 20.230.1-20.230.6 20-27-20-32 21.100 22-1 21.210 22-191 21.210.1-21.210.3 22-192-22-194 21.215 22-150 21.220 22-151 21.225 22-152 21.230 22-153 21.235.1-21.235.3 22-212-22-214 21.240 22-154 21.240.1 22-155 21.250 22-149 21.255 22-148 21.260 22-157 21.265 22-158 21.270 22-159 21.275 22-160 21.280 22-161 21.310.1-21.310.5 22-268-22-272 21.315 22-273 21.320 22-274 21.325.1 22-297 21.325.2, 21.325.3 22-299, 22-300 21.325.4 22-298 21.325.5 22-301 21.325.6-21.325.10 22-303-22-307 21.325.11 22-302 21.325.12 22-308 21.330 22-237 21.410 22-23 21.410.1-21.410.5 22-24-22-28 21.410.6-21.410.14 22-47-22-55 21.410.15 22-29 21.410.16, 21.410.17 22-56, 22-57 21.415 22-113 21.420 22-114 21.425 22-115 21.430 22-116 21.435 22-117 25.100 12-1 25.105 12-4 25.110 12-5 25.115 12-6 25.120 12-7 25.125 12-8 25.130 12-9 25.200 12-39 25.205 12-40 25.300 12-69 25.301 12-70 25.305 12-71 25.310 12-72 25.320 12-73 25.325 12-74 25.330 12-75 25.330.1-25.330.4 12-76-12-79 25.330.6 12-80 25.400 12-96 25.410 12-97 25.415 12-98 25.420 12-99 25.425 12-100 25.430 12-101 25.500 12-187 25.505 12-188 25.510 12-189 25.515 12-190 25.520 12-191 25.525 12-192 25.530.1-25.530.16 12-225-12-240 25.535 12-259 25.540 12-260 25.550 12-193 25.600 12-349 25.600.1-25.600.5 12-350-12-354 25.605.1, 25.605.2 12-355, 12-356 25.610 12-357 25.611 12-358 25.615 12-359 25.620 12-10 25.625 12-330 25.630 12-377 25.635 12-378 25.640 12-379 25.645 12-380 25.650.1 12-404 25.655 12-405 25.660 12-406 25.665 12-407 25.670 12-408 25.675 12-409 25.680 12-410 25.680.1-25.680.3 12-411-12-413 25.680.5-25.680.7 12-414-12-416 25.685 12-417 25.685.1 12-418 25.690.1-25.690.9 12-419-12-427 25.691.1-25.691.3 12-428-12-430 25.695 12-11 25.697 12-11 25.697.1-25.697.5 12-11 25.697.7-25.697.11 12-11 25.698 12-11 25.698.1-25.698.5 12-11 25.698.7-25.698.11 12-11 25.710.1-25.710.7 12-505-12-511 25.715.1, 25.715.2 12-532, 12-533 25.715.3 12-531 25.715.4-25.715.10 12-534-12-540 25.715.11-25.715.14 12-559-12-562 25.715.15-25.715.18 12-588-12-591 25.716.1, 25.716.2 12-616, 12-617 25.716.3-25.716.10 12-620-12-627 25.716.11, 25.716.12 12-618, 12-619 25.720.1 12-658 25.720.2-25.720.4 12-660-12-662 25.720.5 12-659 25.720.6-25.720.11 12-663-12-668 25.725.1-25.725.7 12-695-12-701 25.730.1 12-732 25.730.2 12-731 25.730.3-25.730.8 12-734-12-739 25.730.9 12-733 25.735.1 12-764 25.735.2 12-762 25.735.4 12-768 25.735.5 12-763 25.735.6-25.735.8 12-769-12-771 25.735.9 12-766 25.735.10 12-765 25.735.11 12-772 25.740.1-25.740.4 12-796-12-799 25.745 12-822 25.745.1-25.745.7 12-823-12-829 25.745.8, 25.745.9 12-831, 12-832 25.745.11-25.745.16 12-834-12-839 25.745.75 12-830 25.745.10(a)-(d) 12-833 25.750 12-864 25.750.1-25.750.7 12-857-12-863 25.755.1-25.755.10 12-892-12-901 25.760.2 12-921 25.760.4-25.760.9 12-954-12-959 25.760.10-25.760.13 12-922-12-925 25.760.14 12-960 25.765.1-25.765.3 12-980-12-982 25.765.5, 25.765.6 12-983, 12-984 25.765.7 12-979 25.765.8-25.765.12 12-985-12-989 25.770.1-25.770.8 12-1007- 
12-1014 25.780.1, 25.780.2 12-1042, 12-1043 25.780.3-25.780.15 12-1045- 
12-1057 25.780.2(exh. A) 12-1044 25.800 12-112 25.805 12-113 25.810.1-25.810.7 12-114-12-120 25.815 12-121 25.820 12-122 25.825.1-25.825.7 12-123-12-129 25.830 12-157 25.830.1, 25.830.2 12-158, 12-159 25.900 12-1083 25.905 12-1084 25.910 12-1085 25.915 12-1086 25.920 12-1087 25.925 12-1088 25.930 12-1089 25.935 12-1090 25.940.1 12-1119, 12-1120 25.940.2 12-1121 25.940.4-25.940.9 12-1122- 
12-1127 25.950 12-1148 25.950.1-25.950.7 12-1149- 
12-1155 26.600 16-95 26.605 16-96 26.610 16-98 26.615 16-99 26.620 16-100 26.625 16-101 27.700 8-90 27.705 8-93 27.710 8-91 27.715 8-96 27.720 8-97 27.721 8-98 27.722 8-99 27.725 8-133 27.726 8-134 27.727 8-135 27.728 8-136 27.729 8-137 27.730 8-95 27.735 8-100 27.740 8-101 27.745 8-94 27.750 8-102 28.800 8-158 28.805 8-161 28.810 8-159 28.815 8-162 28.820 8-163 28.825 8-163 28.830 8-164 28.835 8-165 28.840 8-166 29.900 12-282 29.905 12-284 29.910 12-285 29.915 12-286 29.920 12-287 29.925 12-288 29.925.1-29.925.10 12-289-12-298 29.930 12-283  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances that are included herein. Ordinances adopted before August 16, 2011, were found in the city's 2001 Code. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 81  5- 2-1961 8-56 164  7-19-1966 12-189 12-193 12-860 588  8-19-1966 12-862 235  9- 1-1970 8-56 338  3- 4-1977 8-56 388  8-14-1979 18-72 444  6- 8-1982 12-193 492 10-18-1983 12-193 520  8- 7-1984 8-56 536  3-19-1985 12-189 548  5- 7-1985 8-56 566 12- 3-1985 12-124 573  2- 4-1986 8-56 645  1-19-1988 8-56 664  7-19-1988 8-56 676  1- 3-1989 8-56 693  6-20-1989 8-56 715  1-23-1990 12-189 12-193 716  1-23-1990 12-1090 726  4-17-1990 12-860 12-862 733  5- 1-1990 12-668 735  5- 1-1990 12-124 738  5-15-1990 12-733 754  9-17-1990 12-231 12-507 770  3- 5-1991 12-899 777  5- 7-1991 12-40 779  7-16-1991 12-158 780  8- 6-1991 12-40 790  9-16-1991 8-56 791 10- 1-1991 12-862 794 11-19-1991 12-330 12-352 12-354 12-356, 12-357 12-378, 12-379 12-796 12-824 12-837, 12-838 795 11-19-1991 12-235 796 12- 3-1991 12-511 797  2- 4-1992 12-40 12-834 834  4-20-1993 12-330 854 12- 7-1993 12-226 855 12- 7-1993 12-922 856 12-21-1993 12-763 12-768 12-772 876  8- 2-1994 12-40 12-115 877  8- 2-1994 12-230 12-232 879  8-16-1994 12-40 898  8- 1-1995 12-70 899  8-15-1995 12-984 900  9-12-1995 12-40 905 12-19-1995 12-234 12-259 938 12-17-1996 12-40 12-234 12-237 12-862 943  7-15-1997 12-923 951  9- 2-1997 8-56 972  2- 3-1998 12-233 12-238 980  9-15-1998 12-234 989 11-17-1998 12-234 1000  5-18-1999 12-665 1002  9- 9-1999 12-193 1007 11- 2-1999 12-957 1009 12-21-1999 12-665 1019  8-15-2000 12-506 1020  8-15-2000 12-236 1039  2- 6-2001 12-235 1044  5-15-2001 12-768 12-772 1045  5-15-2001 12-379 12-830 1054 10-16-2001 12-863 1065  3- 5-2002 12-861 1068  6-18-2002 12-823 1076  9-24-2002 12-40 1079 10-15-2002 12-234 1080 11- 5-2002 12-234 1076  1-10-2003 12-40 1089  5-20-2003 12-40 1104 12- 2-2003 12-234 12-957 1129 10-19-2004 12-862 1138  4-19-2005 12-235 1154 10-18-2005 12-40 12-506, 12-507 12-826 1159  2- 7-2006 12-235 12-506 1161  2-21-2006 12-40 12-72 12-74 12-125 12-159 12-188 12-193 12-234 12-352 12-358 12-405 12-412, 12-413 12-416 12-559 12-733 12-735 12-824 12-1087 1178  6-20-2006 12-236 1195  1- 2-2007 12-72 1202  3-20-2007 12-40 1207  7- 3-2007 12-507 1227  5-20-2008 12-354 12-357 12-377- 
12-379 12-1084 12-1086- 
12-1088 12-1090 1239 12- 2-2008 12-506 1244  3-17-2009 12-354 12-357 12-377- 
12-379 12-1084 12-1086- 
12-1088 12-1090 1249  7-21-2009 8-56 1252  8- 4-2009 12-72 12-74 1278  8-17-2010 12-506 1307  2-21-2012 2(exh. A, § 25.335.1)- 1-101-1-106 2(exh. A, § 25.335.6) 1308  2-21-2012 2(exh. A, § 25.315.1)- 1-61-1-77 2(exh. A, § 25.315.17) 1312  5- 1-2012 2(20.225.1)- 
2(20.225.7) 20-61-20-67 1332 10-16-2012 1-13 14-1 1336  3-19-2013 1-8 Adopting Ordinance 1340  4-16-2013 1 12-283 12-290(a) 12-293(3) 12-298 1       Rpld 12-298(exh. III C.1) 1341  5-21-2013 1 12-1150(a) 12-1153 1346  7- 2-2013 2 1-61-1-77 1347  7- 2-2013 2       Rpld 20-32 3 20-27 20-31       Added 20-32 1352 11-19-2013 2 12-617 3 12-618 4 12-619(c) 12-619(e) 5       Added 12-628 1353 12- 3-2013 2(Exh.A) 1-105 3(Exh.B) 8-102(1),(2) 8-102(10) 8-102(13)b.,c. 8-102(13)h. 8-102(13)k. 8-102(18) 8-102(19)b. 8-102(22) 4(Exh.C) 8-137(a) 5(Exh.D) 10-3(a) 10-3(b)(1) 6(Exh.E) 10-35 7(Exh.F) 22-340(6) 1354 12- 3-2013 2(Exh.A) 8-56(b)(13),(14) 8-56(d) 8-56(e) 3(Exh.B) 8-57(b)(4)d. 8-57(d) 1355  1- 7-2014 2(Exh.A) 12-508(2) 3(Exh.B) 12-824(o) 4(Exh.C) 12-859(2) 5(Exh.D) 12-860 6(Exh.E) 12-861(7) 12-861(12) 1356  4-15-2014 2       Rpld 8-1 8-21-8-32 8-53-8-59 8-90-8-102 8-133-8-137 8-158-8-166       Added 8-1, 8-2 8-21-8-32 8-53-8-58 8-90-8-102 8-133-8-137 8-158-8-168 1359  7-15-2014 2(Exh. A) 8-56 3(Exh. B) 8-57 4(Exh. C) 8-102 5(Exh. D) 8-137 1362  9-16-2014 2(Exh. A) 1-41 1364 11-18-2014 1-13       Added ch. 7, §§ 7-11-7-22 1365  4-21-2015 1 2-255 2       Added 2-261(f) 1368  6- 2-2015 3(Exh. A) 8-25 4(Exh. B) 12-40 5       Rpld ch. 12, art. IX, div. 3, subdiv. I, §§ 12-531- 
12-540 ch. 12, art. IX, div. 3, subdiv. II, §§ 12-559- 
12-562 ch. 12, art. IX, div. 3, subdiv. III, §§ 12-588- 
12-591 5(Exh. C)       Added ch. 12, art. IX, div. 3, subdiv. I, §§ 12-531- 
12-543 ch. 12, art. IX, div. 3, subdiv. II, §§ 12-559- 
12-564 ch. 12, art. IX, div. 3, subdiv. III, §§ 12-588- 
12-594 1369  6-16-2015 2       Rpld ch. 16, art. IV, §§ 16-95-16-101 1374  9-15-2015 1 22-88(a) 1375  9-15-2015 1 22-56 1381 12- 1-2015 2 22-154 1383 12-15-2015 1(Exh. A)       Added ch. 12, art. VII, div. 5 
§§ 12-299-12-306 2(Exh. B) 12-100 3(Exh. C)       Added ch. 12, art. VII, div. 5, exh. 1 1399  7-19-2016 1(Exh. A) 12-96(b), (c) 12-97(b)       Rpld 12-99 12-100 12-235(b), (e)(3) 12-284(2) 12-286(a), (c) 12-294(b) 12-506 12-1153 2(Exh. B) 12-40 12-187 12-237 12-506 12-957(b)(5)p.       Added 12-957(b)(5)q. 12-984(b) 3(Exh. C) 12-116(5) 4(Exh. D) 12-40 12-762 12-772 1401  8-16-2016 1(Exh. A) 12-40       Rpld 12-979(c), (d)       Rnbd 12-979(e)       as 12-979(c) 12-982(12), (18)       Rpld 12-982(8), (13) 12-983(1)b.2. 12-984(a), (c) 12-988(c)       Rpld 12-989       Added 12-989 1417  4- 4-2017 1 2-202(b) 2       Added 2-205.1 1418  4- 4-2017 1       Added 2-281 1419  5-16-2017 2(Exh. A) 8-167(i)(3) 1420  7-18-2017 1(Exh. A) 12-40       Added 12-81 12-225(b)       Added 12-225(b)(3) 12-226(b)       Added 12-226(b)(3) 12-227(b)       Added 12-227(b)(3) 12-228(b)       Added 12-228(b)(3) 12-229(b)       Added 12-229(b)(10), (c) 12-230(b)       Added 12-230(b)(4), (c) 12-231(a) 12-232(b), (b)(2)       Added 12-232(b)(3) 12-233(c)       Added 12-233(c)(7) 12-234(c)       Added 12-234(c)(19) 12-235(d)       Added 12-238(b)(5)       Added 12-241       Added 12-259(f) 1421  7-18-2017 1(Exh. A) 12-8(1) 12-10 12-71 12-72(a)(4), (c)(1), (d)(5) 12-74(b)-(d) 12-158(a)(3)       Added 12-158(a)(4), (5)       Dltd 12-159 12-188 12-193(b)(2), (4)-(6), (c), (d)       Added 12-194 12-225(c) 12-226(c) 12-227(c) 12-228(c) 12-231(c) 12-233(c) 12-234(c) 12-235 12-241 12-259(f) 12-330(b)-(d), (f) 12-351(c) 12-352(b) 12-354(b), (c) 12-357(b)(1) 12-377       Dltd 12-378 12-379 12-380 1422  7-18-2017 1(Exh. A) 4-6(a)(11) 1423  7-18-2017 1(Exh. A) 8-166(4)d. 1424  7-18-2017 1(Exh. A) 12-40 12-234(c)       Added 12-234(c)(20) 12-237(b)(6)       Added 12-237(b)(24) 12-241 12-259(f) 12-861 12-921 12-923 12-957 12-1043(b) 1426  8-15-2017 1       Added 22-350-22-375 1451  5- 1-2018 1(Exh. A) 2-1(b) 1454  6- 5-2018 1(Exh. A) 12-562 12-921 1455  6-19-2018 2(Exh. A) 8-54-8-58 1460  8- 7-2018 2(Exh. A)       Added 2-83 1477  3-19-2019 2(Exh. A)       Added 8-169-8-177  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 50 1-76 50.041 1-76 50.051 1-76 60.05 10-4 60.06 10-4 ch. 61 2-219 2-276 61.1301 2-214 2-271 70.20 12-124 ch. 83 8-134 chs. 97-107 Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-25 100.361 Char. § 7.07 chs. 111, 112 Ch. 2, Art. III ch. 112, pt. III 2-219 2-276 ch. 112, pt. VII 2-202 2-219 2-259 2-276 112.0801 2-214 2-271 112.18 2-219 112.181 2-219 2-276 112.311 et seq. 2-219 2-276 112.311 Char. § 7.03 112.3143 1-77 2-200 2-257 112.3173 2-219 2-276 2-281 112.60 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. IV, 
Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. V 2-202 2-219 2-259 2-276 112.60-112.67 2-281 112.661 2-201 2-219 2-258 2-276 ch. 119 2-1 2-219 2-276 119.011(12) 2-1 ch. 120 16-100 ch. 121 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. III 2-166 2-213 2-270 125.69 8-175 161.055 12-560 ch. 162 Ch. 1, Art. II 1-39 1-62 1-66 8-2 8-55 8-94 8-134-8-137 8-164 8-175 12-40 12-619 20-32 20-65 22-302 22-373 ch. 162, pt. II 1-101 162.03 1-63 162.05 1-63 162.12 8-167 8-168 162.12(1) 8-167 162.22 Ch. 1, Art. II 1-39 162.3202(2)(a) Ch. 12, Art. VII, Ch. 12, Art. VIII Ch. 12, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 162.3202(2)(a) Ch. 12, Art. IX, 
Div. 9 162.3202(2)(b) Ch. 12, Art. IX, 
Div. 2 162.3202(2)(d) Ch. 12, Art. IX, 
Div. 6 162.3202(2)(f) Ch. 12, Art. IX, 
Div. 15 162.3202(2)(g) Ch. 12, Art. X ch. 163 12-5 12-40 12-71 12-73 12-660 12-667 12-1083 12-1124 ch. 163, pt. II 12-4 12-6 163.231 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 163.2511 et seq. Ch. 12 12-4 12-6 12-40 163.3167(8) 12-1084 163.3177 12-40 163.31777 12-1120 163.3178 12-40 163.3180 Ch. 12, Art. X 163.3180(13) 12-1126 163.3180(13)(e) 12-1120 163.3191 12-40 163.3194(2) 12-96 163.3201 Ch. 12, Art. IV 163.3202(2) Ch. 12 163.3202(2)(c) Ch. 12, Art. IX, 
Div. 7 163.3202(2)(d) Ch. 12, Art. IX, 
Div. 3 163.3202(2) 12-96 163.3220-163.3243 12-40 163.330 et seq. 14-1 ch. 166 Ch. 2 Ch. 8 Ch. 10 Ch. 12 12-4 12-660 Ch. 14 Ch. 16 Ch. 18 Ch. 20 Ch. 22 166.021(9) 2-61 166.04 12-40 166.041 1-5 22-356 166.041(3)(c) 12-668 12-735 166.0415 Ch. 1, Art. II 166.201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 166.231 14-19 14-24 166.232 14-19 ch. 171 12-40 ch. 175 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. IV 2-218 2-222 175.032(8) 2-223 175.061(7) 2-214 175.071 2-200, 2-201 2-219 175.101 2-218 175.195 2-219 175.221 2-219 175.231 2-219 175.241 2-219 175.261 2-211 175.351 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. IV 2-219 175.351(1) 2-202 175.351(1)(d) 2-202 175.361 2-213 ch. 177 12-71 12-357, 12-358 177.011 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. VIII Ch. 12, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 ch. 185 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. V 2-275 2-279 2-281 185.02(11) 2-280 185.05(6) 2-271 185.06 2-257, 2-258 2-276 185.08 2-275 185.185 2-276 185.191 2-276 185.221 2-268 185.25 2-276 185.34 2-276 185.35 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. V 2-276 2-281 185.35(6) 2-281 185.37 2-270 196.011 14-1 196.012(15) 14-1 196.1995 14-1 197.334 8-167 ch. 202 Ch. 14, Art. II 22-357 22-362 202.11(1) 22-357 202.19 22-366 202.20 22-366 ch. 205 Ch. 14, Art. III 14-65 205.022 14-56 205.042 14-58 205.043 14-62 14-66 205.053 14-62, 14-63 205.054 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 205.171 14-70 205.196 14-72 215.47(1)-(6) 2-201 2-258 215.47(16) 2-276 215.47(17) 2-219 ch. 218 Ch. 2, Art. IV 255.05 2-345 ch. 267 12-239 ch. 280 2-201 2-258 280.02 2-201 2-258 286.0105 2-219 2-276 286.011 2-219 2-276 286.012 1-77 2-219 2-276 287.055 Ch. 2, Art. V 288.106 14-1 290.0065 14-1 ch. 316 16-6 20-29 20-65 chs. 316-324 18-22 Ch. 20 316.003 20-1 1-61-1-63 316.007 Ch. 20 316.0076 Ch. 20, Art. II 316.008 Ch. 20 316.008(8), 316.008(7) Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Ch. 20, Art. III 316.008(1)(a) 20-3 316.008(1)(e) 20-2 316.0083 20-30, 20-31 1-61 1-66 1-68 1-76 316.074(1) 20-28, 20-29 316.0745 12-960 316.075(1)(c)1 20-28, 20-29 316.083 Ch. 20, Art. II 316.189 20-2 316.1936 4-8 316.195 et seq. 20-3 316.1955 20-3 316.1958 20-3 316.1967(6) 20-3 316.212 Ch. 20, Art. III 20-62 ch. 318 20-65 ch. 320 8-1 320.01 12-40 320.01(22) 20-61 320.03(8) 20-3 320.8249 12-591 320.084 20-3 320.0842 20-3 320.0843 20-3 320.0845 20-3 320.0848 12-40 20-3 320.848 20-3 322.1615 20-62 ch. 333 22-362 333.03 22-362 334.03(21) 22-357 ch. 337 22-357 22-360 337.401 22-356 22-362 22-366 337.401(6) 22-362 337.402 22-360 337.404 22-360 ch. 364 22-357 366.02 12-560 373.036 12-560 376.80 14-1 ch. 380 12-40 12-1084 ch. 381 10-2 chs. 381-408 Ch. 10 chs. 381-430 12-40 12-241 381.0065 12-560 381.0065 et seq. 10-2 386.01 et seq. 10-4 393.063 12-40 394.492(5), (6) 12-40 ch. 397 12-81 397.311 12-81 ch. 400 12-241 ch. 400, pt. II 12-40 400.011 et seq. 12-40 400.9986 12-40 402.305 4-6 403.413 et seq. 10-31 18-32 Ch. 22, Art. VI 403.415 16-7 403.702 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI 403.7049 Ch. 22, Art. II, 
Div. 3 403.706 Ch. 22, Art. VI ch. 419 12-241 419.001(2) 12-241 ch. 440 16-44 ch. 447, pt. II 2-281 ch. 468 8-26 472.005 22-357 ch. 489 8-1 12-1011 489.501 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III 489.529 Ch. 16, Art. III 489.530 Ch. 16, Art. III ch. 501 14-224 501.022(1)(b) 14-224 ch. 538 Ch. 14, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 538.03(2)(f) Ch. 14, Art. V 538.09 14-162 ch. 553 Ch. 8 22-360 ch. 553, pt. IV 8-25 553.5041(6) 20-3 553.70 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. II 8-25 553.73 1-102 553.73(5) 8-25 12-563 553.73(10)(k) 12-560 553.79 1-102 8-57 553.80 1-102 ch. 556 22-360 chs. 561-569 Ch. 4 4-3 561.01 4-1 chs. 562-568 4-5 562.06 Ch. 4 562.11 Ch. 4 562.14 4-7 562.45 Ch. 4 562.45(2) 4-6, 4-7 563.01 4-1 564.01 4-1 ch. 565 4-6 565.01 4-1 604.50 12-560 ch. 633 2-223 Ch. 8 633.012 Ch. 8, Art. III 633.022 Ch. 8, Art. III 633.025 Ch. 8, Art. III 633.025(2) 8-56 633.025(3) 8-56 633.03 8-57 633.065(2) 8-57 633.081 8-57 633.121 8-55 633.161 8-55 633.35 2-198 ch. 650 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. II 2-128 650.02 2-128 704.06 12-412 12-507 12-667 ch. 705 Ch. 2 Ch. 16 713.78 20-3 715.07 12-988 ch. 760 Ch. 16, Art. IV 760.34 16-100 760.35 16-100 767.10 et seq. 6-34 768.28 22-346 22-369 chs. 775-896 16-1 chs. 775-899 Ch. 16 ch. 791 Ch. 16, Art. II 16-38 16-40 18-30 791.01 16-36 16-43 791.02 16-40 791.04 16-40 791.07 16-40 806.10 8-55 806.13 16-3 ch. 810 8-176 810.11(5) 8-176 ch. 823 10-4 823.05 10-4 823.14 12-238 12-629.9 823.16 16-7 828.12 et seq. 6-35 ch. 847 Ch. 16 847.0134 12-864 877.03 7-16 877.15 8-57 877.20 et seq. 16-2 933.20-933.30 8-97 8-163 938.15 1-40 ch. 943 2-280 943.14 2-255 ch. 1003, pt. II 12-40 1003.21 et seq. 12-40 1013.64 12-1126  
