CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Adopted: January 27, 1998 
Effective: January 27, 1998 
____________ 
Published in 1997 by Order of the Village Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
(2019) 
____________ 
Anne Gerwig 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Drahos, Vice Mayor 
John T. McGovern 
Michael J. Napoleone 
Tanya Siskind 
Village Council 
____________ 
Paul Schofield 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Laurie S. Cohen 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Chevelle D. Nubin, MMC 
Village Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Kathy Foster 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carmine Priore, Vice Mayor 
Michael McDonough 
Thomas Wenham 
Paul Adams 
Village Council 
____________ 
Charles Lynn 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Caldwell & Pacetti 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Awilda Rodriguez 
Village Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the village council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Charles Schoeck, Village Attorney, and Ms. Awilda Rodriguez, Village Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wellington, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wellington, Florida. 1997. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 97-26 
An Ordinance of the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida, Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Village of Wellington; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing for Effective Date. 
WHEREAS, the Village Council of the Village of Wellington has determined it is in the best interest of the citizens of the Village that a Code of Ordinances be adopted for the Village. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Village of Wellington, Florida," published by the Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 70, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of the Code or any ordinance of the Village shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Village may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 3. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 4. Ordinances adopted after May 27, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 5. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
Passed this 13th day of January, 1998, on first reading. 
Published this 20th day of January, 1998, in The Post. 
Passed and Adopted this 27th day of January, 1998, on second and final reading. 
VILLAGE OF WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
		FOR 	AGAINST 
BY: 	/s/       Mary K. Foster       
Mayor 	      ;check;       	_____
	/s/       Dr. Carmine Priore       
Vice Mayor 	      ;check;       	_____
	/s/       Paul A. Adams       
Councilmember 	      ;check;       	_____
	/s/       Michael McDonough       
Councilmember 	      ;check;       	_____
	/s/       Thomas Wenham       
Councilmember 	      ;check;       	_____
 
ATTEST: 
BY: 	/s/       Awilda Rodriguez       
Village Clerk 		
  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
A bill to be entitled 
An act relating to Palm Beach County; creating the "Village of Wellington Charter"; providing legislative intent; establishing the Village of Wellington; providing municipal boundaries and municipal powers; providing a council-manager form of government; providing for election of a village council; providing for membership, qualifications, terms, powers, and duties of its members, including the mayor; providing for a vice-mayor; providing for compensation and expenses; providing general powers and duties; providing circumstances resulting in vacancy in office; providing grounds for forfeiture and suspension; providing for filling of vacancies; providing for meetings; providing for keeping of records; providing for adoption, distribution, and recording of technical codes; providing a limitation upon employment of councilmembers; prohibiting certain interference with village employees which shall constitute malfeasance in office; establishing the fiscal year; providing for adoption of annual budget and appropriation; providing amendments for supplemental, reduction, and transfer of appropriations; providing for limitations; providing for appointment of charter officers, including a village manager and village attorney; providing for removal, compensation, and filling of vacancies; providing qualifications, powers, and duties; providing for nonpartisan elections and for matters relative thereto; providing for recall; providing for initiative and referenda; providing the village a transitional schedule and procedures for first election; providing for first-year expenses; providing for adoption of transitional ordinances, resolutions, comprehensive plan, and local development regulations; providing for accelerated entitlement to state-shared revenues; providing for gas tax revenue; providing for continuation of the Palm Beach County Fire Rescue Municipal Service Taxing Unit; providing for continuation of the Palm Beach County Library Taxing District; providing for dissolution of the Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit B, dissolution of the Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit C and dissolution of Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit F; providing for law enforcement; providing for continuation and transfer of Acme Improvement District and for transfer of its assets and liabilities; providing that all special acts of Acme Improvement District shall become ordinances of the village; providing land descriptions of the village; providing for future amendments of the charter; providing for standards of conduct in office; providing for severability; providing for referendum approval; providing effective dates. 
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Laws of Fla., ch. 95-496, as adopted by the state legislature. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Short title. 
This act, together with any future amendments thereto, shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Wellington Charter," hereinafter referred to as "the charter."  
Section 2. - Legislative intent. 
The Legislature hereby finds and declares that: 
A.  The Wellington area in Palm Beach County includes a compact and contiguous community of approximately 28,000 residents susceptible to urban services, and constitutes a community amenable to separate municipal government. 
B.  It is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Wellington area to form a separate municipality for the Wellington area with all the powers and authority necessary to provide adequate and efficient municipal services to its residents. 
C.  It is intended that this charter and the incorporation of the Wellington area will serve to preserve and protect the distinctive characteristics of the individual communities within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington. 
D.  It is the intent of this charter and the incorporation of the Wellington area that land development costs for infrastructure improvements associated with new land development shall be paid for by the developer of said land or the ultimate owners or users of said land.  
Section 3. - Incorporation of municipality; corporate limits. 
There is hereby created, effective December 31, 1995, in Palm Beach County, a new municipality to be known as the Village of Wellington, which shall have a council-manager form of government. The corporate boundaries of the Village of Wellington, hereinafter referred to as "village," shall be as described in section 12.  
Section 4. - Equestrian Preserve Area. 
Expanding on the legislative intent at incorporation that the unique characteristics of individual communities be preserved and recognizing the importance of Wellington's equestrian community to the vitality of Wellington, it shall be a village priority to preserve and protect the equestrian community as outlined in the village's comprehensive plan. Accordingly, the village may increase the boundaries of the Equestrian Preserve Area by majority vote, but may not contract the boundaries except by affirmative vote of not less than four members of council. 
A.  Occupancy uses prohibited. 
Certain land uses prohibited. Motels, hotels, condo-hotels, and apartments are prohibited within the Equestrian Preserve Area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15; Ord. No. 2015-18, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 5. - Municipal powers. 
The village shall be a body corporate and politic and shall have all the powers of a municipality under the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this charter, unless otherwise prohibited by or contrary to the provisions of this charter. The village shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers necessary to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal services unless expressly prohibited by law. The powers of the village shall be liberally construed in favor of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 6. - Village council. 
A.  Village council; composition; qualifications of councilmembers. 
1.  There shall be a five-member village council, consisting of a mayor and four councilmembers each elected from and representing the village at large. 
2.  There shall be five separate seats to be designated as mayor seat 1, seat 2, seat 3, and seat 4. Candidates must qualify for mayor and council elections by seat, and the councilmembers elected to those seats shall hold the seat of mayor and seats 1 through 4, respectively. 
3.  To qualify for office: 
a.  Each candidate for the office of village council shall be a registered voter in the State of Florida and a resident of the village. 
b.  At the time of qualification, each candidate for mayor or a council seat shall reside within the boundaries of the village and, if elected, shall maintain such residency throughout his or her term of office. Candidates for office shall qualify as provided in section 9.C. 
B.  Term of office. The term of office for mayor and councilmembers shall be four years. The mayor and each councilmember shall remain in office until a successor is elected and assumes the duties of the position, except as otherwise provided herein. No mayor or councilmember shall serve more than two consecutive terms of office. The office of mayor and the office of council member shall be considered separate offices for purposes of this section. 
1.  In determining whether a mayor or a councilmember has served two consecutive terms, no time in office resulting from having been appointed to office to fill a vacancy or time in office resulting from having been elected to a partial term, as a result of a special election, to fill a vacancy shall be counted towards the two consecutive terms. 
C.  The mayor; powers and duties. 
1.  One member of the council shall be the mayor, who shall be elected to the office in the manner provided in section 6.A of this charter, except as provided in this article for the filling of a vacancy in the office of mayor. The mayor shall have the same legislative powers and duties as any other councilmember, except as provided in section 6.C.2. 
2.  In addition to carrying out the regular duties under section 6.C.1., the mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council and shall be recognized as the head of village government for service of process, ceremonial matters, and the signature or execution of ordinances, contracts, deeds, bonds, and other instruments and documents. The mayor shall have no administrative duties other than those necessary to accomplish these actions, or such other actions as may be authorized by the village council, consistent with general or special law. 
D.  The vice-mayor. 
1.  The village council, at its first regular meeting after the fourth Tuesday of each March, shall elect from its membership a vice-mayor who shall serve at the pleasure of the village council and who shall have the same legislative powers and duties as the mayor or any other councilmember. 
2.  The vice-mayor shall serve as acting mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. In the absence of the mayor and the vice-mayor, the remaining councilmembers shall select a councilmember to serve as acting mayor. 
E.  Compensation and expenses. Village councilmembers shall initially be compensated at the rate of $300 per month, and shall be entitled to receive reimbursement in accordance with Florida Statutes for authorized travel and per-diem expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. The village council, by not less than four affirmative votes, may elect to provide for an increase in compensation by ordinance. However, no such ordinance establishing or increasing compensation shall take effect until the date of commencement of the terms of councilmembers elected at the next regular election which follows the adoption of said ordinance. 
F.  General powers and duties of council. Except as otherwise prescribed herein or provided by law, legislative and police powers of the village shall be vested in the council. The council shall provide for the exercise of its powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the village by law. 
G.  Vacancies; forfeiture of office; suspension; filling of vacancies. 
1.  Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or any councilmember shall occur upon the death of the incumbent, removal from office as authorized by law, resignation, appointment to other public office which creates dual office holding, judicially determined incompetency, or forfeiture of office as described in section 6.G.2. 
2.  Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilmember shall forfeit his or her office upon determination by the council, acting as a body, at a duly noticed public meeting that he or she: 
a.  Lacks at any time, or fails to maintain during his or her term of office, any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or otherwise required by law; 
b.  Is convicted of a felony, or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a crime punishable as a felony, even if adjudication is withheld; 
c.  Is convicted of a first-degree misdemeanor arising directly out of his or her official conduct or duties, or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, even if adjudication of guilt has been withheld; 
d.  Is found to have violated any standard of conduct or code of ethics established by law for public officials and has been suspended from office by the Governor, unless subsequently reinstated as provided by law; or 
e.  Is absent from three consecutive regular council meetings without justifiable reason, or for any other reason established in this charter. 
3.  Suspension from office. The mayor or any councilmember shall be suspended from office upon return of an indictment or issuance of any information charging the mayor or any councilmember with any crime which is punishable as a felony or with any crime arising out of his or her official duties which is punishable as a first degree misdemeanor. Pursuant thereto: 
a.  During the period of suspension, the mayor or any councilmember shall not perform any official act, duty, or function, or receive any pay, allowance, emolument, or privilege of office. 
b.  If the mayor or any councilmember is subsequently found not guilty of the charge, or if the charge is otherwise dismissed, reduced, or altered in such a manner that suspension would no longer be required as provided herein, the suspension shall be lifted and the mayor or any councilmember shall be entitled to receive full back pay and such other emoluments or allowances as he or she would have been entitled to had the suspension not occurred. 
4.  Filling of vacancies. If any vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or councilmember, and less than 180 days remain in the term, such seat shall remain vacant until a new mayor or councilmember is elected and assumes the duties of his or her office. If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or councilmember and 180 days or more remain in the term then a special election shall be called within not less than 75 days or more than 180 days to fill such vacancy, or as soon thereafter as the Supervisor of Elections is available to conduct such special election. If the vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, the vice-mayor shall serve as mayor until a new mayor is elected. If the special election provided for herein is required as a result of an irrevocable resignation pursuant to Florida Statute 99.012, as amended from time to time, the special election shall occur during the already scheduled upcoming election. 
H.  Village council meetings. The council shall conduct regular meetings at such times and places as the council shall prescribe by resolution. Such meetings shall be public meetings within the meaning of F.S. § 286.011 and shall be subject to notice and other requirements of law applicable to public meetings. Pursuant thereto: 
1.  Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor, or in his or her absence, at the call of the vice-mayor. Special meetings may also be called upon the request of a majority of the councilmembers. Unless of an emergency nature, the person or persons calling such a meeting shall provide not less than 72 hours' prior notice of the meeting to the public. 
2.  The elected or re-elected mayor and councilmembers shall be inducted into office at the first regularly scheduled meeting following certification of their election. 
3.  A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum. No action of the council shall be valid unless adopted by an affirmative vote of the majority of the councilmembers in attendance, unless otherwise provided by law. All actions of the village council shall be by ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
I.  Village records. The council shall, in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, provide for the authentication and recording in full of all minutes of meetings, and all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council, and the same shall at all times be a public record. The council shall further maintain a current codification of all ordinances. Such codification shall be printed and shall be made available for distribution to the public on a continuing basis. All ordinances or resolutions of the council shall be signed by the mayor, or vice-mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor, or by the acting mayor in the absence or disability of both the mayor and the vice-mayor, and attested to by the village clerk. 
J.  Adoption of codes. The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance and may amend the code in the adopting ordinance or later amendatory ordinance. The procedures and requirements governing such an adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that: 
1.  Requirements regarding distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall not be construed to require distribution and filing of copies of the adopted code of technical regulations, except as provided in Section 6.J.2. 
2.  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as of the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the village clerk. 
K.  Limitation of employment of councilmembers. Neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall be in the employment of the village while in office, nor shall any former mayor or councilmember be employed by the village until after the expiration of one year from the time of leaving office. 
L.  Noninterference by village council. Except for the purposes of inquiry and information, the mayor and councilmembers are expressly prohibited from interfering with the performance of the duties of any employee of the village government who is under the direct or indirect supervision of the village manager or village attorney. Such action shall be malfeasance within the meaning of Sections 112.317 and 112.51, Florida Statutes. 
M.  Transitional. The Mayor shall be elected for an initial three-year term beginning with a special municipal election in March, 2003. Thereafter, the mayor will be elected for two-year terms as provided in section 6.B. 
Village Council seat 4 shall be redesignated as the seat of the mayor for purposes of qualifying candidates for the office of mayor for the election of 2003. On November 5, 2002, a vacancy will exist in the office of council seat 4. The remaining councilmembers shall, within 30 days following the occurrence of the vacancy, by majority vote, appoint a person to fill the vacancy until the special election of March, 2003. 
After the election of March 2003, village council seat 5 shall be redesignated as village council seat 4. 
Any Councilmember who desires to run for the office of may [in the March 2003 election] shall present an irrevocable resignation form the office of councilmember no later than the time prescribed in Section 99.012, Florida Statutes, said resignation to be effective as of the date of the special election of March 2003. Such a resignation will create a vacancy in as of the date of the special election in March 2003. The Council shall, within 30 days following the occurrence of the vacancy, by affirmative vote of no less than three members, appoint a person to fill the vacancy until the regular election of March 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2002-19, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2010-16, § 1, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 2010-19, § 1, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 1, 6-14-16)  
Section 7. - Budget and appropriations. 
A.  Fiscal year. The village shall have a fiscal year which shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on September 30 of the succeeding year. 
B.  Budget adoption. The council shall by resolution adopt a budget on or before the 30th day of September of each year, following a minimum of two public hearings on the proposed budget. A resolution adopting the annual budget shall constitute appropriation of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from funds indicated. 
C.  Appropriation amendments during the fiscal year. 
1.  Supplemental appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation, the council by resolution may make supplemental appropriations for the year in an amount not to exceed such excess. 
2.  Reduction of appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the village manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the village manager shall report same to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken, and recommendations as to any other steps that should be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and, for that purpose, the council may by resolution reduce one or more appropriations accordingly. 
3.  Limitations; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated, or by more than the unencumbered balance thereof. Other provisions of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 8. - Charter officers. 
A.  Designation. The village manager and the village attorney are designated as charter officers, except that the office of village attorney may be contracted to an attorney or law firm. 
B.  Appointment; removal; compensation; filling of vacancies. 
1.  The charter officers shall be appointed by a majority vote of the full council and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
2.  The charter officers shall be removed from office only by a majority vote of the full council. Upon demand by a charter officer, a public hearing shall be held prior to such removal. 
3.  The compensation of the charter officers shall be fixed by the village council. 
4.  The village council shall begin the process to fill a vacancy in a charter office within 90 days of the vacancy. An acting village manager or an acting village attorney may be appointed by the council during a vacancy in such charter office. 
5.  The charter officers shall not be a candidate for village council while holding their charter officer position. 
C.  Village manager. The village manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the village. 
1.  Qualifications. The village manager shall be selected on the basis of experience, expertise, and management ability as it pertains to running municipal government. 
2.  Powers and duties. The village manager shall: 
a.  As the chief administrative officer of the village, direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the village, except the offices of village attorney, and except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
b.  Appoint, suspend, or remove any employee of the village or appointive administrative officer provided for, by, or under this charter, except the office of village attorney, and except as may otherwise be provided by law, this charter, or personnel rules adopted pursuant to the charter. The village manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency. 
c.  Ensure that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the council are faithfully executed. 
d.  Prepare and submit the annual budget, and capital program to the council in the form prescribed by ordinance. 
e.  Attend meetings of the village council. 
f.  Draw and sign vouchers upon depositories as provided by ordinance, and keep, or cause to be kept, a true and accurate account of same. 
g.  Sign all licenses issued by the village, and issue receipts for all moneys paid to the village, and deposit said moneys in the proper depositories on the first banking day after receipt. The village manager may delegate the responsibilities of this subparagraph to an appropriate village employee who shall be bonded. 
h.  Provide administrative services in support of the official duties of the mayor and the council. 
i.  Keep the council advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the village and make recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the village. 
j.  Submit to the council, and make available to the public, a complete report on finances and administrative activities of the village as of the end of each fiscal year. 
k.  Sign contracts on behalf of the village to the extent authorized by ordinance. 
l.  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the council. 
D.  Village attorney. The village attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the village. 
1.  Qualifications. The village attorney shall be a member of The Florida Bar in good standing. 
2.  Powers and duties. The village attorney: 
a.  Shall serve as chief legal advisor to the village council, the charter officers, and all village departments, offices and agencies. 
b.  May hire such assistants as may be required, when approved by the village council. 
c.  Shall attend village council meetings unless excused by the village council, and shall perform such professional duties as may be required by law or by the council in furtherance of the law. 
d.  Shall prepare an annual budget for the operation of the office of the village attorney and shall submit this budget to the village manager for inclusion in the annual village budget, in accordance with uniform village procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 9. - Elections. 
A.  Electors. Any person who is a resident of the village, who has qualified as an elector of this state, and who registers in the manner prescribed by law shall be an elector of the village. 
B.  Nonpartisan elections. All elections for the village councilmembers shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis without any designation of political party affiliation. 
C.  Qualifying for office. Any resident of the village who wishes to become a candidate for a village elective office shall qualify with the village clerk no sooner than noon on the last Tuesday in January nor later than noon on the second Tuesday in February of the year in which the election is to be held. 
D.  Schedule for general elections. The regular village election shall be the second Tuesday in March of each election year. Such village elections shall be general village elections. In the event no candidate for an office receives a minimum of thirty-five (35%) percent of the votes cast for said office, then a second election shall be held on the fourth Tuesday in March. 
E.  Schedule for other elections. 
1.  An election to fill the remainder of an unexpired term shall be held as provided in section 9.D. 
2.  Special municipal elections shall be held in the same manner as regular elections, except that the village council, by ordinance, shall fix the time for holding of such elections. 
F.  Determination of election to office. If only one candidate qualifies for an office, said candidate shall be deemed to be elected. If two or more candidates qualify for an office, the names of those candidates shall be placed on the ballot at the general election. In every election to any office the candidate receiving the highest percentage of the vote equal to or in excess of thirty-five (35%) percent of the votes validly cast for that office shall be declared elected. If in any election no candidate receives a minimum of thirty-five (35%) percent of the votes validly cast for that office, then the two candidates for the office receiving the highest vote in the general election shall run again in election, provided that: 
1.  If more than two candidates for an office receive an equal and highest number of votes, the name of each candidate shall be placed on the second election ballot. 
2.  In any contest in which there is a tie for second place, the name of the candidate placing first and the name of each candidate tying for second shall be placed upon the second election ballot. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office in the second election shall be elected to such office. If the vote at the second election results in a tie, the outcome shall be determined by lot. 
G.  Village canvassing board. The village canvassing board shall be composed of those members of the village council who are not candidates for reelection and the village clerk, who shall act as chairperson. In any village election in which the canvassing board is composed of an even number of persons, council shall, by not less than four affirmative votes, appoint a member of the community and an alternate to serve on the canvassing board in order to avoid single or even membership. The appointment shall occur at least twelve months prior to the election. At the close of the polls of any village election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the canvassing board shall meet at a time and place designated by the chairperson and shall proceed to publicly canvass the vote as shown by the returns then on file in the office of the village clerk, and then shall publicly canvass the absentee elector ballots. The canvassing board shall prepare and sign a certificate containing the total number of votes cast for each candidate or other measure voted upon. The certificate shall be placed on file with the village clerk. 
H.  Recall of village councilmembers. Any member of the village council may be removed from office by the electors of the village following the procedures for recall established by general law. 
I.  Initiative and referendum. 
1.  Power to initiate and reconsider ordinances. 
a.  Initiative. The electors of the village shall have the power to propose ordinances to the village council and, if the village council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a village election, provided that such power shall not extend to the annual budget or capital program or any ordinance appropriating money, levying taxes, or setting salaries of village officers or employees. 
b.  Referendum. 
(1)  The village council shall have the power, by resolution, to call for a referendum vote by the electors of the village at any time, provided that the purpose of such referendum is presented to the village at a public hearing at least 60 days prior to the adoption of said resolution. Any resolution calling for a referendum vote of the electors of the village must be passed by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the council. 
(2)  The electors of the village shall have the power to require reconsideration by the village council of any adopted ordinance and, if the village council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a village election, provided that such power shall not extend to the annual budget or capital program or any ordinance appropriating money, levying taxes, or setting salaries of village officers or employees. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything in section 9.I.1.a.(2) to the contrary, the referendum power shall extend to any ordinance levying ad valorem taxes, provided that the ordinance increases the total village tax rate above 5 mills, and that all petitions with respect to the referendum are filed within 30 days after the date of adoption of the ordinance. 
2.  Commencement of proceedings. Any 10 electors may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the village clerk an affidavit stating that they shall constitute the petitioner's committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioner's committee is filed, the village clerk may, at the committee's request, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioner's committee at the committee's expense. 
3.  Petitions. 
a.  Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by electors of the village equal in number to at least 10 percent of the total number of electors registered to vote in the last regular village election. 
b.  All papers of a petition shall be assembled as one instrument of filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink and shall be followed by the printed name and address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
c.  Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
d.  Except as otherwise provided in section 9.I.1.a.(2), all initiative and referendum petitions must be filed within 60 days of the date on which proceedings with respect to such initiative or referendum are commenced, and all requirements of the process, including, but not limited to, the submission of the signatures required, must be completed no later than 90 days following the date of filing said initiative or referendum petition. 
4.  Procedure for filing. 
a.  [ Generally. ] Within 20 days after an initiative petition or a referendum petition is filed, the village clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioner's committee by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specifics in section 9.I.3.c. that are not met. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioner's committee files a notice of intent to amend it with the designated official within 2 business days after receiving the copy of the certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within 10 days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with original petition requirements, and within 5 days after it is filed, the village clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioner's committee by registered mail. If a petition or an amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioner's committee does not elect to amend or request the village council review under section 9.I.4.b. within the time required, the village clerk shall promptly present a certificate to the village council and such certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
b.  The village council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioner's committee does not file notice of intent to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) business days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the village council. The village council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the village council's filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and determination shall then be final as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
5.  Action on petitions. 
a.  Action by the village council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been determined sufficient, the village council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referendum ordinance by voting its repeal. The repeal of an ordinance relating to the levy of ad valorem taxes shall be by ordinance. If the village council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 45 days or fails to repeal the referendum ordinance within 30 days or, in the case of a referendum authorized pursuant to section 9.I.1.b.(3), within 5 days after the date on which the petition is determined to be sufficient, it shall submit the proposed initiative or referendum ordinance to the electors of the village. If the village council fails to act on a proposed initiative ordinance or a referendum ordinance within the time period specified, the village council shall be deemed to have failed to adopt the proposed initiative ordinance or failed to repeal the referendum ordinance on the last day that the village council was authorized to act on such matter. 
b.  Submission to electors. The vote of the village on a proposed initiative or referendum ordinance shall be held not less than 30 or more than 60 days from the date the village council acted or was deemed to have acted pursuant to section 9.I.5.a. that the petition was determined sufficient. If no regular election is to be held within the period described in this paragraph, the village council shall provide for a special election, except that the village council may, in its discretion, provide for a special election at an earlier date within the described period. Copies of the proposed initiative or referendum ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
c.  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the village by filing with the village clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least eight members of the petitioner's committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
6.  Results of election. 
a.  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
b.  [ Repeal. ] If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referendum ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 12-8-15)  
Section 10. - Transition schedule. 
A.  Referendum. The referendum election called for by this act shall be held on November 7, 1995, at which time the following question shall be placed upon the ballot: 
"SHALL LAWS OF FLORIDA, CH. 95-[496], CREATING THE VILLAGE OF WELLINGTON AND PROVIDING ITS CHARTER BE APPROVED?" 
In the event this question is answered affirmatively by a majority of voters voting in the referendum, the provisions of this charter will take effect as provided in section 15. 
B.  Initial election of councilmembers. 
1.  Dates. Following the adoption of this charter in accordance with section 10.A., the Palm Beach County Commission shall call a special election for the election of the five village councilmembers to be held on March 12, 1996. In the event no candidate for an office receives a majority of the votes cast for said office, then a runoff election shall be held on March 26, 1996. 
2.  Qualifying period. Between noon on January 30, 1996, and noon on February 13, 1996, any individual who wishes to run for one of the five initial seats on the council shall qualify as a candidate with the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections in accordance with the provisions of this charter and general law. 
3.  Certification of election results. For the initial election, the Palm Beach County Commission shall appoint a canvassing board which shall certify the results of the election. 
4.  Induction into office. Those candidates who are elected on March 12, 1996, and March 26, 1996, shall take office at the initial village council meeting, which shall be held at 7 p.m. on March 28, 1996, at the Wellington High School, Wellington, Florida. 
5.  Initial terms of office. In order to provide for staggering terms of office, the initial term of office for those three council candidates receiving the highest number of votes in the initial election shall be 4 years, and for the remaining elected candidates 2 years. 
C.  Creation and establishment of village. For the purpose of compliance with F.S. § 200.066, relating to assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes, the village is hereby created and established effective December 31, 1995, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the village although created and established as of December 31, 1995, shall not be operational until March 28, 1996. 
D.  First year expenses. The village council, in order to provide moneys for the expenses and support of the village, shall have the power to borrow money necessary for the operation of village government until such time as a budget is adopted and revenues are raised in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
E.  Transitional ordinances and resolutions. The village council shall adopt ordinances and resolutions required to effect the transition. Ordinances adopted within 60 days after the first council meeting may be passed as emergency ordinances. These transitional ordinances, passed as emergency ordinances, shall be effective for no longer than 90 days after adoption, and thereafter may be readopted, renewed, or otherwise continued only in the manner normally prescribed for ordinances. 
F.  Transitional comprehensive plan and land development regulations. 
1.  Until such time as the village adopts a comprehensive plan, the applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan of Palm Beach County, as the same exists on the day the village commences corporate existence, shall remain in effect as the village's transitional comprehensive plan. However, all planning functions, duties, and authority shall thereafter be vested in the Village Council of Wellington which shall be deemed the local planning agency until the council establishes a separate local planning agency. Any amendment to any zoning as established in the current county land use plan, which is adopted by the village, shall only be by an ordinance adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the council. Any increase in the residential density or intensity, as established in the current county land use plan which is adopted by the village shall only be by an ordinance adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the council. This charter shall not affect any of the rights and obligations, between and among any persons, which have been and are established by or result from any existing planned unit developments in the area which are established by this charter. Notwithstanding any other provision within general law or this charter, if, before the village adopts its comprehensive plan and land development regulations, an application for development approval is filed for a development of regional impact on a parcel of land located within the corporate boundaries of the village, as described in Section 12 herein, the comprehensive plan and land development regulations of Palm Beach County shall govern all development approvals for the development of regional impact until 48 months subsequent to the date the village commences corporate existence and during that 48-month period all local government orders and development permits associated with the development of regional impact shall be administered and issued by Palm Beach County. 
2.  With the exception of the Development of Regional Impact exemption provided in subparagraph F.1. [of this section], all powers and duties of the planning commission, zoning authority, any boards of adjustment, and the County Commission of Palm Beach County, as set forth in these transitional zoning and land use regulations, shall be vested in the Village Council of Wellington until such time as the village council delegates all or a portion thereof to another entity. 
3.  With the exception of the Development of Regional Impact exemption provided in subparagraph F.1. [of this section], subsequent to the commencement of the village's corporate existence, no amendment of the comprehensive plan or land development regulations enacted by the Palm Beach County Commission shall be deemed as an amendment of the village's transitional comprehensive plan or land development regulations or otherwise take effect within the village's corporate limits unless approved by the village council. 
G.  State shared revenues. The Village of Wellington shall be entitled to participate in all shared revenue programs of the State of Florida effective immediately on the date of incorporation. The provisions of F.S. § 218.23(1) shall be waived for the purpose of eligibility to receive revenue sharing funds from the date of incorporation through the state fiscal year 1996—1997. Initial population estimates for calculating eligibility for shared revenues shall be determined by the University of Florida Bureau of Economic and Business Research. Should the bureau be unable to provide an appropriate population estimate, the Palm Beach County Planning Division estimate should be utilized. 
H.  Gas tax revenues. Notwithstanding the requirements of F.S. § 336.025 to the contrary, the Village of Wellington shall be entitled to receive local option gas tax revenues beginning October 1, 1996. The amount of said revenues distributed to the Village of Wellington shall be determined pursuant to Ordinance [No.] 86-23 of Palm Beach County. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 11. - Continuation, merger, and dissolution of existing districts. 
A.  Palm Beach County Fire Rescue Municipal Service Taxing Unit; continuation. Notwithstanding the incorporation of the Village of Wellington, that portion of the Palm Beach County Fire Rescue Municipal Service Taxing Unit, a special taxing district created by the Palm Beach County Commission that lies within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington, is authorized to continue in existence, until the village adopts an ordinance to the contrary. However, the village shall not establish a village fire department without a referendum. 
B.  Law enforcement. Law enforcement services shall continue to be provided by the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office, or contracted with other law enforcement agencies, until the village adopts an ordinance to the contrary; provided that the village shall not establish a village police department without a referendum. 
C.  Palm Beach County Library Taxing District; continuation. Notwithstanding the incorporation of the Village of Wellington, that portion of the Palm Beach County Library Taxing District, a dependent district of Palm Beach County created by Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1869, as amended, that lies within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington, is authorized but not required to continue in existence. 
D.  Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit B. That portion of Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit B, a dependent district of Palm Beach County created by the Palm Beach Commission that lies within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington, shall cease to exist within the municipal boundaries of the Village of Wellington on September 30, 1996. 
E.  Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit C. That portion of Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit C, a dependent district of Palm Beach County created by the Palm Beach County Commission that lies within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington, shall cease to exist within the municipal boundaries of the Village of Wellington on September 30, 1996. 
F.  Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit F. That portion of Palm Beach County Municipal Service Taxing Unit F, a dependent district of Palm Beach County created by the Palm Beach County Commission that lies within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington, shall cease to exist within the municipal boundaries of the Village of Wellington on September 30, 1996. 
G.  Acme Improvement District continuation and transfer. The Acme Improvement District, an independent special district created by a special act of the Legislature, shall become a dependent district of the Village of Wellington on March 28, 1996. All special acts of the Acme Improvement District shall become Ordinances of the Village of Wellington on March 28, 1996. 
1.  The assets, liabilities, and written contracts of the Acme Improvement District, including all rights, obligations, duties and relationships now existing by law or agreement, shall be unaffected and shall remain in full force and effect and shall be those of the district as a dependent district of the Village of Wellington. All rights, obligations, duties, and relationships now existing by law or agreement shall remain in full force and effect and shall be those of the district as a dependent district of the Village of Wellington. All rights, claims, actions, orders, and all contracts of the special district and all legal or administrative proceedings involving the district shall continue in full force and effect under the jurisdiction of the district as a dependent district of the Village of Wellington. 
2.  Effective March 28, 1996, at 7 p.m., the terms of office of the Board of Supervisors of the Acme Improvement District shall terminate, and the village councilmembers of the Village of Wellington shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the Board of Supervisors. 
3.  To the extent not inconsistent with this charter, all resolutions and policies of the Acme Improvement District shall remain in effect until amended, revised, or repealed by the village council. 
4.  Additional provisions which are necessary to effect this transition and to provide for the operation of the Acme Improvement District as a dependent district of the village shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 12. - Land description. 
The corporate boundaries of the village shall be as follows: 
DESCRIPTION OF BASIN A, BASIN B, WELLINGTON'S EDGE TRACTS AND BREFRANK TRACT Lands in Township 43 South, Range 41 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, as follows: Those portions of Sections 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35 lying southerly of the SOUTH FLORIDA WATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT CANAL C-51 right-of-way (WEST PALM BEACH CANAL, so-called). 
TOGETHER WITH Lands in Township 44 South, Range 40 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, as follows: That part of the North Half (N½) of the North Half (N½) of Section 25 lying northeasterly of the 600 foot wide SOUTH FLORIDA WATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT LEVEE L-40 right-of-way. 
TOGETHER WITH Lands in Township 44 South, Range 41 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, as follows: All of Sections 2 through 11, inclusive, 14 through 23, inclusive, 26 through 29, inclusive, 33, 34, and those parts of Sections 30, 31, and 32 lying northeasterly of the 600 foot wide SOUTH FLORIDA WATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT LEVEE L-40 right-of-way; AND the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section 12 less all that part thereof lying southerly of the southerly right-of-way line of FOREST HILL BOULEVARD as same is described in Official Record Book 2198 at pages 1200 and 1201, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, and less all that part of the East 40 feet thereof lying northerly and southerly of the said right-of-way of FOREST HILL BOULEVARD; AND all that part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of said Section 12 bounded on the North by the South line and the westerly extension thereof of the North 80 feet of TRACTS 22, 23, and 24, BLOCK 18, PALM BEACH FARMS COMPANY PLAT NO. 3, as same is recorded in Plat Book 2 at pages 45 through 54, inclusive, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, bounded on the East by the West line and the southerly extension thereof of the East 335.91 feet of TRACTS 22 and 27 of said BLOCK 18, bounded on the South by the southerly right-of-way line of FOREST HILL BOULEVARD as same is described in Official Record Book 2198 at pages 1200 and 1201, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, and bounded on the West by the West line of the said Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section 12; AND all that part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of said Section 12 lying within the right-of-way of FOREST HILL BOULEVARD as said right-of-way is described in Official Record Book 2198 at pages 1200 and 1201, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, bounded on the East by the southerly extension of the East line of TRACTS 22 and 27 of BLOCK 18, PALM BEACH FARMS COMPANY PLAT NO. 3, as said plat is recorded in Plat Book 2 at pages 45 through 54, inclusive, Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida, and bounded on the West by the southerly extension of the West line of the East 335.91 feet of said TRACTS 22 and 27 of BLOCK 18; AND a parcel of land lying in the North Three Quarters (N¾) of Section 13 described thusly—beginning at the Northwest corner of said Section 13; (bearings cited herein are in a meridian assuming South 87-44-41 East along the North line of said Section 13), run South 87-44-41 East along the North line of said Section 13, a distance of 2643.75 feet to the North quarter corner of Section 13; thence continue South 87-44-41 East, a distance of 883.06 feet to a point of curvature; thence along the arc of a curve to the right having a radius of 5616.58 feet and a central angle of 6-53-57, a distance of 676.31 feet to the point of tangency; thence South 80-50-44 East, a distance of 249.96 feet to a point of curvature; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 5842.58 feet, through a central angle of 5-32-46, a distance of 565.55 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of STATE ROAD NO. 7; thence South 00-21-56 East, a distance of 548.66 feet; thence South 01-58-01 West, along a line parallel with and 240 feet westerly from (as measured at right angles to) the East line of said Section 13, a distance of 363.28 feet; thence North 88-19-38 West, a distance of 28.46 feet; thence South 01-57-22 West, a distance of 208.71 feet; thence South 88-18-59 East, a distance of 199.16 feet to the westerly right-of-way line of STATE ROAD NO. 7; thence South 02-04-34 West, along the said westerly right-of-way line of STATE ROAD NO. 7, a distance of 2520.50 feet; thence North 88-05-25 West, along the South line of the North Half (N½) of the South Half (S½) of said Section 13, a distance of 5208.20 feet to the West line of said Section 13; thence North 01-52-58 East, a distance of 1360.79 feet to the West quarter corner of said Section 13; thence North 01-54-00 East, a distance of 2720.57 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING. LESS AND EXCEPT right-of-way for LAKE WORTH DRAINAGE DISTRICT. 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION: 
A CERTAIN PARCEL OF LAND LYING IN SECTION 24, TOWNSHIP 44 COUTH, RANGE 41 EAST, PALM BEACH COUNTY, FLORIDA, BEING A PORTION OF TRACTS 6, 7 AND 8, PALM BEACH FARMS COMPANY PLAT NO. 3, AS SAME IS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 2, PAGES 45 THROUGH 54, PUBLIC RECORDS OF PALM BEACH COUNTY, FLORID, BEING MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: 
COMMENCING AT A POINT ON THE WESTERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF U.S. HIGHWAY 441 (STATE ROAD #7) AS SAME AS DEPICTED ON THE FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION RIGHT OF WAY MAP, SECTION 93210-2519 AND THE NORTH LINE OF WHITEHORSE ESTATES PLAT 2, AS SAME IS RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK 78, PAGE 92, PUBLIC RECORDS OF PALM BEACH COUNTY, FLORIDA THENCE FROM SAID POINT OF COMMENCEMENT, NORTH 01°53'57" EAST (THE NORTH LINE OF SAID WHITEHORSE ESTATES PLAT 2 IS ASSUMED TO BEAR SOUTH 88°52'02" WEST AND ALL OTHER BEARINGS MENTIONED HEREIN ARE RELATIVE THERETO) ALONG WESTERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE, A DISTANCE OF 6609 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING: THENCE, FROM SAID POINT OF BEGINNING, SOUTH 88°52'02" WEST ALONG A LINE 66.00 FEET NORTH OF, AS MEASURED AT RIGHT ANGLES THERETO, FROM SAID NORTH LINE OF WHITEHORSE ESTATES PLAT 2, (SAID LINE ALSO BEING 86.00 FEET NORTH OF AS MEASURED AT RIGHT ANGLES THERETO, THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID TRACTS 6, 7 AND 8) A DISTANCE OF 1122.03 FEET; THENCE NORTH 01°07'58" WEST, A DISTANCE OF 415.00 FEET; THENCE SOUTH 88°05'50" EAST, A DISTANCE OF 1142.41 FEET TO A POINT ON SAID WESTERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF STATE ROAD #7; THENCE SOUTH 01°53'57" WEST, ALONG SAID WESTERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE, A DISTANCE OF 355.0 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
CONTAINING 10.000 ACRES, MORE OR LESS. 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION: 
ALL THAT PORTION OF THE SOUTH HALF OF THE NORTH HALF OF SECTION 25, TOWNSHIP 44 SOUTH, RANGE 40 EAST, PALM BEACH COUNTY, FLORIDA, LYING EASTERLY OF THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SOUTH FLORIDA WATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT'S LEVEE L-40. 
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
A PORTION OF SECTION 25, TOWNSHIP 44 SOUTH, RANGE 40 EAST DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: 
BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF THOSE CERTAIN LANDS AS CONVEYED IN OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 15060, PAGE 293 OF THE OFFICIAL RECORDS OF PALM BEACH COUNTY, FLORIDA; THENCE, SOUTH 01° 17'01" WEST, (BASIS OF BEARINGS, A GRID AZIMUTH) ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID SECTION 25, 398.46 FEET MORE OR LESS TO AN INTERSECTION WITH THE EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN FLORIDA FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICTS CANAL L-40; THENCE, NORTH 57°08'22" WEST ALONG SAID EASTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, 729.21 FEET MORE OF LESS TO THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THOSE CERTAIN LANDS AS CONVEYED IN SAID OFFICIAL RECORDS BOOK 15060, PAGE 293; THENCE NORTH 89°43'08" EAST, 621.49 FEET MORE OR LESS ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NORTH HALF OR THE NORTH HALF OF SAID SECTION 25 TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
CONTAINING 2.85 ACRES, MORE OR LESS. 
(Ord. No. 2002-15, § 3, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 6, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 2, 6-14-16)  
Section 13. - General provisions. 
A.  Charter amendments. This charter may be amended in accordance with the provisions for charter amendments as specified in the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166, as the same may be amended from time to time, or its successor, or as may otherwise be provided by general law. The form, content, and certification of any petition to amend shall be established by ordinance. 
B.  Standards of conduct. All elected officials and employees of the village shall be subject to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees set by general law. In addition, the village council shall, no later than 6 months from the effective date of incorporation, establish by ordinance a code of ethics for officials and employees of the village which may be supplemental to general law, but in no case may such an ordinance diminish the provisions of general law. The intent of this provision of the charter is to require more stringent standards than those provided under general law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 14. - Severability. 
If any provisions of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared severable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Section 15. - Effective dates. 
This act shall take effect only upon its approval by a majority vote of those qualified electors residing within the proposed corporate limits of the proposed Village of Wellington as described in section 12, voting in a referendum election to be called by the Palm Beach County Commission and to be held on November 7, 1995, in accordance with the provisions of law relating to elections currently in force, except that: 
A.  Section 1, section 2, section 10.A. and this section shall take effect upon becoming a law. 
B.  If approved by the electorate, section 3, section 10.B. and section 10.C. shall take effect immediately upon certification of the election results by the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections. 
C.  The remainder of this act shall take effect March 28, 1996. 
Became a law without the Governor's approval June 17, 1995. 
Filed in Office Secretary of State June 16, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 11-10-15)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Incorporation of municipality, corporate limits, § 3; land description, § 12. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the Code of Ordinances, Village of Wellington, Florida and may be so cited. 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 6(I).  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building inspector. The words "building inspector" shall mean the building official or his duly appointed designee. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Village of Wellington Charter as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is referred to without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Village of Wellington, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, rule 1.090(a). 
County. The word "county" shall mean Palm Beach County. 
F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The word "may" is permissive. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and vice versa. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation, and the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint adventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the village. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Village. The words "the village" or "this village" shall be construed as if the words "of Wellington" followed the word "village," and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
Village council or council. Whenever the words "village council" or "council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
Village officers, agencies. Whenever reference is made to an officer, employee, department, board, committee, commission, agency, etc., it shall mean the same as if it were followed by the words "of the Village of Wellington, Florida." 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1, 4-30-96) 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 1.01.  
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division.  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections.  
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of offenses, acts, penalties or forfeitures prior to effective date. 
Nothing in this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 2, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 3, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances and actions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the village, or any evidence of the village's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the village. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance of the village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance, dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, land development, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any comprehensive plan ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village. 
(12)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the village. 
(13)  The utility fee schedule and other fees established by the village. 
(14)  Any blank form adopted by the council pertaining to travel advances or expenses. 
(15)  Any ordinance, Charter or special act provision regulating the special assessment procedures for local improvements. 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
All such ordinances and actions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section and are on file in the village clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 4, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this section, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Village of Wellington, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Village of Wellington, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 5, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted into the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code or its application to any persons or circumstances shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code or their application. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 6, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in a village ordinance any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or of a village ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the judge. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of a village ordinance shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or of a village ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the village, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 7, 4-30-96) 
State Law reference— Penalties for violation of municipal ordinances, F.S. § 162.22.  
Sec. 1-13. - Civil rights. 
(a)  Purpose. The Wellington Council desires to secure for its citizens freedom from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, familial status, pregnancy, marital status, genetic information, sexual orientation or gender identity or expression, and thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity; to make available to the village their full productive capacities; to secure the village against domestic strife and unrest; to preserve the public safety, health and general welfare; and to promote the interests, rights and privileges of individuals within the village. The village council also desires to adopt an ordinance that is consistent with federal, state and local laws and affords its citizens access to remedies in the case of alleged discrimination, to wit: the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Florida Commission on Human Relations and the Palm Beach County Office of Equal Opportunity. 
(b)  Adoption of the Village of Wellington Civil Rights Act. The Florida Civil Rights Act of 1992, Chapter 760, Section 760.01 through 760.11 and Section 509.092; Florida's Fair Housing Act, Chapter 760, Section 760.20 through 760.37; the Palm Beach County Equal Employment Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article VI, Division 1, Sections 2-251 through 2-313; and the Palm Beach County Ordinance for Equal Opportunity to Housing and Places of Public Accommodation, Chapter 15, Article III, Sections 15-36 through 15-67 are collectively adopted by reference as the Village of Wellington Civil Rights Ordinance Act, subject to and including by reference such amendments, corrections and additions as shall occur therein or as may appear in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 10-13-15)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, § 5; elections, § 9. 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinance of the village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-8(3); planning, ch. 42; special districts, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Public records, F.S. ch. 119; municipal code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162; intergovernmental programs, F.S. ch. 163; municipal powers generally, F.S. ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Village seal. 
(a)  The following emblem, shown in any color, or any part thereof, with or without the legend "A Great Hometown, Let us Show You", or any combination of any of the components of the emblem, is hereby designated as the official seal of the Village of Wellington: 
 
(b)  The village manager is hereby authorized to adopt administrative standards and rules for the unofficial use of the village seal and may impose fees for such use upon a finding that the collection of such fees serves a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 2-25-14)  
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Village council, § 6. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the village council shall be established by resolution as required by the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-32. - Workshop meetings. 
The village council may schedule as many workshop meetings as it may determine are necessary, together with the date, time and place for such meetings being approved at any regular or special session of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 2, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-33. - Notice of meetings. 
The village clerk shall post written notice of all special and workshop village council meetings in the village hall as soon as practicable upon scheduling of such meetings by the village council. Regular meetings of the village council shall begin on or about 7:30 p.m., unless changed by vote of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 3, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-34. - Adjournment of regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the village council shall be adjourned no later than on or about 11:00 p.m. on the date when a meeting is convened, unless changed by vote of the village council. If there is pending business on the floor at 11:00 p.m. during any such meeting, then such business may be continued to the next regular village council meeting and shall be the first item on the agenda, unless changed by vote of the village council. The required adjournment time of 11:00 p.m. shall be strictly enforced. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 4, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-35. - Chairperson to conduct meetings. 
The mayor, as chairperson of the council, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any village council meeting, and shall immediately call all members to order, and with the appearance of a quorum, shall proceed to conduct the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 5, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-36. - Addressing the chair; recognition. 
No member, while the council is in session, shall offer any motion or make any remarks, or speak on any subject under discussion, without addressing and being recognized by the chairperson. When more than one member shall seek recognition by the chairperson at or near the same time, the chairperson shall decide in favor of the member who shall first attract the chairperson's attention, and no member shall interrupt another while speaking except to call such member to order. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 6, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-37. - Questions of order; appeal. 
The chairperson shall decide all questions of order, but any member dissatisfied with any decision by the chairperson shall have the right of appeal to the council. The decision of the council shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 7, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-38. - Motions to reconsider. 
A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the village council will not be entertained unless it is made by a member who previously voted in the majority; nor shall it be entertained at any meeting other than the one at which the proceedings were had or the meeting immediately succeeding. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 8, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-39. - Address of council by public. 
(a)  No person other than a member shall be allowed to address the council unless permitted by the chairperson. 
(b)  All members of the public addressing the village council shall do so at the lectern provided. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 9, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-40. - Parliamentary rules; enforcement; suspension. 
(a)  The chairperson, when the village council is in session, shall enforce parliamentary rules for its government in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(b)  Any of the parliamentary rules may be suspended by the vote of four members of the village council for the meeting then in session. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 10, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-41. - Voting; recordkeeping. 
All votes shall be cast by ayes (affirmative or negative) of the village council, and the village clerk shall record the vote of each member. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 11, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-42. - Record of ordinances, resolutions, rules and policies. 
The clerk shall keep a permanent separate book, in which shall be entered all permanent ordinances, resolutions, rules and policies adopted by the village council. 
(Ord. No. 96-02, § 12, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 2-43. - Salary additive of council members effective April 1, 2004. 
In addition of the compensation of $300.00 provided to the mayor and village council members pursuant to Section 5(e) of the Village Charter, the mayor and village council members shall, effective April 1, 2004, be entitled to the payment of a monthly salary additive ("additive"). The additive shall be $542.00 per month for the mayor and $500.00 per month for each council member. The intent of this additive is compensation for work performed and to provide a partial offset to the numerous expenses that are incurred by the mayor and council members in their official duties. When engaged in travel and training on behalf of the village, the mayor and council members shall be entitled to reimbursement for their expenses above and beyond the $542.00 per month for the mayor and $500.00 per month for council members additive in accordance with division 3, "reimbursement for travel and training", of chapter 2, "administration" of the Village Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2003-34, § 1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 10-9-2012)  
Secs. 2-44—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Charter officers, § 8. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-76—2-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Violation of code of ethics by councilmember, § 6(G)(2)(d); establishment of code of ethics, § 13(B). 
 
Sec. 2-96. - Intent of division. 
It is the intent of this division to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all village officials and employees, to set forth those acts or actions that conflict with the best interests of the village and conflict with or are incompatible with the proper discharge of duties and required independence of judgment and to direct disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or personal interests in matters affecting the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-21, § 1, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 2-97. - Supplementary nature of division. 
This division, as adopted, shall not conflict with, but shall be in addition to any prohibition and requirement of F.S. §§ 112.311—112.326 or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest on contracts of village officials and employees. It is the intent of this division to require more stringent standards than those provided under state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-21, § 2, 10-29-96)  
Sec. 2-98. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means any local or municipal governmental entity, any department, division, bureau, commission, authority, council, board or any advisory body. 
Village official or employee means an elected official, officer or employee of the village, whether paid or unpaid, excluding members of any administrative board or advisory body. 
(Ord. No. 96-21, § 3, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-99. - Prohibited acts or conduct. 
(a)  Solicitation and acceptance of gifts. Solicitation and acceptance of gifts shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Village officials and employees are prohibited from soliciting or accepting anything of value, such as a gift, a loan, a reward, a promise of future employment, a favor or a service that is based on an understanding that their vote, official action or judgment would be influenced by such gift. 
(2)  Village officials and employees are prohibited from soliciting any gift, food or beverage for their own benefit from a political committee, a committee of continuous existence, any advocate who appeared before their council, board, advisory body, commission or department, as the case may be, within the past 12 months, or the partner, firm or employer or principal of such advocate. 
(3)  Village officials and employees are prohibited from directly or indirectly accepting a gift worth over $100.00 from such an advocate described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, from a partner, firm, employer or principal of the advocate, or from a political committee or committee of continuous existence. 
(b)  Unauthorized compensation. Village officials and employees and members of their immediate household are prohibited from accepting any compensation, payment or thing of value when they know or, with the exercise of reasonable care, should know that it is given to influence a vote or other official action. 
(c)  Solicitation or acceptance of honoraria. Solicitation or acceptance of honoraria shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Village officials and employees are prohibited from soliciting an honorarium which is related to their public offices or duties. 
(2)  Village officials and employees are prohibited from knowingly accepting an honorarium. However, they may accept the payment of expenses related to an honorarium event, provided that the expenses are disclosed. 
(3)  If the village official or employee knows the amount of the expenses before the event, he must disclose the amount and type of expenses prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 96-21, § 4, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 2, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Receipt of gifts, F.S. § 112.3148; solicitation and disclosure of honoraria, F.S. § 112.3149.  
Sec. 2-100. - Prohibited employment and business relationships. 
(a)  Doing business with one's agency. Village officials and employees are prohibited from purchasing; renting or leasing any realty, goods or services for their agency from a business entity in which they own more than five percent interest. Village officials and employees, acting in a private capacity, are prohibited from renting, leasing, or selling any realty, goods, or services to their own agency. 
(b)  Exemptions. The prohibitions against doing business with one's agency and having conflicting employment shall not apply: 
(1)  When the business is rotated among all qualified suppliers in the village; 
(2)  When the business is awarded by sealed, competitive bidding and the village official or employee, or his relative, has not attempted to persuade agency personnel to enter the contract; or 
(3)  When the aggregate of any such transactions does not exceed $100.00 in a calendar year. 
(c)  Lobbying by former village officers and employees. Village officials and employees hired after October 29, 1996, are prohibited from representing another person or entity for compensation before the village for three years following vacation of office or termination of employment with the village. No former village officer or employee shall be held in violation of this section if the officer or employee maintains a relationship with an entity which is a tax-exempt organization under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and where the officer or employee receives no compensation. 
(Ord. No. 96-21, § 5, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Sec. 2-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-09, adopted May 11, 1999, repealed § 2-101 in its entirety. Formerly, § 2-101 pertained to the ethics board and derived from § 6 of Ord. No. 96-21, adopted Oct. 29, 1996.  
Sec. 2-102. - Enforcement of division. 
The village council shall have the primary responsibility for enforcement of this division. The village council shall have the power to investigate any complaint, to initiate any suit and to prosecute any criminal or civil action on behalf of the village for violation of this division or any applicable civil or criminal law concerning conduct of village officials and employees. 
(Ord. No. 96-21, § 7(A), 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 2, 6-9-09)  
Secs. 2-103—2-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REIMBURSEMENT FOR TRAVEL AND TRAINING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, adopted May 13, 2014, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 2-126—2-132, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 97-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 1997; Ord. No. 2003-29, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 28, 2003; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, adopted August 22, 2006. 
Charter reference— Expenses of councilmembers, § 6(E). 
Cross reference— Any blank form adopted by the council pertaining to travel advances or expenses saved from repeal, § 1-8(14). 
State Law reference— Per diem and travel expenses, F.S. § 112.061. 
 
Sec. 2-126. - Purpose of division. 
The purpose of this division is to set forth the policy for travel advances and expense reconciliation for the village council and all village staff. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-127. - Scope of division. 
This division establishes guidelines for allowable expenses and the procedure for accurate and timely reconciliation of travel expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-128. - Expense guidelines. 
General guidelines for travel and training expenses are as follows: 
(1)  Travel and training expenses shall reflect correct and complete expenditures (registration fees, lodging, transportation, etc.) that were incurred by the requesting party and shall be reported to Financial Services within a reasonable amount of time in order to avoid taxation per the Department of Treasury Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations. 
(2)  No reimbursement shall be allowed where those costs are incurred and accounted by another person (i.e., two persons traveling in one vehicle cannot claim duplicate mileage/travel costs). 
(3)  Subsistence may be reduced for any meals or lodging included in the conference, seminar or meeting registration. 
(4)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for the spouse (or any other traveling companion) of the village council or village staff. 
(5)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for costs not actually incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-129. - Travel advances. 
The village does provide travel advances for travelers who provide the appropriate documentation to financial services within a reasonable amount of time as outlined by IRS guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-130. - Sales tax exemption; reasonable expenses for lodging, meals, transportation and services. 
Per diem reimbursement for meals shall be in accordance with the Department of Treasury Internal Revenue Service (IRS) as currently applicable and as these rates are periodically amended, meaning when the rates change, the village rate will automatically change accordingly. 
(1)  No receipts are required for per diem rates. Meals which exceed these limits by reason of location or type of function will be reimbursed if receipts are provided, and the exception shall be approved by the village manager or designee. Conference or seminar banquets and lunches in excess of the per meal allowance are allowable exceptions; however, these must be noted on the program or agenda. 
(2)  Traveler may opt out of meals that are included in the conference, seminar or meeting registration, only if documented to serve a business/public purpose. Opting out of an already paid for (included in registration) meal will not be reimbursed. Receipts and proper documentation must be submitted and approved by village manager or designee. 
(3)  Payments for group meals while traveling require a written explanation attached to the receipt. The village reserves the right to withhold any meal reimbursement not having sufficient proof of actual expenditures and a valid reason of public purpose. 
(4)  Tips will be reimbursed on a reasonable and customary basis, and include but are not limited to meals, baggage handling, transportation, valet and porter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-131. - Non allowable travel expenditures. 
(a)  No entertainment or alcoholic beverage expenses shall be reimbursed. 
(b)  Airline clubs. 
(c)  Airline upgrades. 
(d)  Business or first-class airfares. 
(e)  Books, magazines, newspapers. 
(f)  Child-care, babysitting, house-sitting, pet-sitting/kennel charges. 
(g)  Commuting between home and work. 
(h)  Charge card delinquency assessments. 
(i)  Costs incurred by traveler's failure to cancel transportation or hotel reservations in a timely fashion. 
(j)  Evening wear rentals. 
(k)  Formal wear expenses. 
(l)  Flowers. 
(m)  Gifts. 
(n)  Haircuts and personal grooming. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-132. - Transportation. 
All travel must be by a usually traveled route. In case a person travels by an indirect route for his or her own convenience, any extra costs shall be borne by the traveler and reimbursement for expenses shall be based only on such charges as would have been incurred by a usually traveled route. The department head or his or her designee shall designate the most economical method of travel for each trip, keeping in mind the following conditions: 
(1)  The nature of the business. 
(2)  The most efficient and economical means of travel (considering time of the traveler, impact on the productivity of the traveler, cost of transportation and per diem or subsistence required). When it is more efficient and economical to either the traveler or village, jet service offered by any airline may be used when the cost is within an approved threshold determined by the department head or designee. 
(3)  The number of persons making the trip and the amount of equipment or material to be transported. 
(a)  Airfare. Take advantage of special rates, when available. 
(b)  Mileage. The rate of reimbursement for the use of a personal car will be in accordance with the most current standard mileage rate of Department of Treasury IRS Publication 463 "Travel, Entertainment, Gifts and Car Expense". Reimbursement shall generally not exceed the reasonable cost of commercial airfare, including transportation to and from the airport. 
(c)  Village vehicle. Receipts for gasoline purchases for village vehicles must be provided. 
(d)  Rental car. A copy of the lease agreement for a rental car must be provided. 
(e)  Taxi/limousine service. Receipts must be provided for a taxi/limousine service. 
(f)  Tolls, parking facilities. Receipts must be provided for all tolls and parking charges. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01A, § 1, 5-13-14)  
Secs. 2-133—2-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEFENSE OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-156. - Civil liability; exceptions. 
To the extent permitted by law, the village is hereby authorized to expend from village funds the amount of money necessary as payment on behalf of any officer or employee of the village, that amount of money which such officer or employee becomes obligated to pay by reason of any civil liability imposed by law upon such officer or employee, individually, except as hereinafter set forth, for claims or causes of action arising out of the acts or conduct of such officer or employee performed in good faith within the scope of the duties or employment of such officer or employee, which claims or causes of action were not the result of any willful, wanton, or malicious act of such officer or employee in the discharge of said duties or employment; provided, however, the village shall not be liable to any officer or employee under any circumstances for claims or causes of action where said officer or employee acted in bad faith, with malicious purpose, or in a manner exhibiting wanton or willful disregard of human rights, safety of property, or committed acts involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 97-08, § 1, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 98-37, § 1, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 2-157. - Civil claims, cause of action or litigation. 
To the extent allowed by law, the village shall defend any civil claim, cause of action, or litigation that comes within the terms of this section, either by its legal counsel or by other counsel designated and retained by the village for said purpose, when such defense is not afforded by any policy of insurance carried by the village. In the event the claim, cause of action, or litigation is covered by a policy of insurance of the village, whether said policy covers litigation or suits of defense, it shall be discretionary with the village as to whether its legal counsel or other attorneys retained by it assist in said defense. The assumption of the defense of any said litigation shall not preclude the defense being conducted under a reservation of rights, indemnification, or any other legal rights of the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-08, § 2, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 98-37, § 2, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 2-158. - Applicability of section 2-156. 
The provisions of section 2-156 of this article shall not be applicable in the event the village carries insurance policies covering such acts or omissions, unless a claim or cause of action should result in a judgment in excess of policy limits. In no event shall section 2-156 be applicable in the case of an award of exemplary or punitive damages. 
(Ord. No. 97-08, § 3, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 98-37, § 3, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 2-159. - Payment of reasonable attorney's fees. 
The village council is authorized to expend village funds for the payment of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by any past or present member of the village council or any person appointed by the village council to any village agency, authority, board, or commission when said person is charged with a violation, or violations, of any of the provisions of F.S. § 286.011, when said person is subsequently acquitted or the charge, or charges, against said person are dismissed, or by any person previously appointed but no longer a member of any village agency, authority, board, or commission when said person is charged with a violation, or violations, of any of the provisions of such section when said person is subsequently acquitted or the charge, or charges, against said person are dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 97-08, § 4, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 98-37, § 4, 1-26-99)  
Sec. 2-160. - Sovereign immunity of village. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign immunity by the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-08, § 5, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 98-37, § 5, 1-26-99)  
Secs. 2-161—2-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-13, § 2, adopted June 12, 2012, repealed §§ 2-175—2-178, which pertained to lobbyist disclosure and derived from Ord. No. 2010-23, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 2010. 
 
Secs. 2-175—2-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of this article to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the village by providing an equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes of the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 1, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06)  
Sec. 2-192. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code enforcement clerk means any employee of the village so designated by the manager. 
Code inspector means those authorized agents or employees of the village whose duty it is to assure code compliance. 
Enforcement board or board means the village code enforcement board that was in existence prior to June 11, 2006. 
Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person who has been previously found through the enforcement board or special magistrate or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process to have violated or has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the violation, notwithstanding, the violations occur at different locations. 
Special magistrate means a person who is a member in good standing with the Florida Bar appointed by the village council and authorized to hear and decide cases involving code violations. 
Village attorney means the legal counselor for the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 2, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, F.S. § 162.04.  
Sec. 2-193. - Ex parte communications. 
No ex parte communication relative to the merits of any pending action, threat, or offer of reward shall be made to the special magistrate by any employee of the village, or any party to the proceeding, or any person who directly or indirectly would have a material interest in such an action pending before the special magistrate, or the authorized representative or counsel of any such party. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 3, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-194. - Village attorney's legal capacity for service. 
The village attorney may act as prosecutor for the village in cases brought before the special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 7, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.05(5).  
Sec. 2-195. - Waiver of right to hearing; consent to fine. 
The alleged violator may, if he so elects, waive his right to a hearing and consent to the imposition of a fine after a stated period of time in which to comply. The waiver shall be in writing on a form provided by the village, signed by all violators named in the notice of violation and witnessed. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 11, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-196. - Duties of code inspector. 
(a)  Enforcement proceedings; initiation. It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes. No special magistrate shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Notice of violation; time for correction. If a violation of a code is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator, unless subsection (c) or (d) of this section applies, and give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall notify the special magistrate and request a hearing pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. Notice shall be served upon the violator as provided in this article. If the violation is corrected and then recurs, or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for the correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the special magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  Action on violations posing threat to public or irreparable by nature. If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the special magistrate and request a hearing. 
(d)  Repeat violators. If a repeat violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the special magistrate and request a hearing. The special magistrate, through their clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice as set forth in this article. The case may be presented to the special magistrate even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing, and the notice shall so state. If the repeat violation has been corrected, the special magistrate retains the right to schedule a hearing to determine costs and impose the payment of reasonable enforcement fees upon the repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive his rights to this hearing and pay such costs as determined by the special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 12, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.06.  
Sec. 2-197. - Subpoena of evidence. 
The code inspector, the special magistrate, or the alleged violator may request that witnesses, records (including surveys, plats, and other materials) and other evidence are subpoenaed to any violation hearing. Subpoenas shall be served by the sheriff of the county. These subpoenas shall be available through the clerk of the enforcement division. A nominal administrative fee shall be charged for the preparation and service of the subpoenas, the amount of which administrative fee shall be established by resolution of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 13, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-198. - Hearings. 
(a)  Conduct. Hearings shall be informal and need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. They shall, however, be conducted in accordance with accepted parliamentary procedures relative to motions, votes and decisions. Fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern all hearings. 
(b)  Minutes; provision of clerical and administrative personnel. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings, and all hearings shall be open to the public. The code enforcement clerk shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the special magistrate for the proper performance of its duties. 
(c)  Presentation of case; recovery of costs. Each case before the special magistrate shall be presented by the village attorney, or by a member of the village staff. If the village prevails in prosecuting a case before the special magistrate, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the special magistrate, and such costs may be included in a lien authorized by this article and applicable laws. 
(d)  Testimony. The special magistrate shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The special magistrate shall take testimony from the code inspector and the alleged violator. 
(e)  Rights of parties to hearing. Each party to the hearing shall have the right to: 
(1)  Call and examine witnesses. 
(2)  Introduce exhibits. 
(3)  Cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(4)  Impeach witnesses. 
(5)  Rebut evidence. 
(f)  Representation of alleged violator. The alleged violator has the right to be represented by an attorney at all hearings before the special magistrate. 
(g)  Evidence. All relevant evidence shall be admitted if, in the opinion of the special magistrate, it is the type of evidence upon which reasonable and responsible persons would normally rely in the conduct of business affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make such evidence inadmissible over objections in civil actions. The special magistrate may exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence. Hearsay evidence may be accepted for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but such hearsay evidence shall not in and of itself be considered sufficient to support a finding or decision unless the evidence would be admissible over objections in a civil action. 
(h)  Findings of fact; issuance of orders. At the conclusion of the hearing, special magistrate shall issue findings of fact based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this article. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed and, under the conditions specified in F.S. § 162.09(1), the cost of repairs may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by such date. 
(i)  Motions for rehearing or reconsideration of orders. Motions for rehearing, motions for reconsideration, or any other motion that seeks to have the special magistrate overturn a previously issued order are not permitted and shall not be considered by a special magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 14, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2016-19, § 1, 11-8-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.07(4).  
Sec. 2-199. - Fines; imposition of liens. 
(a)  The special magistrate, upon notification by the code inspector that a previous order of the enforcement board or special magistrate has not been complied with by the set time, may order the violator to pay a fine not to exceed $250.00 for each day that the violation continues past the date set for compliance for a first violation, or in the case of a repeat violation may order the violator to pay a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day the violation continues beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. In addition, if the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the special magistrate shall notify the village council, which may make all repairs which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the cost of the repairs as part of the fine imposed pursuant to this article. If, after due notice and hearing, the special magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation. 
(b)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. It may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property. A fine imposed pursuant to this article shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit filed pursuant to F.S. § 162.09, whichever occurs first. Once a violator comes into compliance, the violator may request a reduction of the fine from the special magistrate. In making the determination on whether to reduce a fine, following compliance, the special magistrate may take into consideration the gravity of the violation, any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation, any previous or subsequent violations committed by the violator, whether there was intervening matters that prevented or obstructed the violator from timely complying with the order to correct the violation, and/or the financial ability of the violator to pay the full amount of the fine. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this article runs in favor of the village council, and the village council may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this article. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the special magistrate may authorize the village attorney to foreclose on the lien, or to sue to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien, plus accrued interest. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this article may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, article X of the state constitution. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 15, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09.  
Sec. 2-200. - Duration of lien; action to foreclose; costs collection; continuance of lien. 
No lien provided in this article shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to F.S. 162.09(3). In an action to foreclose on a lien or for a money judgment, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the action. The village council shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 16, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.10.  
Sec. 2-201. - Service of notice; methods. 
(a)  All notices required by this part must be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail to the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices or to the address listed in the county property appraiser's database. The local government may also provide an additional notice to any other address it may find for the property owner. For property owned by a corporation, notices may be provided by certified mail to the registered agent of the corporation. If the only notice provided was sent by certified mail and was not signed as received within 30 days after the postmarked date of mailing, additional notice may be provided by posting as described in subsection (b); 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the local governing body; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), notice may also be served as provided in F.S. § 162.12(2) by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the special magistrate is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under chapter 50 of the Florida Statutes for legal and official advertisements. 
(2)  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(3)  In lieu of publication as described in paragraph (b)(1), such notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be in a conspicuous place at the village municipal complex. 
(4)  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(5)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (1). 
(6)  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 17, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2, 11-8-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.12.  
Sec. 2-202. - Appeals of administrative orders. 
An aggrieved party, including the village, may appeal a final administrative order of the special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the enforcement board or special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-19, § 18, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.11.  
Sec. 2-203. - Special magistrate. 
One or more persons may be appointed as special magistrate by Wellington's Council. An appointee shall serve a two-year term and may be reappointed, provided that for the period beginning in June of 2010, half of the special magistrates shall serve an initial one-year term ending on May 31, 2011, so that the appointments would be staggered in future years. Special magistrates appointed in June of 2012 and beyond may serve a maximum of four consecutive two-year terms after which such special magistrates may not be eligible for reappointment until one two-year term has expired. The compensation for special magistrate services may be authorized as specified in the appointing resolution. A special magistrate may be suspended or removed with or without cause by Wellington's Council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2012-18, § 2, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Secs. 2-204—2-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUPPLEMENTAL CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES: ENFORCEMENT THROUGH CITATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Authority. 
This division is authorized and adopted pursuant to [F.S.] pt. II of ch. 162. The provisions of the section are additional and supplemental means of enforcing municipal codes and ordinances and may be used for the enforcement of any code or ordinance or for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances except as set forth herein above. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the village from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-227. - Authority of code enforcement officers. 
A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based on personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance and this citation will be heard by the county court. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-228. - Notice. 
Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period allowed, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, the code enforcement officer is not obligated to provide the person with a reasonable time period within which to correct the violation prior to the issuance of the citation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-229. - Form of citation. 
The citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall be in a form prescribed by the village and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person to whom this citation is issued. 
(2)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed for the facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(3)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(4)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
(5)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or contest the citation. 
(6)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(7)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(8)  A conspicuous statement if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
_____ 
Sec. 2-230. - Violations and penalties. 
All violations of the Code of Ordinances shall be considered as civil infractions with a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. Certain ordinances lend themselves to be enforced by means of a citation method and as such, the village has deemed the following sections of the Code those that may be enforced through the citation method and has provided a schedule of violations and penalties to be assessed as follows: 
Class I 
$50.00 Penalty 	Class II 
$75.00 Penalty 	Class III 
$125.00 Penalty 	Class IV 
$250.00 Penalty 	Class V 
$500.00 Penalty 
Prohibited Signs 
LDR Section 7.14 	Water Restrictions 
Codes and Ordinances Section 30-144(a)—(e) unless due to drought conditions more stringent penalties are applicable 	Failure to obtain Building Permit prior to commencement of construction 
Building Codes Enforcement Administrative Code Section 104.1.1 	Livestock Waste BMP's 
Section 30-153 	Repeat Violations of items listed under Class I, II, III and IV 
Noise 
Codes and Ordinances Sections 36-33 and 36-34 	Solid Waste 
All violations of Codes and Ordinances Sections 36-22(d), 36-23(b), 46-40, 46-41, 46-42 	Failure to obtain Local Business Tax Receipt 
Codes of Ordinances Section 58-61 	Vegetation Removal w/o permit 
LDR Section 7.5 	
Property Maintenance 
Codes and Ordinances Section 36-22 		Failure to Obtain Special Use Permit 
LDR Article 5 Chapter 5 	Transient (Mobile) Sales 
LDR Section 6.4.4.96 	
		Failure to Comply with Article 6 of the LDR (Zoning Districts) 		
 
LDR = Land Development Regulations 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-25, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14) 
_____ 
Sec. 2-231. - Citations not applicable to certain portions of building codes. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to sections 553.79 and 553.80 of the building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73, as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the municipality. For the purpose of this subsection, building codes means only those codes adopted pursuant to [F.S.] § 553.73. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 2-232. - Processing citations; county court. 
(a)  Disposition by county court. After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county court for further disposition. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a citation, the person alleged to have violated the village code may request a court appearance. The county court judge may assess a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 if contested. If the citation is not contested, the amount of fine is the face value of the citation plus costs. 
(c)  Should any person receiving a citation desire to contest same, such person shall have the right to appear in county court in order to present his case and have the determined position made by the court. 
(d)  Failure to accept citation; misdemeanor. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 755.082 or 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 5-13-14)  
Secs. 2-233—2-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Budget and appropriations, § 7. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village, or any evidence of the village's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the village saved from repeal, § 1-8(2); any right or franchise granted by any ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(4); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(6); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-8(7); utility fee schedule and other fees established by the village saved from repeal, § 1-8(13); any ordinance, charter or special act provision regulating the special assessment procedures for local improvements saved from repeal, § 1-8(15); special districts, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Adoption of budget. 
The village council shall adopt a budget in accordance with applicable law, including, but not limited to, F.S. § 200.065 and applicable state department of revenue rules, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, § 1, 4-30-96)  
Secs. 2-262—2-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMITTEES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-09, adopted May 11, 1999, amended art. VI in its entirety, in effect repealing §§ 2-226—2-231, 2-291, 2-292, 2-301—2-309, and 2-321—2-323 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as herein set out. Formerly, such provisions derived from §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 97-17, adopted Nov. 14, 1997; §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 98-02, adopted Feb. 10, 1998; §§ 1—9 of Ord. No. 98-06, adopted Mar. 31, 1998; and § 1 of Ord. No. 98-14, adopted July 14, 1998. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Creation of boards and committees. 
(a)  Boards. The Wellington Council may, by ordinance, create a board in connection with any functions of Wellington. The ordinance creating such board shall specify the powers and duties of the board and the number, qualifications, and terms of office of the members thereof. 
(b)  Committees. The Wellington Council may, by resolution, create a committee whose purpose is to advise Wellington Council on an item of a special nature and whose creation is for a stated period of time, at the end of which time the committee will no longer exist. The resolution creating such committee shall specify its powers and duties, the time for which it shall exist, and the number, qualifications, and terms of office of the members thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-282. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all boards and committees of Wellington and shall govern all members thereof. Neither "board" nor "committee" shall be construed to include Wellington's Council. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-283. - List of volunteers. 
Wellington's Clerk shall prepare and maintain a list of volunteers comprising those persons who have indicated an intention and willingness to serve as members of Wellington's Boards and Committees if appointed by Wellington's Council for such purpose. Any preference of the volunteers to serve on a particular board or committee shall be so stated. The list shall be kept current and be available to the members of Wellington's Council as requested. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-284. - Announcement of vacancies. 
All vacancies in the membership of any appointive Wellington Board or Committee shall be announced by the Wellington Clerk by posting a notice of the same at a public place in Wellington's Hall and by publishing a copy thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Wellington one time, not less than five days prior to the date at which the Wellington Council appoints candidates to fill any such vacancies. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-285. - Procedure for appointment and filling vacancies; qualifications for membership of boards and committees. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, appointments on boards and committees shall be made at a regular Wellington Council meeting within 60 days of the certification of results of a regular election of the Wellington Council and/or Mayor in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Regular members. 
a.  Unless, otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all of Wellington's Boards and Committees shall consist of seven regular members and the attendance of four members shall constitute a quorum. There shall be no alternate members appointed to boards or committees. 
b.  For boards and committees consisting of seven members, each councilmember shall appoint one member, and councilmembers shall nominate two members who shall be appointed by majority vote of the council. 
Councilmembers shall nominate two additional members who shall be appointed by majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 8, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-286. - Attendance records. 
The Wellington Clerk shall maintain an attendance record of the members of all boards and committees, which shall be furnished by each board or committee. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-287. - Compensation of members. 
Board members shall serve without compensation except as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Wellington Council. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-288. - General provisions. 
All members of boards and committees shall: 
(1)  Serve at the pleasure of the Wellington Council. 
(2)  Be a resident of Wellington, maintain residency in Wellington during the term of appointment, and meet such other eligibility requirements as may be established by ordinance or resolution. Resident, for purposes of this chapter, shall include persons who are domiciled in Wellington for only a portion of the year. 
(3)  To be eligible to serve, a member or prospective member shall not have been convicted of a felony, by the State of Florida, the United States, or its other states and territories within ten years prior to the date of their appointment or any time after their appointment. 
(4)  Any member who fails to meet the requirements for his/her appointment to a board or committee shall immediately cease to be a member of his/her board or committee, and that position shall be deemed vacant. 
(5)  All boards and committees shall be part of the municipal government and shall utilize, insofar as practicable, the services of the regular departments in Wellington. 
(6)  No board or committee member shall hold any elected office in the government or be a full-time employee of Wellington. 
(7)  If any member of a board or committee shall find that his/her private or personal interests are involved in the matter coming before the board, he/she shall disqualify himself/herself from all participation in that matter. No member of a board or committee shall appear before that board or committee or the Wellington Council as agent or attorney for any person. 
(8)  No board member shall have or hold any employment or contractual relationship that will create a continuing or frequently recurring conflict between his or her private interests and the performance of his or her public duties or that would impede the full and faithful discharge of his or her public duties. 
(9)  Board or committee members may not serve on more than one board or committee, provided, however, that board or committee members may serve on special task force committees formed by Wellington Council for a specific purpose and for a limited duration. Board or committee members may only serve on such special task force committees for six months or less, unless their term is specifically extended by the Wellington Council. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 1, 12-13-11)  
Sec. 2-289. - Terms of members. 
(a)  Terms of members shall be established in the ordinance or resolution creating the board or committee and unless otherwise specified begin effective June 1 of even years and end on May 31 of subsequent even years. 
(b)  Board members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  Vacancies in the board or committee membership shall be filled by appointment by Wellington's Council for the unexpired term of the member affected. 
(d)  Board and committee members may be reappointed to successive terms. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 7, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-290. - Officers. 
All boards and committees established by the Wellington Council shall, at a meeting during the month of June or the next regularly scheduled meeting held thereafter, elect one of their members as chairperson and elect other such officers as may be necessary. Each board and committee shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-291. - Meetings. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, meetings shall be held quarterly, or at such times as Wellington's Council may provide by resolution: or as otherwise provided by law. Special meetings shall not be held unless at least 24 hours' notice is given to each member and Wellington manager. 
(b)  Members shall notify the board liaison if they are unable to attend a meeting. If a quorum will not be present, the Wellington Clerk shall notify the chairperson, who may cancel the scheduled meeting. 
(c)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall be established in the ordinance or resolution creating the board or committee. 
(d)  An audio tape or video tape, recording, or both when available, shall be made of all meetings. Additionally, minutes shall be kept of the proceedings at each meeting and shall record the official acts taken by the board. Audio tapes or video tapes, or both when available, and minutes shall be forwarded to the Wellington Clerk. 
(e)  All meetings and public hearings of board and committees shall be open to the public. All meetings shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, and Government-in-the-Sunshine pursuant to F.S. § 286.011. 
(f)  Members of Wellington boards and committees are subject to the jurisdiction of the Palm Beach County Commission on Ethics and are responsible for understanding and abiding by the Palm Beach County Code of Ethics in the conduct of their duties as board members. Prior to being seated, all members must complete the mandatory ethics training provided by the Palm Beach County Commission on Ethics. Failure to complete the training will make the member ineligible to take their seat. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 2, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2014-24, § 1, 6-24-14)  
Sec. 2-292. - Removal of board and committee members. 
(a)  Removal based on absenteeism. Active participation by members of the boards and committees is essential to the effectiveness of the board or committee operations. It is therefore necessary for members to attend the meetings as frequently as possible. As important as participation and attendance is, Wellington's Council understands that a member's activities and other obligations of either a personal or professional nature will on occasion take precedence over their participation in board or committee activities. If a member recognizes they will not be able to fully and regularly participate in the board or committee meetings they should resign from the board or committee and allow the council to fill the vacancy created by their resignation. In order to maintain a standard of commitment from the members they shall be subject to removal from their position as a member of a board or committee under the following circumstances. Any member of a board or committee, during the course of their two-year term, who has two consecutive unexcused absences or four absences out of the last six meetings, whether excused or unexcused, from regular meetings shall be automatically removed as a member of the respective board or committee. For purposes of this section, the term "excused absence" shall mean: (i) illness of a board or committee member or other person for whom the member is a caregiver; (ii) death of a board or committee member's relative; (iii) observance of religious holidays; (iv) compliance with a subpoena or other legal process; and (v) absence resulting from events reasonably beyond the control of the board or committee member. The member removed for absenteeism shall be ineligible for reappointment to a board or committee for a period of two years following the effective date of their removal. 
(b)  Removal for reasons other than absenteeism and failure to maintain the requirements for being a board member. All board and committee members shall serve at the pleasure of the Wellington Council. Board and committee members appointed by individual Council members may be removed without cause by the Council member who appointed the board or committee member unless otherwise provided by the Charter or Florida Statutes. No vote by the Wellington Council shall be required for such removal. At large board and committee members may be removed by a majority vote of the Council, unless otherwise provided by the Charter or Florida Statutes. Any member so removed shall have no right to request a hearing before the Wellington Council. 
(1)  Hearing; decision of council. Any request for hearing must be filed with the Wellington Clerk within five days of the date of the decision to remove. Upon the timely request of the member for a hearing before the Wellington Council, the council shall set a date and time for a hearing and direct the Wellington Clerk to give the member notice of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held no later than 30 days from receipt of a request for a hearing. At the hearing, the member may present evidence and argument as to why he/she should not be removed. The decision of the council may be to remove, to suspend, to reprimand, or to absolve the member. 
(2)  [Effective date of removal.] The effective date of removal of a member shall be immediately after the expiration of the time in which the member has the right to request a hearing before the Wellington Council, or any later date which the Wellington Council may provide, unless the member timely requests a hearing before the Wellington Council. If the member requests a hearing, the member shall continue to serve on the board or committee until conclusion of the hearing or withdrawal of the request. If the member timely requests a hearing, and the Wellington Council decides to remove the member upon the conclusion of the hearing, the removal shall take effect immediately unless the Wellington Council specifies a later date. If a member timely requests a hearing but withdraws the request prior to the hearing, the effective date shall be the date on which the request is withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2014-24, § 1, 6-24-14; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 7-12-16; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 1, 11-8-16)  
Sec. 2-293. - Resignation of members. 
Members of boards or committees may resign at any time. A member who resigns will not be eligible for appointment to the same board or committee for a period of time equal to a full term of that board or committee. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 2-294—2-298. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-299. - Powers and duties. 
The tree board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Develop an annual work plan in accordance with the Tree City USA guidelines. Such work plan shall include tree-related projects and tasks, as well as an implementation schedule for such projects and tasks. 
(2)  Submit to the Wellington Council not later than April of each year a list of estimated expenses for the following calendar year. 
(3)  Review and comment to the public works director on all Wellington planting projects prior to installation. 
(4)  Assist the public works director to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written care guide for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. 
(5)  Assist Wellington in preparing plans for Wellington's Annual Arbor Day ceremony for approval by the Wellington Council. 
(6)  Review, upon referral by the Wellington Council proposed ordinances which relate to landscaping regulations and make recommendations to the council regarding such ordinances. 
(7)  To hears and decide appeals of administrative decisions of the planning, zoning, and building department pertaining to natural resource protection regulations. 
(8)  Such powers and duties as may be assigned by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 4, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2002-06, § 7, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-300. - Creation. 
The tree board shall consist of seven regular members. Appointments of regular members shall be for a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 4, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 1, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-301. - Meetings, quorum, and required vote. 
(a)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four members. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to take official action. If any motion fails to achieve the affirmative vote of a majority of those present, then such petition or other matter shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 4, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Secs. 2-302—2-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 2-306. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The purposes of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be to provide constructive advice and counsel to the Wellington's Parks and Recreation Department, Wellington's Manager, and Wellington's Council with a broad outlook towards improving present recreational facilities, increasing their utilization and use by the public generally, and evaluating and recommending future community needs as to recreational projects and facilities. 
(b)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To study and make recommendations concerning the visioning and strategic planning for the development of parks, parkways, playgrounds, and other recreational facilities in Wellington. 
(2)  To study and recommend the establishment of rules and regulations for the operation of Wellington's Parks, Playgrounds, and Public Recreational Facilities and the fees to be charged for the public for the use and enjoyment thereof. 
(3)  Such powers and duties as may be assigned by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 5, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-307. - Creation. 
(a)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of seven regular members. Appointments of regular members shall be for a term of two years. 
(b)  Members of the board shall be knowledgeable and concerned with recreational events and park facilities in the community. Membership of the board may be composed of persons from all walks of life, including, but not limited to, retired persons, students, active sport participants, and persons whose interests are confined to spectator participation with a view towards obtaining a committee which is representative of the community in regard to recreational programs and needs. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 5, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 00-08, § 2, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 2, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-308. - Meetings, quorum, and required vote. 
(a)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four members. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to take official action. If any motion fails to achieve the affirmative vote of a majority of those present, then such petition or other matter shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 5, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Secs. 2-309, 2-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-311. - Powers and duties. 
The architectural review board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To adopt by resolution various schedules of approved materials, designs, and charts of approved colors. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals of administrative decisions of the planning, zoning, and building department pertaining to approved materials, designs, and charts of approved colors. 
(3)  To hear and approve alternatives to the development and design criteria established by ordinance or resolution. 
(4)  To review and approve plans for multi-family and nonresidential development. 
(5)  Such powers and duties as may be assigned by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 6, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 2-312. - Creation; qualifications. 
(a)  The board shall consist of seven regular members. Appointments of regular members shall be for a term of two years. 
(b)  Appointments shall be made by the Wellington Council based on experience or interest in the businesses and professions involved in building and development. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 6, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 00-08, § 3, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 3, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-313. - Meetings, quorum, and required vote. 
(a)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four members. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of four members shall be necessary to take official action. If any motion fails to achieve the affirmative vote of four members, then such petition or other matter shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 6, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Secs. 2-314—2-320. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, adopted June 13, 2006, repealed Div. 5, §§ 2-317—2-319, which pertained to code enforcement board and derived from Ord. No. 99-09, § 7, adopted May 11, 1999; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 4, adopted May 25, 2004.  
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING, ZONING, AND ADJUSTMENT BOARD[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 42. 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Powers and duties. 
The planning, zoning, and adjustment board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Conduct hearings and make recommendations to the Wellington Council regarding: 
a.  Proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan or elements or portions thereof, and other matters as may be required by law or ordinance. 
b.  Proposed amendments to the land development regulations. 
c.  Applications for the rezoning of property. 
d.  Applications for development permits for class A, B conditional uses, requested uses, and development order amendments. 
(2)  Perform the functions, duties, powers, and responsibilities of a local planning agency as set forth and established in the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
(3)  Hear and approve, approve with conditions, or deny variances to the terms of sections of the land development regulations. 
(4)  Hear and approve or reverse decisions of the director of planning, zoning, and building on zoning matters. 
(5)  Hear and approve or reverse decisions of the Wellington's Engineer on subdivision requirements. 
(6)  Conduct review hearings pursuant to the provisions of the Wellington's Impact Fee Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 8, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-322. - Membership; terms; transition; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  The board shall consist of seven regular members. Appointments of regular members shall be for a term of two years. 
(b)  Appointments shall be made by the Wellington Council based on experience or interest in the businesses and professions involved in building and development. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 8, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 00-08, § 4, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 5, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-323. - Meetings, quorum and required vote. 
(a)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four members. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of four members shall be necessary to take official action. If any motion fails to achieve the affirmative vote of four members, then such petition or other matter shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 8, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 3-22-16)  
Secs. 2-324—2-326. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 2-327. - Powers and duties. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 9, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 2-328. - Creation; qualifications. 
(a)  The board shall consist of seven regular members. Appointments of members of the board shall be for a term of two years. 
(b)  Such board members shall be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes to include: an architect, engineer, general contractor, electrical contractor, HVAC contractor, plumbing contractor, and any other contractor-licensed category. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 9, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 00-08, § 5, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 6, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-329. - Meetings, quorum, and required vote. 
(a)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four members. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of four members shall be necessary to take official action. If any motion fails to achieve the affirmative vote of four members, then such petition or other matter shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 9, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PUBLIC ART ADVISORY PANEL[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-15, § 2, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 2-332—2-324. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-330.5—2-330.7. 
 
Sec. 2-330.5. - Powers and duties. 
The public art advisory panel shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare implementation guidelines, selection procedures and organizational policies to facilitate this section, subject to the approval of the Wellington's Council. 
(2)  To prepare an annual plan for the expenditure of the public and private monies in the public art trust fund, subject to approval of the Wellington's Council. 
(3)  Related to private construction projects, to work with property owners to designate sites for the art; approve the art project scope and budget; manage the artist or artwork selection process; approve design, execution and placement of the art; inspect the artworks and relay maintenance deficiencies to the owner. 
(4)  To coordinate, investigate, review and recommend to the Wellington's Council other means by which artwork may be obtained, including donations to the public art trust fund, gifts of artwork, and grant applications for public art projects. 
(5)  To encourage public art throughout the village and educate and stimulate the participation of all citizens in a joint public and private effort to promote public art. 
(6)  To enter into agreement with artists that shall also be accepted by Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, § 2, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-330.6. - Creation; qualifications. 
(a)  The public art advisory panel shall be administered by the department of community services. 
(b)  Wellington's Manager shall designate panel members. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, § 2, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 2-330.7. - Meetings, quorum and required vote. 
(a)  A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of half the membership plus one. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to take official action. If any motion fails to achieve the affirmative vote of a majority of those present, then such petition or other matter shall be deemed denies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, § 2, 9-28-04)  
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING, CONTRACTS, AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT POLICIES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 1—4, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 2-331—2-334, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 989-34, §§ 1(A)—1(D), adopted Nov. 24, 1998. 
 
Sec. 2-331. - Purchasing, procurement and disposal. 
The village's purchases and acquisitions of personal property and services, management of contracts and property management and disposal of property shall be in accordance with the procedures and policies set forth in the purchasing and procurement manual adopted by resolution, which as needed may be amended from time to time. Unsuccessful bidders may file protests to awards, where appropriate and applicable, in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 2-335 below. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 5, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 2-332. - Purchase and disposition of real property. 
(a)  The village may purchase real property utilizing the procedure set forth in F.S. (2004) § 166.045, as same may be amended from time to time, when it wishes to temporarily except certain records from the public records law's disclosure requirement or it may utilize the provisions set forth in this section. 
(b)  For each purchase of real property in an amount of $100,000.00 or less, no written appraisal or comparables must be obtained or reviewed as part of the village's negotiation process. For each purchase greater than $100,000 and less than or equal to $500,000.00, the village shall receive comparable information and may receive one written appraisal by a state certified real estate appraiser to consider as part of the purchase process. For each purchase between $500,000.00 and less than or equal to $5,000,000.00, the village shall obtain at least one written appraisal by a state-certified real estate appraiser to consider as part of the negotiation process. For each purchase of real property in an amount in excess of $5,000,000.00, the village shall obtain at least two written appraisals by appraisers independent of each other who are state-certified real estate appraisers. The administration shall be responsible to negotiate the essential terms of the purchase and same shall be presented to the village council. The village administration need not obtain the comparable or appraisal information provided in this section until immediately prior to the time the contract to purchase is presented to the village council, the time the applicable due diligence period expires, or the time of closing, whichever is later. A failure to obtain such appraisals or comparables shall not be cause to set aside a closed real estate transaction or affect the village's title derived by the deed delivered at closing. 
(c)  The village may contract to purchase real property pursuant to any terms if finds acceptable. All purchases shall be presented to the village council for approval, after they have been approved by the administration and legal departments and signed by the seller(s). A village resolution approving the closing of the contract shall be required prior to the city being obligated to purchase any property. 
(d)  No particular form advertising shall be required prior to the village considering and approving such purchase; however, the matter must be placed on an agenda for a village council meeting. 
(e)  The village may dispose of surplus real property in any manner the village council deems appropriate, so long as there is a public purpose in the sale, transfer, gift or other disposition of surplus property. The village council does not have to sell property through a bidding process, but may choose to negotiate a price for the property and/or offer the property for sale through any means the village council determines to be commercially viable. In appropriate circumstances, the village council may decide to limit the potential buyers and sell or transfer to property for less than the full market value in order to put the property back on the tax rolls and/or insure that appropriate use of the property will be made. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 5, 2-22-05)  
Secs. 2-333, 2-334. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-335. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, adopted March 11, 2014, repealed § 2-335, which pertained to protests and derived from Ord. No. 98-36, § 2, adopted Jan. 12, 1999.  
Secs. 2-336—2-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RECOVERY OF COSTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND PROCESSING 
 
Sec. 2-361. - Development application fees. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed an administrative fee to cover all costs associated with the processing submissions, or requests concerning proposed matters of planning and zoning applications, including but not limited to site plans, master plans, special permits, and development permits excluding building permits. The fee shall cover all staff costs. Additional escrow shall be collected for outside consultant's fees and required public noticing costs. 
(b)  A fee structure shall be established, and from time to time amended, by resolution of the village council. The fee structure is intended to function by collecting a flat, up front, fee for planning and zoning applications to cover the cost of review by village staff. An escrow amount will also be collected, if necessary, to pay for any required outside consultants, advertising, or other costs associated with the project. A financial account will be opened and maintained throughout the review process to manage the escrow for the project. This may include requiring additional funds to replenish the escrow account should it be necessary. At such time that the project is finished and closed, any remaining escrow will be refunded to the applicant no later than two months from the project's closing date. If the account is in the negative and the applicant does not reconcile the deficiency, the applicant will not be able process future development applications on the subject property. 
(c)  This program shall not apply to review requests which are originally initiated by or on behalf of the Village of Wellington or another governmental entity acting in its governmental capacity; such as, but not limited to, department of transportation highway proposal commentary, reviews of Palm Beach County transportation improvements, review of proposed amendments to the Palm Beach County or local land use plans, and review of developments of regional impact; provided however, that the initiating governmental entity does not charge the Village of Wellington for its review, processing, and comment upon Wellington's review requests of a similar type or nature. 
(d)  The preceding subsection (c) shall not apply to review requests which are initiated by another governmental entity or agency acting in a corporate or proprietary capacity, such action including, but not limited to, a governmental entity's review requests incident to the erection of buildings or structures within Wellington (such as post offices, libraries, or governmental office buildings). 
(Ord. No. 2017-12, § 2(Exh. A), 9-12-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2017, repealed the former § 2-361. Section 2(Exh. A) of said ordinance enacted a new § 2-361 as set out herein. The former § 2-361 pertained to cost recovery and derived from Ord. No. 2007-17, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2008.  
ARTICLE IX. - POST-DISASTER DEBRIS RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 2-362. - Declaration of state of emergency. 
(a)  Natural, technological and manmade emergencies. In the event of a natural, technological or manmade emergency, as defined in F.S. § 252.34, the mayor is designated as the village official empowered to declare that a state of local emergency exists within the boundaries of the village and to exercise the emergency powers conferred in F.S. ch. 252. In the absence of the mayor, the vice mayor shall be the designated village official to exercise the powers to declare that a state of local emergency exists within the boundaries of the village. In the absence of the vice mayor, the next senior councilmember shall be the designated village official; or in his absence, the next senior councilmember, in order of seniority, shall be the designated village official to exercise the powers to declare that a state of local emergency exists within the boundaries of the village. 
(b)  Civil unrest emergency. In the event of an act of violence, riot or general public disorder, as set forth in F.S. § 870.043, the mayor is designated as the village official empowered to declare that a state of local emergency exists within the boundaries of the village. In the absence of the mayor, the vice mayor shall be the designated village official to exercise the powers to declare that a state of local emergency exists within the boundaries of the village. In the absence of the mayor and vice mayor, the next senior councilmember, in order of seniority, shall be the designated city official to exercise the powers to declare that a state of local emergency exists within the boundaries of the village. 
(c)  When a state of local emergency is declared, the mayor or designated city official shall, as promptly as practicable, file the written declaration of emergency in the office of the village clerk. In the event of an act of violence, riot, or general public disorder, the declaration of emergency shall be delivered to appropriate news media for publication and radio and television broadcast thereof, and, if practicable, published by other means such as by posting and loudspeakers. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, § 4, 6-12-18)  
Sec. 2-363. - Emergency management powers. 
Upon declaration of a state of local emergency and during the existence of a declared state of local emergency, the mayor or designated city official, in addition to any other powers conferred upon the mayor or designated city official by F.S. ch. 252, F.S. ch. 870, F.S. ch. 166, or other law, has the power and authority to: 
(1)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within the village if the mayor or designated city official deems this action necessary for the preservation of life or other emergency mitigation, response, or recovery. 
(2)  Waive the procedures and formalities otherwise required of the village by law or ordinance pertaining to: 
a.  Performance of public work and taking whatever prudent action is necessary to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the community; 
b.  Entering into contracts; 
c.  Incurring obligations; 
d.  Employment of permanent and temporary workers; 
e.  Utilization of volunteer workers; 
f.  Rental of equipment; 
g.  Acquisition and distribution, with or without compensation, of supplies, materials, and facilities; 
h.  Appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, highway or upon any other public property. Persons in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof may be excepted from such prohibition or regulation. 
(4)  Impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the village thereby prohibiting persons from being on public streets, highways, parks or other public places during the hours which the curfew is in effect. The duration and application of the curfew shall be tailored to meet the specific emergency. 
(5)  Prohibit any person, firm, or corporation from using the fresh water supplied by the village for any purpose other than cooking, drinking or bathing. 
(6)  Prohibit the sale or distribution of any alcoholic beverage, with or without the payment or a consideration therefor. 
(7)  Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment and any other place of public assembly. 
(8)  Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or participation therein from taking place on any of the public rights-of-way or upon any public property. 
(9)  Authorize the right of access to village staff and village contracted agents to enter private roads, gated communities that have executed a right of entry and emergency and disaster ingress/egress easement in a form substantially similar to Exhibit A, attached hereto, and private water bodies to remove post-disaster debris as necessary to eliminate any immediate threat to public health and safety, to reduce the threat of additional damage to improved property, and to promote economic recovery of the community at large. 
(10)  The restrictions referenced in subsections (3) through (7) above may exempt, from all or part of such restrictions, physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, on-duty employees of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty military personnel, bona fide members of the news media, personnel of public utilities maintaining essential public services, city authorized or requested fireman, law enforcement officers and emergency management personnel and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to preserve safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, § 4, 6-12-18) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A, referenced above, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the village offices.  
Chapter 3 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, adopted May 10, 2005, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-8, and enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-27, § 1, adopted Oct. 28, 2003. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to special assessment public service programs and public works projects, and may be referred to as the "home rule special assessment ordinance." Public service programs ("service(s)") and public works projects ("project(s)") may be made or undertaken in accordance with the home rule special assessment ordinance whenever the village determines that such services or projects should be undertaken and completed and the costs collected, in whole or in part, as a special assessment. The authority granted to the village pursuant to the home rule special assessment ordinance shall be supplemental to other provisions of law, including F.S. Ch. 170, and shall not be construed as limiting, or being limited by, such other provisions of law. To the extent provisions of this chapter conflict with special assessment procedures and powers related to the Acme Improvement District and the Pine Tree Water Control District the procedures and powers previously in affect shall control with respect to assessments levied by those entities. 
(b)  Special assessments made pursuant to this chapter shall be levied only for the purposes enumerated in this chapter and at a rate of assessment based upon the special benefit accruing to the property assessed from such service or project undertaken by the village. The reasonably estimated value of such special benefit must equal or exceed the amount of each assessment. Adoption of the assessment resolution, as hereinafter defined and provided, shall constitute a legislative finding that these standards have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Assessable area means the area of real property that will receive a special benefit from a special assessment service or project. 
Assessable front footage means the length of property abutting a special assessment service or project that will receive a special benefit from that service or project. 
Assessable value of real property means the value of real property that will receive a special benefit from a special assessment improvement. For the purposes of this chapter, the value shall be determined by reference to the assessed value according to the latest final assessment roll prepared by the property appraiser for Palm Beach County, including improvements located thereon but without regard to exemptions. 
Basis for assessment means the assessable area; assessable front footage; or assessable value of real property, deriving a special benefit from a special assessment service or project, as determined by the village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. When appropriate, the village may use a basis other than assessable area, assessable front footage, or assessable value of real property in allocating service or project costs among properties specially benefited by a special assessment service or project, including, but not limited to, the amount of any impact or concurrency fees, or other similar governmental charges levied in connection with the development of the properties, for which the property in the assessable area would be liable and for which the special assessment is levied in lieu thereof. 
Project(s) means a valuable addition made to real property or an amelioration in its condition. For the purposes of this chapter, the term shall include but not be limited to repairs and replacement. 
Service(s) means a valuable public service provided to owners of real property which provides a special benefit to the real property serviced. 
Special assessment public service program ("service") or public works project ("project") means a public service program or public works project which adds to or extends the capability of a municipal service (including another governmental unit's service pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the village and such other governmental unit or units) and which specially benefits properties within the assessable area in which the special benefits of the service or project may be determined, by increasing the safety, utility, accessibility or value of the properties involved or by levying a special assessment in lieu of an impact fee, concurrency fee or other similar governmental charge levied in connection with the development of the properties. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, paving, repaving, widening, guttering or draining of streets, alleys and sidewalks; 
(2)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of permanent pedestrian canopies over public sidewalks and ways; 
(3)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of lighting, landscaping, street furniture, signage, bike paths, horse trails, subdivision or neighborhood boundary walls, trails and other amenities associated with streets, sidewalks, or public ways; 
(4)  Construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, renovation, excavation, grading, stabilization, relocation and upgrading of greenbelts, swales, culverts, sanitary sewers, water lines, storm sewers, outfalls, canals, primary, secondary, and tertiary drains, water bodies, marshlands, and natural areas, separately or as part of a comprehensive stormwater management system, including the necessary appurtenances and structures thereto and including, but not limited to, dams, weirs, and pumps and underdrains, retention and detention ponds; 
(5)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of sanitary sewers, gravity lines, force mains, lift stations, telemetry systems, water mains, water laterals and other potable and reuse water distribution and storage facilities, including the necessary appurtenances thereto; 
(6)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of bridges and culverts; 
(7)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of parks and other public recreational facilities and improvements, including appurtenances thereto; 
(8)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of public schools and other public educational facilities and improvements, including appurtenances thereto; 
(9)  Creation, restoration, drainage or reclamation of wet, low, or overflowed lands; 
(10)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of off street parking facilities, parking garages, or similar facilities; 
(11)  Construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of mass transportation facilities; 
(12)  Provision for commercial projects in an enterprise zone as defined in F.S. § 159.27(19); 
(13)  Construction, rehabilitation, revitalization and beautification of village neighborhoods and low, moderate and affordable housing; 
(14)  Burial of overhead utility lines, including without limitation acquisition of necessary or convenient easements or rights-of-way; 
(15)  Provision for landscaping and green spaces; 
(16)  Provision of all other public improvements and services as designated by the village council; 
(17)  Stabilization and improvement of: 
a.  Retail business districts; 
b.  Wholesale business districts; 
c.  Nationally recognized historic districts; 
d.  Industrial districts; 
e.  Educational districts; 
f.  Commercial districts; or 
g.  Office and newly developing districts; 
h.  And such other areas as the village council may desire from time to time, or any combination of such districts, through promotion, management, marketing, security, maintenance and other similar services in the municipality. 
(18)  Provision of public service programs including but not limited to the village's fire and emergency medical services program and all costs associated therewith and the village's solid waste collection services and all costs associated therein. 
(19)  Provision of engineering, surveys, designs, documents, plans and specifications, legal services and all services related to the feasibility or practicability of such service or project. 
The term includes any service or project of general and special benefit to the public which the village council determines to serve a proper public purpose, and may include services or projects conducted jointly with any other public agency or publicly regulated utility. 
Special benefit shall mean a logical relationship between the service or project and the benefit to real property. 
Street includes but is not limited to a road, highway, boulevard, alley, street or other public thoroughfare. 
Total cost for service or project means the sum of all expenses chargeable to a service or project, including all costs incurred from inception to final acceptance, if applicable, including by way of example and not limitation, engineering, field, design, and overhead costs; acquisition and construction costs; operating and equipment costs; direct village labor and material costs; general village administrative and overhead costs as a fixed percentage of the other total costs; attorneys fees; and other necessary or incidental expenses. Such costs may include the cost of construction or reconstruction, repair, or maintenance, the cost of all labor and materials, the cost of all lands, property, rights, easements, and franchises acquired, financing charges, interest, discount on the sale of special assessment bonds or anticipation certificates, cost of plans and specifications, surveys, environmental assessments, remediation or mitigation, surveys of estimates of costs and of revenues, cost of engineering and legal services, and all other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of providing such service or project or the construction or reconstruction, repair or maintenance of such service or project, administrative expense, and such other expense as may be necessary or incident to the service or project and financing authorized. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act (Uniform Method) refers to F.S. § 197.3632 or any successor statute authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-3. - Declaration of intent; notice. 
(a)  Whenever the village shall decide that a special assessment service or project needs to be provided or accomplished, the village council shall by resolution (the "intent resolution") declare the village's intention to have such work performed or services provided, designating the nature of the work or services; the location of the work or services; the part or portion of the cost to be paid by special assessment; the manner in which special assessments shall be made; when such assessments are to be paid; and what part, if any, shall be apportioned to be paid from other funds of the village or another participating governmental unit(s). Such intent resolution shall also describe the lands on which the special assessment is to be levied and it shall be sufficient to describe such lands as all lots and lands located within the assessable area receiving special benefit from the service or project. Such intent resolution shall also state the estimated costs of the service or project. The resolution may be adopted prior to or within one year of the completion of construction of the assessment or service or project and if the work is completed, the actual costs of the service or project shall be stated within the body of the resolution. 
(b)  At the time of the adoption of the intent resolution there shall be on file with the village clerk an assessment plat showing the area to be assessed, together with preliminary plans and specifications and an estimate of the total or annual cost for the service or project, which assessment plat, preliminary plans and specifications, and estimate shall be open to the inspection of the public. 
(c)  Upon adoption of the intent resolution, if not done previously, the village may advertise for bids, provide in-house or provide pursuant to an agreement with a third party or another public agency or a publicly regulated utility agency to provide the service or for the construction of the project. If bid, the bid shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and include in such advertisement the intent resolution number and title. All such bids shall conform to the village bid procedures then in effect. 
(d)  Promptly after adoption of the intent resolution, the village clerk shall cause said intent resolution to be published by title once a week for a period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and in Palm Beach County, Florida. The notice of the intent resolution shall provide that the complete resolution is available for review and copying at the office of the village clerk during normal business hours. 
(e)  Whenever it is necessary for the village to adopt an assessment roll on an annual basis, it shall not be necessary to adopt an intent resolution each year. Instead, in subsequent years, the village shall adopt a preliminary assessment resolution, which shall provide for the purpose of the special assessment and the preliminary amount of such assessment. The preliminary assessment resolution may also provide for the date, time and place of the public hearing required by section 3-5, and any other information the village deems necessary. The preliminary assessment resolution need not be published subsequent to adoption. If the original assessment resolution provided for payments over a period of years and there is no change to the amount or period of assessment from the original resolution, no subsequent annual resolution is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-4. - Setting assessments for special assessment improvements or service program. 
(a)  Determining basis for assessment. The village shall determine the assessable area; assessable front footage; or assessable value, for each special assessment service or project and shall prepare an assessment roll (the "preliminary assessment roll") in accordance with the method of assessment set out in the intent resolution. Such preliminary assessment roll shall show the lots and lands to be assessed and, after taken into consideration the limitations contained in subsection (b) of this section, the amount of each assessment and the total assessment. 
(b)  Determining assessable cost her property owner for property located in the assessable area. The estimated annual cost or total cost, which ever is applicable, for the service or project shall be used to develop a formula to determine the basis for assessment in order to attribute cost per property owner for property located within the assessable area. The assessable cost for each property owner for property located in the assessable area shall then be added together to arrive at the total assessment. 
(c)  Annual determination of cost for a service. The estimated cost of a service funded by a special assessment levied pursuant to this chapter shall be set annually by resolution of the village council after notice and public hearing, if the estimated annual cost for the upcoming year exceeds the current annual assessment amount. If the estimated annual cost for the upcoming year does not exceed the current annual assessment amount then notice and public hearing shall not be required but the village council will set the amount of the annual assessment by resolution at a public meeting. Whenever a public hearing is required by this section, the public hearing held by the village pursuant to section 3-5 shall satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-5. - Levying special assessment. 
(a)  Upon completion of the preliminary assessment roll, the village shall by resolution or motion fix a time and place at which the owners of property to be assessed, or any other persons interested therein, may appear before the village and be heard with respect to the propriety and advisability of providing the service or project and funding them with special assessments, the cost of the service or project, and the amount to be assessed against each property so improved or serviced. The village clerk shall provide written notice of such hearing to each of the property owners whose property is subject to being assessed. Such notice shall be provided by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, or through the annual TRIM Notices forwarded by the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser, not less than 20 days in advance of the hearing. The notice by mail shall include the following information: the purpose of the assessment; the total amount to be levied against each parcel; the unit of measurement to be applied against each parcel to determine the assessment; the number of such units contained within each parcel; the total revenue the local government will collect by the assessment; a statement that failure to pay the assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property which may result in a loss of title; a statement that all affected property owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the village within 20 days of the notice; and the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not less than 20 days in advance of the hearing; provided however, that any mistake in such advertised notice or in any mailed notice shall not void any assessment levied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The published notice shall contain at least the following information: the name of the village; a geographic depiction of the property subject to the assessment; the proposed schedule of the assessment; the fact that the assessment will be collected by the tax collector or the village directly; and a statement that all affected property owners have the right to appear at the public hearing and the right to file written objections within 20 days of the publication of the notice. The resolution or motion shall contain the date, time, and place of the hearing, describe the assessable area, and advise persons interested that the description of the properties located within the assessable area and the amount of the assessment can be ascertained at the office of the village clerk. 
(b)  At such public hearing, the village council shall consider all objections relating to the assessments and shall make a final decision on whether to levy the special assessments. Thereafter, if the decision is to levy the special assessments, the village council shall equalize or adjust such assessments where justice and right so dictate, and shall approve and confirm the assessment roll by resolution (the "assessment resolution"). When so equalized and approved, a final assessment roll shall be filed in the office of the village clerk of the village and such assessments shall stand confirmed and remain legal, valid, and binding first liens upon the property against which such assessments are made until paid. The annual assessment amount for a service shall be determined by village in accordance with section 3-4 (c) shall be filed in the office of the village clerk of the village, and such assessments shall stand confirmed and remain legal, valid and binding first liens upon the property against which such assessments are made until paid. 
(c)  A statement of the confirmed assessment shall be provided to each property owner listed on the roll. The property owner shall have such time as may be provided in the assessment within which to pay the total or annual assessment. 
(d)  The village shall determine in the assessment resolution when the payment of any special assessment levied pursuant to this chapter shall commence, and the frequency and amount of any scheduled collections of such assessments upon determination of the confirmed assessment roll. 
(e)  Upon completion of a project or termination of a service, any excess in the special assessment as originally made, approved and confirmed over the actual cost of the improvement to be paid by such special assessment, shall be credited proportionately against each special assessment against each parcel in the manner set forth in the assessment resolution, or used for any lawful purpose. 
(f)  The village council shall be authorized to revise and correct errors and omissions in the assessment roll if: 
(1)  Any assessment made under this chapter is annulled, vacated, or set aside, in whole or in part, by the judgment of any court. In such a case, the village council may revise the assessment to comport with the guidelines of any such judgment until such time as a valid assessment is imposed. 
(2)  The village council is satisfied that any assessment is so defective that it can not be enforced or collected. 
(3)  The village council has omitted any property from the assessment roll which should have been assessed for the service or project funded by the assessment. 
(g)  Prior to the delivery of the assessment roll to the tax collector, the mayor, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to reclassify any property subject to the assessment based upon competent substantial evidence, or to correct any error in applying the assessment upon any particular parcel, either on his or her own initiative or upon receipt of a timely filed written petition by a property owner. 
(h)  No error or omission by the village council, mayor or any of his or her designees, village administrator, property appraiser, tax collector, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of an assessment imposed by the village council under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-6. - Partial year assessments. 
A partial year assessment shall be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after adoption of the assessment resolution for any special assessment levied pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the partial year assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the assessment resolution for the calendar year in which the certificate of occupancy is issued. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the calendar year. In addition to the monthly rate, the partial year assessment shall also include an estimate of the subsequent calendar year's assessment. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until full payment of the partial year assessment is received by the village. Issuance of the certificate of occupancy by mistake or inadvertence, and without the payment in full of the partial year assessment, shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. For the purpose of this provision, such partial year assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-7. - Collection of payments; installment payments; certificate of indebtedness. 
(a)  Notice of assessment. Promptly after adoption of the assessment resolution, a statement of the confirmed assessment shall be provided to each property owner listed on the confirmed roll. The special assessments shall bear interest and be payable at the time and in the manner stipulated in the assessment resolution, and shall remain liens, co-equal with the lien of all state, county, district, and municipal taxes, other non-ad valorem assessments which are duly levied, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims, until paid. The village may elect to collect its own assessments, retain a third party to collect, use the uniform method or use any other legally available mechanism for collection. 
(b)  Installment payments. The assessment, subject to the interest provided in this section, may be satisfied through weekly, monthly or annual installments as provided for in the assessment resolution. All assessments, together with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in full at any time and the property owner shall not incur any penalty for prepayment. 
(c)  Certificate issued for failure to pay assessment. Where assessments are not paid within the time provided in the assessment resolution, a certificate of indebtedness shall be issued. The certificate shall contain a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, a description of the service or project, and shall identify the assessment resolution under which the assessment was made. Such certificate shall be recorded in the public records of Palm Beach County and shall constitute a lien coequal with the lien of all state, county, district and other municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid, and shall bear interest at a rate to be set forth in the assessment resolution. 
(d)  Enforcement of certificate. Upon failure of the property owner to pay any assessment installment due, any part thereof, or any interest, the procedures and remedies of the uniform method shall apply if used by village, if not then the village, or its agent, may cause the necessary proceedings to be brought to enforce payment of either the assessment or the certificate issued under section 2-76(c), together with all accrued interest. As a part of such proceeding, the village shall be entitled to recover all costs and a reasonable attorney's fee. Default in the payment of any installment of the assessment or accrued interest shall result in the entire or annual assessment, if applicable, plus interest becoming immediately due. Such foreclosure proceeding shall be instituted and prosecuted under F.S. Chs. 43 and 173, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(e)  Validity. In no event shall the amount or validity of the lien or certificate of indebtedness as provided for by this chapter be questioned in any direct or collateral proceeding instituted more than 30 days after the issuance of such certificate of indebtedness by the village, or such shorter time as may result from the filing of bond validation proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-8. - Issuance of bonds. 
The village may at any time without an election being held therefore borrow money and issue bonds therefore in anticipation of the collection of unpaid special assessments levied or to be levied for the purpose of paying the cost of special assessment service or project. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 3-9. - Prepayment of special assessments. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of F.S. § 170.09, section 3-7(b) of this chapter or any other provision of law pertaining to the prepayment of special assessments, the village council may, in its discretion, by enabling resolution(s), provide for restrictions or limitations on the prepayment of special assessments levied by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 2-10-15)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is based on chapter 3 and section 21-32 of the Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances. 
Cross reference— Alcohol and drugs in Little Blue Park, § 38-31. 
State Law reference— Municipalities prohibited from imposing license tax, F.S. § 561.342; enforcement, F.S. ch. 562; local option elections, F.S. ch. 567. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-07, adopted Mar. 23, 1999, repealed § 6-1 in its entirety. Formerly, § 6-1 pertained to alcoholic beverage license for airports and derived from § 1 of Ord. No. 96-12, adopted May 28, 1996.  
Sec. 6-2. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  On-premises consumption. No alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, served or permitted to be served in any place in the village holding a license under the State of Florida Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco for on-premises consumption, nor shall the licensed premises be rented, leased, or otherwise used: 
(1)  On Monday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  On Sunday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(3)  On Saturday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  On any day of the week other than Saturday, Sunday, and Monday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as stated below in subsection (5). 
(5)  On New Years Day (January 1), between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Off-premises consumption. No alcoholic beverages may be sold in any place in the village holding a license under the State of Florida Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco for off-premises consumption. 
(1)  On Sunday, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(2)  On any day of the week other than Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 99-07, § 2, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2007-20, § 1, 1-8-08) 
State Law reference— Hours of sale, F.S. § 562.14.  
Sec. 6-3. - Public possession or consumption. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, as determined in accordance with F.S. § 561.01(4)(b). 
Beverage law means F.S. chs. 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 567, 568. 
Commercial establishment parking lot means any private or public area appurtenant to commercial establishments used by the public for parking for, and pedestrian access to, commercial establishments, including drives, parking areas and sidewalks and walkways appurtenant thereto. 
Container means any can, bottle, carton or other vessel of alcoholic beverage. 
Public or semipublic area open for vehicular travel means all public and private roads, streets, highways, lanes, alleys, parking lots and parking areas on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel by motor vehicle or which is otherwise open for vehicular travel. The term does not include: 
(1)  Areas such as golf courses, go-cart tracks, motocross tracks and similar areas; and 
(2)  Private driveways or property serving a single dwelling unit. 
(b)  Findings of fact. The uncontrolled consumption of alcoholic beverages in and around commercial establishment parking lots contributes to lewd behavior, verbal harassment, intoxicated disorderly conduct, destruction of property, excessive noise and litter. The uncontrolled consumption of alcoholic beverages in and around commercial establishment parking lots has led to an increase in the number of violent crimes committed on and near those commercial establishment parking lots. Individuals consuming alcoholic beverages in and around commercial establishment parking lots deter the public's use and enjoyment of these areas. No effective means exists to deter the violent, disorderly, destructive or offensive conduct associated with the consumption of alcoholic beverages in and around uncontrolled commercial establishment parking lots other than to prohibit the consumption of alcohol in those areas. 
(c)  Consumption prohibited in parking lots; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage in or within 500 feet of a commercial establishment parking lot in the village, except in those areas in which such consumption is permitted pursuant to the Beverage Law, special or general act of the state, the Florida Administrative Code, or village ordinance, resolution, or administrative approval. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit consumption on private property within 500 feet of a commercial establishment parking lot; provided, however, that the owner or person in control of the private property has explicitly consented to such consumption. 
(d)  Possession in parking lots prohibited; exception. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in or within 500 feet of a commercial establishment parking lot in the village except in those areas in which such possession is permitted pursuant to the Beverage Law, special or general act of the state legislature, the Florida Administrative Code, or village ordinance, resolution or administrative approval unless such alcoholic beverage is in the original container with the seal unbroken. 
(e)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person engaged in picking up empty beverage containers for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of the bottle or can itself, nor to any person taking part in a litter control campaign; or 
(2)  The possession of any open container by any licensed distributor or licensed vendor of alcoholic beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverage is being transported solely for commercial purposes. 
(f)  Enforcement of section. It shall be the duty and responsibility of all appropriate law enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54.  
Sec. 6-4. - Warning signs. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, regardless of amount, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
Business establishment means, but is not limited to, any place of business of any club, organization, person, firm, corporation or partnership, such as a golf club; country club; veteran's, fraternal or benevolent organization; grocery store; drugstore; nightclub; bottle club; bar; tavern; restaurant; grill; filling station; convenience store; or other building, structure or location or portion thereof, wherein one person directly or indirectly pays another for the purchase or dispensing of an alcoholic beverage. 
Dispense means the storing, handling, apportionment, preparation, gift, distribution or serving, directly or indirectly, of any amount of an alcoholic beverage to or for any person by any officer, owner, operator, lessee or employee of a business establishment. For purposes of this definition, permitting or allowing any person to carry alcoholic beverages on the premises of any business establishment to be consumed thereon shall constitute the "dispensing" of such beverages. 
Sale means any transfer of an alcoholic beverage for a consideration or any gift of an alcoholic beverage in connection with or as a part of a transfer of any property or product not an alcoholic beverage for a consideration. 
Vendor of alcoholic beverages means any person who owns or operates a business establishment which sells or dispenses any alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises. 
(b)  Posting of public health messages. All persons who own or operate a business establishment which sells or dispenses alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises shall post, in a conspicuous place within the business establishment where alcoholic beverages are displayed, purchased or consumed, one or more signs or notices, not less than 12 inches wide and 18 inches high, which contain the following statement, clearly discernible by persons to whom alcoholic beverages may be sold or dispensed: 
Health Warning 
Alcohol in Beer, Wine, and Liquor Can Cause: 
Intoxication 
Addiction 
Birth Defects 
Do Not Drink Before Driving or 
Operating Machinery 
Do Not Mix Alcohol With Other 
Drugs (It Can Be Fatal) 
Do Not Drink During Pregnancy 
(c)  Posting requirements prior to sale or dispensing. No person shall sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at a business establishment unless and until the sign or notice required by subsection (b) of this section has been posted in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person, firm, corporation, association or agent thereof who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be subject, upon conviction, to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 5-28-96)  
Sec. 6-5. - Alcoholic beverages in parks. 
(a)  Prohibited generally. The sale, purchase, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages as defined in F.S. § 561.01(4) is hereby prohibited in all village parks except as specifically provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Possession in sealed, original packages excepted. Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the possession of alcoholic beverages in sealed original packages in any vehicle, vessel or conveyance for purposes of storing or transporting such and not for purposes of selling or consuming such in a village park shall not be violative of this article. 
(c)  Designation of specific areas for possession or consumption. The director of parks and recreation may designate specific areas in which alcoholic beverages may be possessed and/or consumed. Such areas may include, but are not exclusive to, family picnic areas, areas reserved for large group picnics, and facilities for food service. In determining whether an area should be designated for the consumption of alcoholic beverages or whether a designation should remain, the director may consider, among other factors, the general use of the area under consideration and nearby areas, the hours during which the park is open, the conduct of persons utilizing the area so designated or under consideration for designation and nearby areas, and the anticipated conduct of persons who are anticipated to use, or are using, the areas so designated or under consideration for designation. The village council may reverse or amend the decision of the director as it deems appropriate. Kegs of beer or other alcoholic malt beverages shall be allowed only in reserved picnic areas and only with a permit issued by the department of parks and recreation. 
(d)  Special events. The director of parks and recreation may permit, in writing, the sale, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages incidental to a special event. Such permission may not exceed four consecutive days. In determining whether the sale, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages should be permitted, the director of parks and recreation may consider, among other factors, the nature of the event, the anticipated number, age and/or conduct of persons attending the event, the days and/or times of the event, uses of areas near the special event, and the anticipated impact the sale, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages would have on the park, its uses and the special event. The village council may reverse or amend the decision of the director of parks and recreation as it deems appropriate. 
(e)  Permitted sales. The village council may permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by private entrepreneurs who develop and/or operate facilities upon premises leased from the village within a village park for food service, performing arts, golf courses, and other facilities, as the village council deems appropriate. Such requests shall be directed to the village council for consideration on an individual, case-by-case basis; and approval may be granted, if at all, only by formal council action. The council action shall set forth the type of alcoholic beverages which may be sold, the area in which the sale may occur, the area in which the alcoholic beverage may be possessed and consumed, and the hours and days during which the sale, possession and/or consumption is permitted. The council action may set forth other terms and conditions as the village council deems appropriate. The village council may, at its discretion, revoke or condition such approval, either temporarily or permanently. 
(f)  State licensing; lessee requirements. The village may, at its option, obtain in its name the necessary state licensing for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The lessee for whose benefit the license is held shall be responsible for all costs associated with obtaining and renewing such license. The village may, at its option, have such license transferred to the lessee's name; however, such licensing shall immediately revert to the village upon termination, for any reason, of the lessee's lease with the village. The license holder shall take all action and execute all documents necessary to effect transfer to the village. 
(g)  Permit conditions. The permission granted under this section shall be subject to all ordinances, laws, rules and regulations applicable in the village; and any grantee shall be responsible for compliance thereto. The permission granted may also be subject to and granted with specified conditions, and the grantee shall be responsible for ensuring compliance thereto. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions as to the type of alcoholic beverages sold, possessed and/or consumed; the type or size of containers; crowd size; other activities; areas for sale, possession or consumption; times and/or days; and conduct of individuals bringing alcoholic beverages to the area. 
(h)  Intoxicated persons. No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any park; and any such person so found in a park in a drunken condition may be ejected therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation generally, ch. 38.  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fraudulent operation of coin-operated devices, F.S. § 817.32; manufacture or sale of slugs to be used in coin-operated devices, F.S. § 817.33. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Authority of article provisions. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the village's home rule power, in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the village; article VIII, section 2(b) of the Florida Constitution; F.S. chs. 163 and 166 and any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 2, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-32. - Purpose of article. 
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of regulating and controlling adult entertainment uses and establishments. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 3, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-33. - Intent of article. 
(a)  It is the intent of the village council in adopting this article to establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce the adverse secondary effects that adult entertainment uses, referred to herein as "regulated uses," have upon the residents of the village and protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the village. 
(b)  It is further intended by the village council in adopting this article to provide for the proper location of regulated uses in the village as a permitted use in the nonresidential zoning districts along principal arterial roadways, to require a separation between such uses to avoid clustering, and to require separation from and thereby protect the integrity of incompatible uses in nearby neighborhoods, including residences, educational institutions, religious institutions, public parks and other commercial enterprises. Proper separation of regulated uses prevents the creation of skid row areas in the village which otherwise result from the concentration of these establishments and their patrons. This article has neither the purpose nor the effect of limiting or restricting access by adults to sexually oriented, nonobscene materials protected by the First Amendment, or denying access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is instead the intent to limit the secondary effects of regulated uses through content-neutral regulation as set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 4, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-34. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place or establishment operated for commercial gain which invites or permits the public to view adult material. For purposes of this article, the term "adult arcade" is included within the definition of "adult theater." 
Adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store means an establishment which sells or offers adult material for sale or rent for commercial gain, unless the establishment demonstrates either: 
(1)  The adult material is accessible only by employees and the gross income from the sale or rental of adult material comprises less than 40 percent of the gross income from the sale or rental of goods or services at the establishment; or 
(2)  The individual items of adult material offered for sale or rental comprise less than ten percent of the individual items, as stock-in-trade, publicly displayed in the establishment and are not accessible to minors at the establishment. 
Adult booth means a small enclosed or partitioned area inside an adult entertainment establishment which is: 
(1)  Designed or used for the viewing of adult material by one or more persons; and 
(2)  Is accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. 
The term "adult booth" includes, but is not limited to, a peep show booth, or other booth used to view adult material. The term "adult booth" does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment, or a restroom. 
Adult dancing establishment means an establishment, where employees display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, regardless of whether the employees actually engage in dancing. 
Adult entertainment establishment means as follows: 
(1)  Any adult arcade, adult theater, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult motel or adult dancing establishment; or any other establishment or business operated for commercial gain where any employee, operator or owner exposes his/her specified anatomical area for viewing by patrons including, but not limited to, massage establishments, whether or not licensed pursuant to F.S. ch. 480, tanning salons, modeling studios or lingerie studios. 
(2)  Excluded from this definition are any schools or educational institutions where the exposure of specified anatomical areas is associated with a curriculum or program. 
(3)  An establishment that possesses an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
Adult material means any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations; recordings and other audio matter; and novelties or devices which have, as their primary or dominant theme, subject matter depicting, exhibiting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; 
(2)  Provides patrons with adult material by means of closed-circuit television transmissions. 
Adult novelty store. See Adult bookstore. 
Adult theater means an establishment operated for commercial gain which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part thereof, or an open-air area regularly used for viewing of adult material, which activity requires the exclusion of minors under F.S. ch. 847. The terms "adult motel," "adult arcade," "adult booth" and "adult motion picture theater" are included within the definition of "adult theater." An establishment which has adult booths is considered to be an adult theater. 
Adult video store. See Adult bookstore. 
Alcoholic beverage means a beverage as defined by F.S. § 561.01(4) (the Beverage Law). It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if proof exists: 
(1)  The beverage in question was or is known as whiskey, moonshine whiskey, shine, rum, gin, tequila, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, beer, malt liquor or by any other similar names; or 
(2)  The beverage was contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the names in subsection (1) of this definition, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's insignia, name or trademark. 
Any person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
Commercial establishment means any business, location or place which conducts or allows to be conducted on its premises any activity for commercial gain. 
Commercial gain means operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for any establishment which has received an local business receipt. For the purpose of this article, operation for commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from plea or trail, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Department means the fire department, health department, sheriff or any division of the planning, zoning and building department, including the respective directors, employees and agents thereof. 
Educational institution means a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes or courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. The term "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which there is a day care center, nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school; professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college, junior college, or four-year college or university; libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public; or any special institution of learning. However, the term "educational institution" does not include a premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution operated for commercial gain. 
Employee means any person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether the person is paid a salary or wage by the owner or manager of the premises. The term "employee" shall include any person who pays any form of consideration to an owner or manager of an establishment for the privilege to work, perform or expose his/her specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
Establishment means the site or premises on which the adult entertainment establishment is located, including the interior of the establishment, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are being conducted for commercial gain. 
Inspector means an employee or agent of the village who is authorized pursuant to this article to inspect licensed premises. 
Lap dance (straddle dance, face dance or flash dance) means the use by an employee, whether clothed or partially or totally nude, of any part of his or her body to touch, massage, rub, stroke, caress or fondle the genital or pubic area of a person while at the establishment, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of any employee by a person while at the establishment. It shall be a lap dance regardless of whether the touch or touching occurs while the employee is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. It shall also be a lap dance regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or through a medium. 
Licensed premises. See Establishment. 
Licensee means any person whose application for an adult entertainment establishment has been granted and who totally or partially owns, operates or controls the establishment. 
Operator means any person who engages or participates in any activity which is necessary to or which facilitates the operation of an adult entertainment establishment including, but not limited to, the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, dancer, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist or supervisor. It shall not include persons who only perform janitorial, repair or maintenance services for the establishment. 
Person means, but is not limited to, an individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation and any other similar entity. 
Principal arterial means those roadways so classified in the Palm Beach County Federal Functional Classification contained in Appendix A of the Transportation Element of the Palm Beach County Comprehensive Plan, as it may from time to time be amended. 
Principal stockholder means any person who owns or controls, legally or beneficially, ten percent or more of a corporation's capital stock, and includes the officers and directors. If no stockholder of a corporation owns or controls, legally or beneficially, at least ten percent of the capital stock, all stockholders shall be considered principal stockholders. And, if a corporation is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or pursuant to F.S. ch. 517, and its stock is for sale to the general public, it shall not be considered to have any principal stockholders. 
Private performance means the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee at an adult entertainment establishment to a person other than another employee while the person is in an area within the establishment not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment, or while the person is in an area in which the person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons within the establishment. 
Regulated uses means any uses meeting the above definition of adult entertainment establishment. It also means any bookstore, video store, novelty store, motion picture theater, motel/hotel, dancing establishment, massage establishment, or photo/modeling studio (a) that includes the word "adult" in its name; or (b) where an employee, operator or owner exposes his or her specified anatomical areas for viewing by patrons; or (c) that requires the exclusion of minors under F.S. ch. 847. 
Residential zoning district means, for purposes of this section only the following districts or any other districts which permit residential development that may from time to time be established by the village: 
(1)  AR-RR, agricultural residential district in rural residential; 
(2)  AR-USA agricultural uses in the urban services area (USA); 
(3)  PUD, residential planned unit development district. 
Specified anatomical areas means as follows: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human male genitals and pubic region; 
b.  The opening between the human buttocks; i.e., the anal cleft; 
c.  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola; this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act means as follows: 
(1)  A criminal violation of this article; 
(2)  Any felony; 
(3)  An offense under F.S. ch. 794 (Sexual Battery); 
(4)  An offense under F.S. ch. 796 (Prostitution); 
(5)  An offense under F.S. ch. 800 (Lewdness; Indecent Exposure); 
(6)  An offense under F.S. ch. 826 (Bigamy; Incest); 
(7)  An offense under F.S. ch. 847 (Obscene Literature; Profanity); 
(8)  An offense under F.S. ch. 831 (Forgery and Counterfeiting); 
(9)  An offense under F.S. ch. 837 (Perjury); 
(10)  An offense under F.S. ch. 843 (Obstructing Justice); 
(11)  An offense under F.S. ch. 849 (Gambling); 
(12)  An offense under F.S. ch. 893 (Drug Abuse Prevention and Control); 
(13)  An offense under F.S. ch. 895 (Offenses concerning Racketeering and Illegal Debts); 
(14)  An offense under F.S. ch. 896 (Offenses Related to Financial Transactions); or 
(15)  An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than Florida, or under an analogous ordinance of a county or another city. 
Specified criminal offense means as follows: 
(1)  A conviction under F.S. § 60.05 (Nuisance Abatement); 
(2)  A conviction under F.S. §§ 480.043, 480.046, 480.047 or 480.049, or subsequent regulation; 
(3)  A conviction under F.S. ch. 561 (Beverage Law: Administration) or F.S. ch. 562 (Beverage Law: Enforcement); or 
(4)  A judgment against or conviction under F.S. ch. 823 (Public Nuisances). 
Specified sexual activities means as follows: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(2)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Village means the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 5, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 2, 12-12-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-35. - Conflicts with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations and requirements of this article are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or laws, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 6, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-36. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 13, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-37. - Declaration of value of location considerations for certain areas of village. 
The village council hereby declares that the location of residential zones, educational institutions, religious institutions, public parks and other commercial enterprises within viable, unblighted and desirable areas supports the preservation of property values and promotes the health, safety and welfare of the village and the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 7, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-38. - Findings of fact. 
Based on the evidence and testimony which has been presented to the village council, and based upon the findings incorporated in: (a) the United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), (b) "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, City of Indianapolis, January 1984, (c) the "Report on the Secondary Effects of the Concentration of Adult Use Establishments in the Times Square Area," by Insight Associates (April 1994) and "Adult Entertainment Study" by the Department of City Planning, City of New York (November 1994); (d) the "Report to American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses," by Peter R. Hecht, Ph.D. of the Environmental Research Group (March 31, 1996); (e) the "Final Report to the City of Garden Grove, CA: The Relationship Between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove Blvd.," by Richard McCleary, Ph.D. and James W. Meeker, J.D., Ph.D. (Oct. 23, 1991), and (f) "An Analysis of the Effects of SOB's on the Surrounding Neighborhoods In Dallas, TX as of April 1997," by Peter Malin, MAI, the village council hereby finds that: 
(1)  Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the village or in close proximity to the village where books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and/or devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed or sold; 
(2)  Such commercial establishments are or may be located within the village or are so close in proximity to the village that the same may seek location within the village where: 
a.  The superficial tissues of one person are manipulated, rubbed, stroked, kneaded or tapped by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Dancers, entertainers or other individuals who, for any form of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area; or 
c.  Lap dancing occurs. 
(3)  The activities described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section occur at commercial establishments for the purpose of commercial gain and, as such, are subject to regulation within and by the village in the interest of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the village; 
(4)  The competitive commercial exploitation of such nudity and seminudity is adverse to the public's interest and the quality of life, ton of commerce, and total community environment in the village; 
(5)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section are presented in commercial establishments within the village, other activities which are illegal, immoral or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them and be aggravated by them; such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property; 
(6)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section are present in commercial establishments within the village, they tend to blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower property values, promote crime (particularly the kinds detailed in subsection (5) of this section) and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations; and 
(7)  There is a direct relationship between the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas in subsections (1) and (2) of this section and an increase in criminal activities, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community, and the concurrency of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. These secondary effects are adverse to the public's interest and quality of life, tone of commerce and total community environment in the village. 
(8)  To preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare of the village and its residents, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, patrons, spectators, and other persons on the premises of these establishments. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 8, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-39. - District regulations. 
Regulated uses are a permitted use in the nonresidential zoning districts of the village, if located on properties with frontage along a principal arterial roadway. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 9, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-40. - Distance regulations. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the operation of any proposed or existing regulated use within the following minimum distances from any existing uses specified below: 
(1)  Church or religious institution, 250 feet; 
(2)  School or educational institution, 250 feet; 
(3)  Public park, 250 feet; 
(4)  Residential or recreational zoning district or residential land use designation or residential use, 250 feet; 
(5)  Another regulated use, 500 feet; and 
(6)  Any establishment for the sale of beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises, pawnshop, pool or billiard hall, penny arcade or other business establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its business the operation of coin-operated amusement devices, 250 feet. 
(b)  The subsequent establishment of the uses listed in (a)(1) through (6) within these distances of an existing regulated use shall not change the status of the regulated use to that of a nonconforming use. 
(c)  The distances set forth in (a)(1) through (6) shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the closest property lines of the parcel of land containing proposed or existing regulated use to the nearest point on the property line of the parcel of land containing a use listed in (a)(1) through (6). Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. For purposes of this subsection, the term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
(d)  For purposes of establishing the distance between regulated uses, other regulated uses, and incompatible uses as set forth above, the applicant for any regulated use shall furnish a certified survey from a registered surveyor. Such survey shall indicate the distance from the regulated use to any other regulated use and any incompatible use as set forth above. In case of any dispute, the measurement scaled by the planning director shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 10, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-41. - Variances to location standards prohibited. 
Variances to the locational standards of this article shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 11, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-42. - Hours of operation for regulated uses. 
Regulated uses shall be restricted to the following hours of operation: 
(1)  Adult bookstores/video stores/novelty stores shall not be open for business before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Adult dancing establishments shall not be open for business before 11:00 a.m. or after 2:00 a.m. 
(3)  Adult theaters shall not be open for business before 11:00 a.m. or after 2:00 a.m. 
(4)  No regulated use shall be open for business on any Sunday or national legal holiday. 
(5)  In any case where two or more different regulated uses for which this section regulates the hours of operation are maintained in one building or structure, the hours of operation of each use shall be regulated as provided individually in this section without regard to any other regulated use. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 12, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Sec. 10-43. - Fees for permits, licenses or other authorizations. 
A reasonable fee for applying for a permit, license or other authorization to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall be set forth by ordinance or resolution of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 96-24, § 14, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2002-14, § 1, 6-25-02)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Wildlife, F.S. ch. 372; damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of county animal regulation ordinance. 
The provisions of chapter 4, entitled "Animals" of the Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances, entitled the "Palm Beach County Animal Regulation Ordinance of 1989," are hereby adopted and incorporated into this chapter by reference in this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, § 1, 5-28-96)  
Sec. 14-2. - Retail sale of dogs and cats/prohibition of puppy and kitten mills. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Animal rescue organization means a duly incorporated nonprofit organization devoted to the rescue, care and adopting of stray, abandoned or surrendered animals and which does not breed animals. 
Animal shelter means a municipal or related public animal shelter or duly incorporated nonprofit organization devoted to the rescue, care and adoption of stray, abandoned or surrendered animals, and which does not breed animals. 
Cat means an animal of the Felidae family of the order Carnivora. 
Dog means an animal of the Canidae family of the Carnivora. 
Pet store means any retail establishment open to the public that sells or transfers, or offers for sale or transfer, dogs and/or cats, regardless of the age of the dog or cat. 
Pet store operator means a person who owns or operates a pet store. 
Puppy or kitten mill means a facility where dogs and cats are bred for the purpose of selling them and where any two of the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  More than 20 puppies (under the age of 12 weeks) or more than 20 kittens (under the age of 16 weeks) are kept at a single time; 
(2)  No genetic (heredity) health testing appropriate for the breed is conducted; 
(3)  No long-term (over one year) guarantees are offered; 
(4)  A single female is bred every cycle; 
(5)  A single female is bred more than five times; 
(6)  There are no records of the dogs' or cats' parents; 
(7)  More than eight dogs or kittens are kept in a single enclosure. For purposes of this section, the space requirements for dogs and cats/kittens shall comply with section 4-23(h)(3)(d)(1)(D)(i) though (vii) and section 4-23(h)(3)(d)(1)(E)(i)(a)-(b) of the Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances known as the Palm Beach County Animal Care and Control Ordinance of 1998. 
(b)  Puppy and kitten mills. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to establish, operate or maintain a puppy or kitten mill in the Village of Wellington. 
(c)  Sale or transfer of dogs and/or cats. No pet store shall display, sell, trade, deliver, barter, lease, rent, auction, give away, transfer, offer for sale or transfer, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats in the Village of Wellington. 
(d)  Exemptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  A person that sells, delivers, offers for sale, trades, barters, leases, rents, auctions, gives away, or otherwise transfers or disposes of dogs and/or cats that were bred and reared on property owned by the person 
(2)  An animal shelter. 
(3)  An animal rescue organization. 
(4)  An animal shelter or animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store. 
(e)  Adoption of shelter and rescue animals. Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet store or its owner, operator or employees from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by an animal shelter or animal rescue organization and maintained at the pet store for the purpose of adopting those animals to the public. 
(f)  Violations—Enforcement. 
(1)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to penalties set forth in section 1-12 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Additionally, the village may initiate a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 1-28-14)  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Adoption of codes, § 6(J). 
Cross reference— Construction board of adjustment and appeals, § 2-327 et seq.; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Municipal code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162; building code inspection fees, F.S. § 166.222; contracting, F.S. ch. 489; building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553; Florida Building Codes Act, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-17, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2001 repealed the former §§ 18-32—18-38 and enacted new §§ 18-32, 18-33 as set out herein. The former §§ 18-32—18-38 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 99-05, § 2, adopted Feb. 9, 1999; Ord. No. 99-12, § 2, adopted June 22, 1999; Ord. No. 00-09, § 2, adopted Mar. 21, 2000. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Wellington's Building Codes. 
(a)  Authority. This chapter is promulgated pursuant to Chapter 553, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  Codes adopted by reference. The building official shall enforce the following, which are adopted by reference and as may be amended by this article. 
(1)  The group of codes known as the Florida Building Code 6 th Edition (2017). 
a.  Building. 
b.  Accessibility. 
c.  Residential. 
d.  Existing buildings. 
e.  Plumbing. 
f.  Fuel Gas. 
g.  Mechanical. 
h.  Energy Conservation. 
(2)  2014 National Electrical Code. 
(3)  Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(4)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition as published by the International Code Council, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 00-09, § 1, 3-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2005-17, § 1, 11-3-05; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 1-23-18) 
State Law reference— Building code inspection fees, F.S. § 16.222; State Plumbing Code, F.S. § 553.06; adoption of electrical standards, F.S. § 553.19; state minimum building codes, F.S. § 553.73; minimum fire safety standards, F.S. § 633.025.  
Sec. 18-32. - Wellington Building Code Administrative Code. 
The purpose of the Wellington Building Code Administrative Code is to provide for a means of properly enforcing the codes adopted by reference in section 18-31. 
CHAPTER 1 
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101
GENERAL 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Florida Building Code hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures as herein amended by the Village of Wellington. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached one and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plan in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height, shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential. 
2.  Code Requirements that address snow loads and earthquake protection are pervasive; they are left in place but shall not be utilized or enforced because Florida has no snow load or earthquake threat. 
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
101.2.2 Florida Building Code, Residential. Construction standards or practices which are not covered by the Florida Building Code, Residential Volume, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters, code officials, and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
101.3.1 Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
101.3.2 Warranty and Liability. The permitting plan review or inspection of any building, system, or plan by Wellington, under the requirements of this code, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system, or plan, or their adequacy. Wellington shall not be liable in tort for damages or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system, or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. Further, no building department employee shall be liable in tort for damage from such conditions, in accordance with F.S. § 768.28, as may be amended or replaced. 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.11 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. 
101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas Volume shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas applicants and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical Volume shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. 
101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing Volume shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. 
101.4.4 Property maintenance. The provisions contained within the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council shall establish the minimum standards for maintenance of; interior and exterior structure, required light and ventilation, required space and maximum number of occupants, minimum plumbing requirements, minimum heating requirements, minimum electrical system requirements, and other requirements applicable to all structures currently in existence within the Village of Wellington. 
101.4.5 Fire prevention. For provisions related to fire prevention, refer to the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The Florida Fire Prevention Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
101.4.7 Accessibility. For provisions related to accessibility, refer to the Florida Building Code, Accessibility. 
101.4.8 Manufactured buildings. For additional administrative and special code requirements, see section 458, Florida Building Code, Building, and Rule 61-41 Florida Administrative Code. 
101.4.9 Electrical. The provisions of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building Volume and Part VIII - Electrical, of the Florida Building Code Residential Volume, 6th Edition (2017) shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, applicants, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
101.4.10 Existing buildings. The provisions of the Florida Existing Building Code shall apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings. 
101.4.11 Article III, - Flood Damage Prevention of Wellington Code of Ordinances shall be considered part of the requirements of this code relative to flood control. Conflicting requirements between the Florida Building Code and Article III of Wellington Code of Ordinances shall be resolved in favor of the requirement that offers the greatest degree of flood damage prevention or alternatives that would provide an equivalent degree of flood damage prevention and an equivalent method of construction. 
SECTION 102
APPLICABILITY 
102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
102.1.1 The Florida Building Code does not apply to, and no code enforcement action shall be brought with respect to, zoning requirements, land use requirements and owner specifications or programmatic requirements which do not pertain to and govern the design, construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or demolition of public or private buildings, structures or facilities or to programmatic requirements that do not pertain to enforcement of the Florida Building Code. Additionally, a local code enforcement agency may not administer or enforce the Florida Building Code, Building Volume to prevent the siting of any publicly owned facility, including, but not limited to, correctional facilities, juvenile justice facilities, or state universities, community colleges, or public education facilities, as provided by law. 
102.2 Building. The provisions of the Florida Building Code shall apply to the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every public and private building, structure or facility or floating residential structure, or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings, structures or facilities. Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy group in all buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions provided in the Florida Building Code, Existing Building. The following buildings, structures and facilities, except for those located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, are exempt from the Florida Building Code as provided by law, and any further exemptions shall be as determined by the legislature and provided by law: 
(a)  Building and structures specifically regulated and preempted by the federal government. 
(b)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(c)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms. 
(d)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(e)  (Reserved) 
(f)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02 which are directly involved in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity. 
(g)  Temporary sets assemblies or structures used in commercial motion picture or television production, or any sound-recording equipment used in such production, on or off the premises. 
(h)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing or other non-wood features. 
(i)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet (23 m2) in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(j)  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(k)  A building or structure having less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) which is constructed and owned by a natural person for hunting and which is repaired or reconstructed to the same dimension and condition as existed on January 1, 2011, if the building or structure: 
1.  Is not rented or leased or used as a principal residence; 
2.  Is not located within the 100-year floodplain according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency's current Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
3.  Is not connected to an off-site electric power or water supply. 
(l)  Service provider water, sewer, storm, gas, cable, telephone, or other similar utility systems are exempt to the point of service connection for the building or structure. Additional telecommunication exemptions may be found in Section 489.503(14), Florida Statutes. 
However, these structures may be subject to local zoning and/or land development regulations. 
102.2.1 In addition to the requirements of F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80, Florida Statutes, facilities subject to the provisions of Chapter 395, Florida Statutes, and Part II of Chapter 400, Florida Statutes, shall have facility plans reviewed and construction surveyed by the state agency authorized to do so under the requirements of Chapter 395, Florida Statutes, and Part II of Chapter 400, Florida Statutes, and the certification requirements of the federal government. 
102.2.2 Residential buildings or structures moved into or within municipality shall not be required to be brought into compliance with the state minimum building code in force at the time the building or structure is moved, provided: 
1.  The building or structure is structurally sound and in occupiable condition for its intended use; 
2.  The occupancy use classification for the building or structure is not changed as a result of the move; 
3.  The building is not substantially remodeled; 
4.  Current fire code requirements for ingress and egress are met; 
5.  Electrical, gas and plumbing systems meet the codes in force at the time of original construction and are operational and safe for reconnection; and 
6.  Foundation plans are sealed by a professional engineer or architect licensed to practice in this state, if required by the Florida Building Code, Building for all buildings or structures of the same residential occupancy class. 
7.  The requirements of Florida Building Code, Existing Building Volume, are also satisfied. 
102.2.3 The building official shall apply the same standard to a moved residential building or structure as that applied to the remodeling of any comparable residential building or structure to determine whether the moved structure is substantially remodeled. The cost of the foundation on which the moved building or structure is placed shall not be included in the cost of remodeling for purposes of determining whether a moved building or structure has been substantially remodeled. 
102.2.4 This section does not apply to the jurisdiction and authority of the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services to inspect amusement rides or the Department of Financial Services to inspect state-owned buildings and boilers. 
102.2.5 Each enforcement district shall be governed by a board, the composition of which shall be determined by the affected localities. 
1.  At its own option, each enforcement district or local enforcement agency may adopt rules granting to the owner of a single-family residence one or more exemptions from the Florida Building Code relating to: 
(a)  Addition, alteration, or repairs performed by the property owner upon his or her own property, provided any addition or alteration shall not exceed 1,000 square feet (93 m2) or the square footage of the primary structure, whichever is less. 
(b)  Addition, alteration, or repairs by a non-owner within a specific cost limitation set by rule, provided the total cost shall not exceed $5,000 within any 12-month period. 
(c)  Building and inspection fees. 
2.  However, the exemptions under subparagraph 1 do not apply to single-family residences that are located in mapped flood hazard areas, as defined in the code, unless the enforcement district or local enforcement agency has determined that the work, which is otherwise exempt, does not constitute a substantial improvement, including the repair of substantial damage, of such single-family residences. 
3.  Each code exemption, as defined in sub-subparagraphs 1a, 1b, and 1c shall be certified to the local board 10 days prior to implementation and shall only be effective in the territorial jurisdiction of the enforcement district or local enforcement agency implementing it. 
4.  Each enforcement district or local enforcement agency may establish an alternative permitting program for replacing nonstructural components of building systems in a residential dwelling unit. A licensed contractor performing such work for the resident shall also be exempt from individual permits and inspections if either the owner or the licensed contractor obtains a valid Annual Permit per Section 105.1.1 of this code and all such work is reported as required in Section 105.1.2 of this code for compliance evaluation. No added capacity, system expansion or new building work of any type shall be excluded from individual permit and inspection by this provision. 
102.2.6 This section does not apply to traditional swings and other standard playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling, as determined by the building official. Exempt structures covered under this section may still be subject to zoning permits. 
Exception: Electrical service to such playground equipment shall be in accordance with Chapter 27 of this code or Part VIII, Electrical, of the Florida Building Code Residential Volume, 6th Edition (2017), as applicable. 
102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. 
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference as further regulated in Section 102.4.1 and 102.4.2. of this code. 
102.4.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.4.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code or the Florida Codes listed in Section 101.4, the provisions of this code or the Florida Codes listed in Section 101.4, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions of this code 
102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this section, or the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or 2018 Property Maintenance Code as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
102.6.1 Buildings not previously occupied. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose in accordance with the laws in existence at the time of its completion shall comply with the provisions of the Florida Building Code or Florida Residential Code, as applicable for new construction or with any current permit for such occupancy. 
102.6.2 Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the Florida Building Code, Existing Building Volume; Florida Fire Prevention Code; the Palm Beach County Property Maintenance Code; the codes referenced in Section 101.4 of this code; or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
102.7 Relocation of manufactured buildings. 
1.  Relocation of an existing manufactured building does not constitute an alteration. 
2.  A relocated building shall comply with wind speed requirements of the new location, using the appropriate wind speed map. If the existing building was manufactured in compliance with the Standard Building Code (prior to March 1, 2002), the wind speed map of the Standard Building Code shall be applicable. If the existing building was manufactured in compliance with the Florida Building Code (after March 1, 2002), the wind speed map of the Florida Building Code shall be applicable. 
3.  A relocated building shall comply with the flood hazard area requirements of the new location, if applicable. 
102.8 Existing mechanical equipment. An agency or local government may not require that existing mechanical equipment located on or above the surface of a roof be installed in compliance with the requirements of the Florida Building Code except during reroofing when the equipment is being replaced or moved during reroofing and is not in compliance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code relating to roof-mounted mechanical units. 
PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
SECTION 103
BUILDING DEPARTMENT 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Department is hereby created and the official in charge shall be known as the building official. All code officials employed by the department shall be certified in accordance with Chapter 468, Part XII, Florida Statutes. 
103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the appointing authority of the jurisdiction. 
103.3 Deputies In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. 
103.4 Restrictions on employees. An employee connected with the department, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he/she is the owner of such. This employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his/her duties or conflict with the interests of the department, or which violates Florida Statutes Section 112.313(7)(a). 
SECTION 104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 
104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings, structures, and service systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code. 
104.2.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, alteration, addition or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in flood hazard areas, the building official shall determine if the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage. Where the building official determines that the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, and where required by this code, the building official shall require the building to meet the requirements of Section 1612 or R322 of this code, and Article III, - Flood Damage Prevention of Wellington Code of Ordinances. 
104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
104.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
104.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification, as issued by the jurisdiction, when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. 
104.6 Right of entry. 
104.6.1 Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises a condition which is contrary to or or in violation of this code which makes such structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform any duty imposed by this code, provided that If such structure or premises are occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure, or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the structure, or premises, and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
104.6.2 When the building official obtains a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of the structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. 
104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records per F.S. 119. 
104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties, required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be civilly or criminally rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer, employee or board member because of an act performed by that officer or employee or board member in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. 
104.8.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against an officer or employee or board member because of an act performed by that officer or employee or board member in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. 
104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used, materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department. 
104.10.1 (Reserved FBC) Flood hazard areas. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provision required in flood hazard areas as established by Section 1612.3 unless a determination has been made that: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the site render the elevation standards of Section 1612 inappropriate. 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable. 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
4.  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the flood hazard. 
5.  Submission to the applicant of written notice specifying the difference between the design flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built, stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation, and stating that construction below the design flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, level of sanitation, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternative. Where the alternative material, design or method of construction is not approved, the building official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was not approved. 
104.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
104.12 Requirements not covered by this code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
SECTION 105
PERMITS 
105.1 Required. Any contractor, owner, or agent authorized in accordance with Florida Statute 489 who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building tenancy or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any impact-resistant coverings, electrical, gas, mechanical, fire protection or plumbing system, or accessible or flood resistant site element, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or Article III, - Flood Damage Prevention of Wellington Code of Ordinances to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
105.1.1 Annual facility permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an existing electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or interior nonstructural office system(s), the building official is authorized to issue an annual permit for any occupancy to facilitate routine or emergency service, repair, refurbishing, minor renovations of service systems or manufacturing equipment installations/relocations. The building official shall be notified of major changes and shall retain the right to make inspections at the facility sites as deemed necessary. An annual facility permit shall be assessed with an annual fee and shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. A separate permit shall be obtained for each facility and for each construction trade, as applicable. The permit application shall contain a general description of the parameters of work intended to be performed during the year. 
105.1.2 Annual facility permit records. The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The building official shall have access to such records at all times or such records shall be filed with the building official as designated. The building official is authorized to revoke such permit and deny future permits, if code violations are found to exist. 
105.1.3 Food permit. In accordance with F.S. § 500.12 a food permit from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services is required of any person who operates a food establishment or retail store. 
105.1.4 Public swimming pool. The local enforcing agency may not issue a building permit to construct, develop, or modify a public swimming pool without proof of application, whether complete or incomplete, for an operating permit pursuant to Section 514.031, Florida Statutes. A certificate of completion or occupancy may not be issued until such operating permit is issued. The local enforcing agency shall conduct their review of the building permit application upon filing and in accordance with Chapter 553, Florida Statutes. The local enforcing agency may confer with the Department of Health, if necessary, but may not delay the building permit application review while awaiting comment from the Department of Health. 
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction, to include work in any special flood hazard area. Exemptions granted under this section do not relieve the owner or contractor from their duty to comply with applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code and requirements of Article III, - Flood Damage Prevention of Wellington Code of Ordinances. As determined by the building official, permits shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
1.  Cabinets and countertops with no reconfiguration for 1 & 2 Family Dwellings, papering, tiling, carpeting, and similar finish work, with no electrical or plumbing work. 
2.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater sets and scenery. 
3.  Traditional swings and other standard playground equipment accessory to detached one-and two-family dwellings, as determined by the building official, but they may be subject to Zoning permits. 
4.  Retractable awnings supported by an exterior wall and do not require additional support or electric in Groups R-3 and U occupancies, but they may be subject to Zoning permits. 
5.  Non fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, and counters not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
8.  The installation, replacement, removal or metering of any electrical load management control device where installed by a utility service provider. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
3.  The replacement of common household plumbing fixtures to existing supply lines and outlets in 1 & 2 Family Dwellings. This does not include water heaters bathtubs, and showers. 
Electrical: 
1.  Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles, or repair and replacement of like for like common household electrical fixtures, switches, and outlets on the load side of the electrical source. 
2.  Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas, except as exempted by Florida Statute Chapter 489.503(14). 
3.  Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
4.  As used in this section, the term: 
(a)  "Contractor" means a person who is qualified to engage in the business of electrical or alarm system contracting pursuant to a certificate or registration issued by the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation under part II of Chapter 489, Florida Statutes or by the Palm Beach County Construction Industry Licensing Board under Chapter 67-1876, Laws of Florida. 
(b)  "Low-voltage alarm system project" related to the installation, maintenance, inspection, replacement, or service of a new or existing alarm system, as defined in Section 489.505, Florida Statutes, operating at low voltage, as defined in the National Electrical Code Standard 70, and ancillary components or equipment attached to such a system, including, but not limited to, home-automation equipment, thermostats, and video cameras. This section does not apply to the installation or replacement of a fire alarm if plan review is required. 
(c)  "Low-voltage electric fence" means an alarm system, as defined in § 489.505, that consists of a fence structure and an energizer powered by a commercial storage battery not exceeding 12 volts which produces an electric charge upon contact with the fence structure. 
A low-voltage electric fence must meet all of the following requirements to be exempt as a low-voltage alarm system project: 
 • The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact must not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 and depicted in Figure 102 of International Electrotechnical Commission Standard No. 60335-2-76, Current Edition. 
 • A nonelectric fence or wall must completely enclose the low-voltage electric fence. The low-voltage electric fence may be up to 2 feet higher than the perimeter nonelectric fence or wall. 
 • The low-voltage electric fence must be identified using warning signs attached to the fence at intervals of not more than 60 feet. 
 • The low-voltage electric fence shall not be installed in an area zoned exclusively for single-family or multi-family residential use. 
 • The low-voltage electric fence shall not enclose the portions of a property which are used for residential purposes. 
(d)  "Wireless alarm system" means a burglar alarm system or smoke detector that is not hardwired. 
(e)  This section does not apply to the installation or replacement of a fire alarm, or access control system affecting required means of egress as required by Florida Building Code Chapter 10, if a plan review is required. 
105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. Prior notification shall be given to the building official including the work address, nature of emergency and scope of work immediately in person or via email or voice mail. 
105.2.2 Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the prior approval of the building official without a permit, provided the repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; ordinary minor repairs shall not include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring systems or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety, and such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose. 
Permit application forms shall be in the format prescribed by a local administrative board, if applicable, and must comply with the requirements of F.S. § 713.135(5) and (6). 
Each application shall be inscribed with the date of application, and the code in effect as of that date. For a building permit for which an application is submitted prior to the effective date of the Florida Building Code, the state minimum building code in effect in the permitting jurisdiction on the date of the application governs the permitted work for the life of the permit and any extension granted to the permit. 
Effective October 1, 2017, a local enforcement agency shall post each type of building permit application on its website. Completed applications must be able to be submitted electronically to the appropriate building department. Accepted methods of electronic submission include, but are not limited to, e-mail submission of applications in portable document format or submission of applications through an electronic fill-in form available on the building department's website or through a third-party submission management software. Payments, attachments, or drawings required as part of the permit application may be submitted in person in a non-electronic format, at the discretion of the building official. 
105.3.1 Action on application. Except for applications filed without the prerequisite fees, the building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. When authorized through contractual agreement with a school board, in acting on applications for permits, the building official shall give first priority to any applications for the construction of, or addition or renovation to, any school or educational facility. 
105.3.1.1 If a state university, Florida college or public school district elects to use a local government's code enforcement offices, fees charged by counties and municipalities for enforcement of the Florida Building Code on buildings, structures, and facilities of state universities, state colleges and public school districts shall not be more than the actual labor and administrative costs incurred for plans review and inspections to ensure compliance with the code. 
105.3.1.2 No permit may be issued for any building construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or addition unless the applicant for such permit provides to the enforcing agency which issues the permit any of the following documents which apply to the construction for which the permit is to be issued and which shall be prepared by or under the direction of an engineer registered under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes: 
1.  Plumbing documents for any new building or addition which requires a plumbing system with more than 250 fixture units or which costs more than $125,000. 
2.  Fire sprinkler documents for any new building or addition which includes a fire sprinkler system which contains 50 or more sprinkler heads. Personnel as authorized by chapter 633 Florida Statutes, may design a fire sprinkler system of 49 or fewer heads and may design the alteration of an existing fire sprinkler system if the alteration consists of the relocation, addition or deletion of not more than 49 heads, notwithstanding the size of the existing fire sprinkler system. 
3.  Heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning documents for any new building or addition which requires more than a 15-ton-per-system capacity which is designed to accommodate 100 or more persons or for which the system costs more than $125,000. This paragraph does not include any document for the replacement or repair of an existing system in which the work does not require altering a structural part of the building or for work on a residential one, two, three or four-family structure. An air-conditioning system may be designed by an installing air-conditioning contractor certified under Chapter 489, Florida Statutes, to serve any building or addition which is designed to accommodate fewer than 100 persons and requires an air-conditioning system with a value of $125,000 or less; and when a 15-ton-per system or less is designed for a singular space of a building and each 15-ton system or less has an independent duct system. Systems not complying with the above require design documents that are to be sealed by a professional engineer. 
Example 1: When a space has two 10-ton systems with each having an independent duct system, the contractor may design these two systems since each unit (system) is less than 15 tons. 
Example 2: Consider a small single-story office building which consists of six individual offices where each office has a single three-ton package air conditioning heat pump. The six heat pumps are connected to a single water cooling tower. The cost of the entire heating, ventilation and air-conditioning work is $47,000 and the office building accommodates fewer than 100 persons. Because the six mechanical units are connected to a common water tower this is considered to be an 18-ton system. 
NOTE: It was further clarified by the Commission that the limiting criteria of 100 persons and $125,000 apply to the building occupancy load and the cost for the total air-conditioning system of the building. 
4.  Any specialized mechanical, electrical, or plumbing document for any new building or addition which includes a medical gas, oxygen, steam, vacuum, toxic air filtration, halon, or fire detection and alarm system which costs more than $5,000. 
5.  Electrical documents. See Florida Statutes, Section 471.003(2)(h). Any electrical or plumbing or air-conditioning and refrigeration system meeting the following thresholds are required to be designed by a Florida Registered Engineer. The system, requires an electrical system with a value of over $125,000; and Requires an aggregate service capacity of over 600 amperes (240 volts) on a residential electrical system or over 800 amperes (240 volts) on a commercial or industrial electrical system; 
NOTE: It was further clarified by the Florida Building Commission that systems exceeding the limiting factor of 240 volts are required to be designed by an Engineer. 
Documents requiring an engineer seal by this part shall not be valid unless a professional engineer who possesses a valid certificate of registration has signed, dated, and stamped such document as provided in Section 471.025, Florida Statutes. 
6.  All public swimming pools and public bathing places defined by and regulated under Chapter 514, Florida Statutes. 
105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned and becoming null and void after six months of no activity, abandonment or failure to respond to requested corrections occurs during the application process after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing prior to the abandonment date, with justifiable cause demonstrated. Abandoned applications shall be subject to destruction in accordance with state law. The fee for extension of a permit application shall be set forth by the administrative authority. There may be fees or requirements from other government agencies for permit application extensions. 
105.3.3 An enforcing authority may not issue a building permit for any building construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or addition unless the permit either includes on its face or there is attached to the permit the following statement: "NOTICE: In addition to the requirements of this permit, there may be additional restrictions applicable to this property that may be found in the public records of this county such as the requirement for Home or Property Owners Association approval and there may be additional permits required from other governmental entities such as water management districts, state agencies or federal agencies." 
105.3.4 A building permit for a single-family residential dwelling must be issued within 30 working days of application therefore unless unusual circumstances require a longer time for processing the application or unless the permit application fails to satisfy the Florida Building Code or the enforcing agency's laws or ordinances. 
105.3.5 Identification of minimum premium policy. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 440, Florida Statutes, Workers' compensation, every employer shall, as a condition to receiving a building permit, show proof that it has secured compensation for its employees as provided in F.S. § 440.10 and 440.38. 
105.3.6 Asbestos removal contractor exemption. Refer to Section 105.9 for additional requirements. A licensed asbestos removal contractor is not required when moving, removal or disposal of asbestos-containing materials on a residential building where the owner occupies the building, the building is not for sale or lease, and the work is performed according to the owner-builder limitations provided in this paragraph and Florida Statutes Chapter 489.103(7). To qualify for exemption under this paragraph, an owner must personally appear and sign the building permit application. The permitting agency shall provide the person with a disclosure statement in substantially the following form: 
Disclosure Statement: State law requires asbestos abatement to be done by licensed contractors. You have applied for a permit under an exemption to that law. The exemption allows you, as the owner of your property, to act as your own asbestos abatement contractor even though you do not have a license. You must supervise the construction yourself. You may move, remove or dispose of asbestos-containing materials on a residential building where you occupy the building and the building is not for sale or lease, or the building is a farm out building on your property. If you sell or lease such building within 1 year after the asbestos abatement is complete, the law will presume that you intended to sell or lease the property at the time the work was done, which is a violation of this exemption. You may not hire an unlicensed person as your contractor. Your work must be done according to all local, state and federal laws and regulations which apply to asbestos abatement projects. It is your responsibility to make sure that people employed by you have licenses required by state law and by county or municipal licensing ordinances. 
105.3.7 Applicable Code for Manufactured Buildings. Manufacturers should be permitted to complete all buildings designed and approved prior to the effective date of a new code edition, provided a clear signed contract is in place. The contract shall provide specific data mirroring that required by an application for permit, specifically, without limitation, date of execution, building owner or dealer, and anticipated date of completion. However, the construction activity must commence within 6 months of the contract's execution. The contract is subject to verification by the Department of Business and Professional Regulation. 
105.3.8 Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be issued by the building official for the construction, alteration, or relocation of any building where impacting any street, alley or public lane, unless the applicant has received a right-of-way permit from the authority having jurisdiction over the right of way. 
105.4 Conditions of the permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other federal, state and local laws ordinance, codes and regulations. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of any other federal, state and local laws ordinances codes and regulations shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. 
105.4.1 Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced. 
105.4.1.1 If work has commenced and the permit is revoked, becomes null and void or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit, or revalidation of the original permit, covering the proposed construction shall be obtained before proceeding with the work. 
105.4.1.2 If a new permit, or revalidation (renewal) of the original permit, is not obtained within six months from the date the initial permit became null and void, the building official is authorized to require that any work which has been commenced or completed be removed from the building site. Alternatively, a new permit may be issued on application, providing the work in place and required to complete the structure meets all applicable regulations in effect at the time the initial permit became null and void and any regulations which may have become effective between the date of expiration and the date of issuance of the new permit. 
105.4.1.3 Work shall be considered to be in active progress when the permit has received an approved inspection within six months. This provision shall not be applicable in case of civil commotion or strike or when the building work is halted due directly to judicial injunction, order or similar process, or due to action by an environmental or archeological agency having jurisdiction. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 3 months each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated, prior to expiration. 
105.4.1.4 The fee for renewal, reissuance and extension of a permit shall be set forth by the administrative authority. There may be fees or requirements from other government agencies for permit extensions and renewals. 
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become inactive or expired pursuant to Section 105.4.1 of this code, and shall be renewed pursuant to Section 105.4.1.1 of this code before the work may resume. Permits that remain inactive or expired for more than six months shall lose all rights vested in the permit pursuant to Section 105.4.1.2 of this code. In order to complete the work authorized under a permit which has lost all vested rights, the permit holder and property owner shall be responsible to either remove the work from the site or obtain a new permit to complete all work in accordance with the current code requirements and approved permitted plans. Inspections performed and accepted prior to expiration may be accepted subject to the discretion of the building official. 
105.5.1 The building official is authorized to reject new permit applications from a contractor who holds more than 2 inactive permits. 
105.5.1.1 For the purposes of this subsection, a closed permit shall mean a permit for which all requirements for completion have been satisfied or a permit that has been administratively cancelled by the building official. 
105.5.1.2 For the purposes of this subsection, an open permit shall mean a permit that has not satisfied all requirements for completion as defined in 105.5.1.1. 
105.5.1.3 Contractors who hold more than 2 expired permits and are actively working to resolve them may obtain new permits subject to the approval of the building official. 
105.5.2 The building official is authorized to administratively close, expired or inactive trade permits more than 10 years after expiration when no safety hazard exists and no code violations have been previously identified. 
105.5.3 Closing out or resolving open or expired permits shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant and the property owner. Failure to close out or resolve open permits may result in a referral of the matter to the County Construction Industry Licensing Board (CILB) or Wellington Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals (CBAA), as applicable, and Wellington Code Enforcement Department. 
105.6 Denial or Revocation of permits. Whenever a permit required under this section is denied or revoked because the plan, or the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition of a building, is found by the local enforcing agency to be not in compliance with the Florida Building Code, the local enforcing agency shall identify the specific plan or project features that do not comply with the applicable codes, identify the specific code chapters and sections upon which the finding is based, and provide this information to the permit applicant. If the local building code administrator or inspector finds that the plans are not in compliance with the Florida Building Code, the local building code administrator or inspector shall identify the specific plan features that do not comply with the applicable codes, identify the specific code chapters and sections upon which the finding is based, and provide this information to the local enforcing agency. The local enforcing agency shall provide this information to the permit applicant. 
105.6.1 Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
105.6.2 Violation of code provisions. The building official may require correction or revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project 
105.8 Notice of commencement. In accordance with F.S. § 713.135 when any person applies for a building permit, the authority issuing such permit shall print on the face of each permit card in no less than 14-point, capitalized, boldfaced type: "WARNING TO OWNER: YOUR FAILURE TO RECORD A NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT MAY RESULT IN YOUR PAYING TWICE FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO YOUR PROPERTY. A NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT MUST BE RECORDED AND POSTED ON THE JOB SITE BEFORE THE FIRST INSPECTION. IF YOU INTEND TO OBTAIN FINANCING, CONSULT WITH YOUR LENDER OR AN ATTORNEY BEFORE RECORDING YOUR NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT." 
105.9 Asbestos. The enforcing agency shall require each building permit for the demolition or renovation of an existing structure to contain an asbestos notification statement which indicates the owner's or operator's responsibility to comply with the provisions of F.S. § 469.003 and to notify the Department of Environmental Protection of his or her intentions to remove asbestos, when applicable, in accordance with state and federal law. Refer to Section 105.3.6 "Asbestos Removal Contractor Exemption" of this code for additional requirements. 
105.10 Certificate of protective treatment for prevention of termites. A weather-resistant job-site posting board shall be provided to receive duplicate treatment certificates as each required protective treatment is completed, supplying one copy for the person the permit is issued to and another copy for the building permit files. The treatment certificate shall provide the product used, identity of the applicator, time and date of the treatment, site location, area treated, chemical used, percent concentration and number of gallons used, to establish a verifiable record of protective treatment. If the soil chemical barrier method for termite prevention is used, final exterior treatment shall be completed prior to final building approval. For a bait system, see Section 1816.1.7 of the Florida Building Code for contract document requirements. 
105.11 Notice of termite protection. A permanent sign which identifies the termite treatment provider and need for re-inspection and treatment contract renewal shall be provided. The sign shall be posted near the water heater or electric panel. 
105.12 Work starting before permit issuance. Upon written request and written approval of the building official, the scope of work delineated in the building permit application and plan may be started prior to the final approval and issuance of the permit, provided any work completed is entirely at risk of the permit applicant and the work does not proceed past the first required inspection. This provision only applies to Florida Building Code, all other Agency approvals necessary for construction must be secured prior to this provision being applied. 
105.13 Phased permit approval. After submittal of the appropriate construction documents, the building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's and owner's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. Corrections may be required to meet the requirements of the technical codes. This provision only applies to the Florida Building Code, all other agency approvals necessary for construction must be secured prior to this provision being applied. 
105.14 Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity to the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity to the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. The building official shall ensure that any person conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, and that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part III of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes. Nothing aforesaid shall preclude plan review or inspections by the building official (See also Section 107.6). 
Exception: Permits issued on the basis of an affidavit shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
105.15 Opening protection. When any activity requiring a building permit that is applied for on or after July 1, 2008, and for which the estimated cost is $50,000 or more for a site built single-family detached residential structures that is located in the wind borne debris region as defined in this Code and that has an insured value of $750,000 or more, or, if the site built single-family detached residential structures is uninsured or for which documentation of insured value is not presented, has a just valuation for the structure for purposes of ad valorem taxation of $750,000 or more; opening protections as required within this Code or Florida Building Code, Residential for new construction shall be provided. 
Exception: Single family residential structures permitted subject to the Florida Building Code are not required to comply with this section. 
105.16 Inspection of existing residential building not impacted by construction. 
(a)  A local enforcing agency, and any local building code administrator, inspector, or other official or entity, may not require as a condition of issuance of a one- or two-family residential building permit the inspection of any portion of a building, structure, or real property that is not directly impacted by the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition of the building, structure, or real property for which the permit is sought. 
(b)  This subsection does not apply to a building permit sought for: 
1.  A substantial improvement as defined in Section 161.54, Florida Statutes or as defined in the Florida Building Code. 
2.  A change of occupancy as defined in the Florida Building Code. 
3.  A conversion from residential to nonresidential or mixed use pursuant to Section 553.507(2)(a), Florida Statutes or as defined in the Florida Building Code. 
4.  A historic building as defined in the Florida Building Code. 
(c)  This subsection does not prohibit a local enforcing agency, or any local building code administrator, inspector, or other official or entity, from: 
1.  Citing any violation inadvertently observed in plain view during the ordinary course of an inspection conducted in accordance with the prohibition in paragraph (a). 
2.  Inspecting a physically nonadjacent portion of a building, structure, or real property that is directly impacted by the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition of the building, structure, or real property for which the permit is sought in accordance with the prohibition in paragraph (a). 
3.  Inspecting any portion of a building, structure, or real property for which the owner o[or] other person having control of the building, structure, or real property has voluntarily consented to the inspection of that portion of the building, structure, or real property in accordance with the prohibition in paragraph (a). 
4.  Inspecting any portion of a building, structure, or real property pursuant to an inspection warrant issued in accordance with Sections 933.20 through 933.30, Florida Statutes. 
SECTION 106
FLOOR AND ROOF DESIGN LOADS 
106.1 Live loads posted. Where the live loads for which each floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building is or has been designed to exceed 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), such design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by the owner in that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices. For residential construction where roof trusses have been designed for 30 psf for light attic storage, a permanent sign shall be posted in the attic area at final building inspection. 
106.2 Issuance of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy required by Section 111 shall not be issued until the floor load signs, required by Section 106.1, have been installed. 
106.3 Restrictions on loading. It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by this code. 
SECTION 107
SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS 
107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, a statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in approved format with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the Chapter 471, Florida Statutes or Chapter 481, Florida Statutes & 61G15 Florida Administrative Code or Chapter 481, Florida Statutes & 61G1 Florida Administrative Code. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. Electronic media documents shall be submitted in the approved format when required by the building official. 
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. 
If the design professional is an architect, interior designer, or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or interior design as provided for in Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, Part I, or landscape architecture as provided for in Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, Part II, or engineering as provided for in Chapter 471, Florida Statutes, then he or she shall affix his or her official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, as required by Florida Statute. 
107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.6. 
107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and prepared as electronic media documents and submitted in the format approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. (see also Section 107.1). 
107.2.1.1 For roof assemblies required by the code, the construction documents shall illustrate, describe and delineate the type of roofing system, materials, fastening requirements, flashing requirements and wind resistance rating that are required to be installed. Product evaluation and installation shall indicate compliance with the wind criteria required for the specific site or a statement by an architect or engineer certifying suitability for the specific site must be submitted with the construction documents. 
107.2.1.2 Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal, signature and date as state law requires. 
107.2.1.3 Quality of building plans. Building plans shall be drawn to a minimum 1/8-inch scale. The building official may establish through departmental policy, standards for plans and specifications, including electronic format in order to provide conformity to its electronic permit review and record retention program. This policy may include such things as minimum and maximum sizes, shape, contrast, clarity, electronic format, or other items related to records management. Electronic media must be compatible with the archive requirements of Florida Statutes. 
107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance to this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9. 
107.2.3 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress including the exit, the exit access, and the path of the exit discharge to the public way in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. 
107.2.4 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
107.2.5 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines and between buildings, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The site plan shall include accessible parking and accessible routes as required by the FBC Accessibility when applicable. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
107.2.5.1 Design flood elevations. Where design flood elevations are not specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.3.1. 
107.2.5.2 For the purpose of inspection and record retention, site plans for a building may be maintained in the form of an electronic copy at the worksite. These plans must be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative, as required by the Florida Building Code. 
107.2.6 Structural information. The construction documents shall provide the information specified in Section 1603 of this code and include shoring details, where applicable, for new construction and alterations. Where construction includes excavation, shoring details shall demonstrate protection of the angle of repose for foundation systems of existing adjacent structures. 
107.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Building plans approved pursuant to F.S. § 553.77(5) and state-approved manufactured buildings are exempt from local codes enforcing agency plan reviews except for provisions of the code relating to erection, assembly or construction at the site. Erection, assembly (including utility crossover connections) and construction at the site are subject to local permitting and inspections. Photocopies of plans approved according to FAC 9B-1.009, F.A.C., shall be sufficient for local permit application documents of record for the modular building portion of the permitted project. 
2.  Industrial construction on sites where design, construction and fire safety are supervised by appropriately licensed design and inspection professionals and which contain adequate in-house fire departments and rescue squads is exempt, subject to approval by the building official, from review of plans and inspections, providing the appropriate licensed design and inspection professionals certify that applicable codes and standards have been met and supply appropriate approved drawings to local building and fire-safety inspectors. 
107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be noted, in writing or by stamp, as "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. 
107.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 6 months after the effective date of this code and has not been abandoned. 
107.3.3 Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. This provision only applies to the Florida Building Code; all other agency approvals necessary for construction must be secured prior to this provision being applied. 
107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner or the owner's authorized agent to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner or the owner's authorized agent shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner or the owner's authorized agent if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. Those products which are regulated by FAC Rule 61G20 shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the designer of record prior to submittal for jurisdictional approval. 
107.3.4.1 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. 
Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official. 
107.3.4.2 Certifications by contractors authorized under the provisions of F.S. § 489.115(4)(b) shall be considered equivalent to sealed plans and specifications by a person licensed under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes, or Chapter 481 Florida Statutes, by local enforcement agencies for plans review for permitting purposes relating to compliance with the wind-resistance provisions of the code or alternate methodologies approved by the Florida Building Commission for one and two-family dwellings. Local enforcement agencies may rely upon such certification by contractors that the plans and specifications submitted conform to the requirements of the code for wind resistance. Upon good cause shown, local government code enforcement agencies may accept or reject plans sealed by persons licensed under Chapters 471, 481 or 489, Florida Statutes. 
107.3.5 Minimum plan review criteria for buildings. The examination of the documents by the building official shall include the following minimum criteria and documents: a floor plan; site plan; foundation plan; floor/roof framing plan or truss layout; all fenestration penetrations; flashing; and rough opening dimensions and all exterior elevations: 
Commercial Buildings: 
107.3.5.1.1 Building: 
1.  Site requirements: 
Parking 
Fire access 
Vehicle loading 
Driving/turning radius 
Fire hydrant/water supply/post indicator valve (PIV) 
Set back/separation (assumed property lines) 
Location of specific tanks, water lines and sewer lines 
Flood hazard areas, flood zones, and design flood elevations 
2.  Occupancy group and special occupancy requirements shall be determined. 
3.  Minimum type of construction shall be determined (see Table 503). 
4.  Fire-resistant construction requirements shall include the following components: 
Fire-resistant separations 
Fire-resistant protection for type of construction 
Protection of openings and penetrations of rated walls 
Fire blocking and draftstopping and calculated fire resistance 
5.  Fire suppression systems shall include: 
Early warning smoke evacuation systems 
Schematic fire sprinklers 
Standpipes 
Pre-engineered systems 
Riser diagram 
6.  Life safety systems shall be determined and shall include the following requirements: 
Occupant load and egress capacities 
Early warning 
Smoke control 
Stair pressurization 
Systems schematic 
7.  System schematic 
Occupancy load/egress requirements shall include: 
Gross Net 
Means of egress 
Exit access 
Exit 
Exit discharge 
Stairs construction/geometry and protection 
Doors 
Emergency lighting and exit signs 
Specific occupancy requirements 
Construction requirements 
Horizontal exits/exit passageways 
8.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Soil conditions/analysis 
Termite protection 
Design loads 
Wind requirements 
Building envelope (including Section 107.2.4) 
Impact resistant coverings or systems 
Structural calculations (if required) 
Foundation 
Flood requirements in accordance with Section 1612, including lowest floor elevations, enclosures, flood damage-resistant materials 
Wall systems 
Floor systems 
Roof systems 
Threshold inspection plan 
Stair systems 
9.  Materials shall be reviewed and shall at a minimum include the following: 
Wood 
Steel 
Aluminum 
Concrete 
Plastic 
Glass 
Masonry 
Gypsum board and plaster 
Insulating (mechanical) 
Roofing 
Insulation 
Building envelope portions of the Energy Code (including calculation and mandatory requirements) 
10.  Accessibility requirements shall include the following: 
Site requirements 
Accessible route 
Vertical accessibility 
Toilet and bathing facilities 
Drinking fountains 
Equipment 
Special occupancy requirements 
Fair housing requirements 
11.  Interior requirements shall include the following: 
Interior finishes (flame spread/smoke development) 
Light and ventilation 
Sanitation 
12.  Special systems: 
Elevators 
Escalators 
Lifts 
13.  Commercial Energy Code submittal 
14.  Swimming pools: 
Barrier requirements 
Spas 
Wading pools 
15.  Location and installation details. The specific location and installation details of each fire door, fire damper, ceiling damper and smoke damper shall be shown and properly identified on the building plans by the designer. 
107.3.5.1.2 Electrical: 
1.  Electrical: 
Wiring 
Services 
Feeders and branch circuits 
Overcurrent protection 
Grounding 
Wiring methods and materials 
GFCIs 
Electrical requirements of the Energy Code 
2.  Equipment 
3.  Special occupancies 
4.  Emergency systems 
5.  Communication systems 
6.  Low voltage 
7.  Load calculations 
8.  Design flood elevation 
107.3.5.1.3 Plumbing 
1.  Minimum plumbing facilities 
2.  Fixture requirements 
3.  Water supply piping 
4.  Sanitary drainage 
5.  Water heaters 
6.  Vents 
7.  Roof drainage 
8.  Back flow prevention 
9.  Irrigation 
10.  Location of water supply line 
11.  Grease traps 
12.  Environmental requirements 
13.  Plumbing riser 
14.  Design flood elevation 
107.3.5.1.4 Mechanical 
1.  Energy Calculations 
2.  Exhaust systems: 
Clothes dryer exhaust 
Kitchen equipment exhaust 
Specialty exhaust systems 
3.  Equipment 
4.  Equipment location 
5.  Make-up air 
6.  Roof-mounted equipment 
7.  Duct systems 
8.  Ventilation 
9.  Combustion air 
10.  Chimneys, fireplaces and vents 
11.  Appliances 
12.  Boilers 
13.  Refrigeration 
14.  Bathroom ventilation 
15.  Laboratory 
16.  Design flood elevation 
107.3.5.1.5 Gas 
1.  Gas piping 
2.  Venting 
3.  Combustion air 
4.  Chimneys and vents 
5.  Appliances 
6.  Type of gas 
7.  Fireplaces 
8.  LP tank location 
9.  Riser diagram/shutoffs 
10.  Design flood elevation 
107.3.5.2 Demolition 
1.  Asbestos removal 
107.3.5.3 Residential (One and Two-Family) 
1.  Site requirements 
Set back/separation (assumed property lines) 
Location of septic tanks 
2.  Fire-resistant construction and fire protection systems (if required) 
3.  Smoke detector locations 
4.  Egress 
Egress window size and location stairs construction requirements 
5.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Wall section from foundation through roof, including assembly and materials connector tables wind requirements structural calculations (if required) 
Flood hazard areas, flood zones, design flood elevations, lowest floor elevations, enclosures, equipment, and flood damage-resistant materials 
Termite protection 
Design loads 
Wind requirements 
Building envelope 
Structural calculations (if required) 
Foundation 
Wall systems 
Floor systems 
Roof systems 
6.  Accessibility requirements: show/identify accessible bath 
7.  Impact resistant coverings or systems 
8.  Flood hazard areas, flood zones, design flood elevations, lowest floor elevations, enclosures, equipment, and flood damage-resistant materials 
9.  Electrical: 
Electric service riser with wire sizes, conduit detail and grounding detail. Complete load calculations, Panel schedules 
10.  Mechanical: 
Equipment and location, Duct systems 
11.  Plumbing: 
Plumbing riser 
12.  Gas: 
Gas piping 
Venting 
Combustion air 
Chimneys and vents 
Appliances 
Type of gas 
Fireplaces 
LP tank location 
Riser diagram/shutoffs 
13.  Energy Calculations 
14.  Swimming Pools: 
Barrier requirements 
Spas 
Wading pools 
107.3.5.4 Exemptions: Plans examination by the building official shall not be required for the following work: 
1.  Replacing existing equipment such as mechanical units, water heaters, etc. (as determined by the building official) 
2.  Minor electrical, plumbing, and mechanical repairs 
3.  Annual maintenance permits 
4.  Prototype plans: except for local site adaption, siding, foundations and/or modifications. Except for structures that require waiver. 
5.  Manufactured buildings plan except for foundations and modifications of buildings on site and as listed below in manufactured buildings/housing. 
Manufactured buildings/housing - 
1.  Site requirements 
Setback/separation (assumed property lines) 
Location of septic tanks (if applicable) 
2.  Structural 
Wind zone 
Anchoring 
Blocking 
3.  Plumbing 
List potable water source and meter size (if applicable) 
4.  Mechanical 
Exhaust systems 
Clothes dryer exhaust 
Kitchen equipment exhaust 
5.  Electrical exterior disconnect location 
107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for review as an amended set of construction documents. 
107.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official as required by state or local laws. 
107.6 Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. The building official shall ensure that any person conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, and that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes. Nothing aforesaid shall preclude plan review or inspections by the building official (See also Section 105.14). 
107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit in special flood hazard areas. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Parts 59 and 60), the authority granted to the Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Sections 105.14 and 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
SECTION 108
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES 
108.1 General. The building official is authorized to require a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than six months. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause. 
108.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall comply with the requirements in Section 3103. 
108.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70. (National Electrical Code [NEC]) 
108.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure to be removed or use to be discontinued. 
SECTION 109
FEES 
109.1 Payment of Fees. An application shall not be valid and shall not be reviewed until the applicable fees prescribed by law have been paid. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. For permitting purposes, permit valuations shall include total replacement value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as structural, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, interior finish, related site work, architectural and design fees, marketing costs, overhead, and profit, excluding only land value. Valuation references may include the latest published data of national construction cost analysis services, such as Marshall-Swift, Means, etc., or as published by the International Code Council. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed quantity estimates, or bona fide signed contracts, acceptable to the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits or without prior approval from the building official as permitted in Section 105.2.2 or 105.12 shall be subject to a penalty fee in addition to the required permit fees, as set in the approved schedule of fees or as provided by local ordinance. This provision shall not apply to emergency work when delay would clearly have placed life or property in imminent danger. But in all such cases, the required permit(s) must be applied for within three (3) business days and any unreasonable delay in obtaining those permit(s) shall result in the charge of a penalty fee. The payment of a penalty fee shall not preclude or be deemed a substitute for prosecution for commencing work without first obtaining a permit. The building official may grant extensions of time or adjust penalties when justification cause has been demonstrated in writing. 
109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law 
109.6 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
SECTION 110
INSPECTIONS 
110.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the owner or the owner's authorized agent to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. The building official shall be permitted to require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor whenever the boundary lines cannot be readily determined in the field. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
110.1.1 Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he/she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
110.1.2 Other inspections services. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by Section 110 of this code. He/she may accept reports of department inspectors, independent inspectors or recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate required by any provision of this codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are certified by the building code inspector or the architect or engineer performing building code inspections in a manner specified by the building official. The building official shall ensure that all persons making such inspections shall be certified in accordance to Chapter 468 Florida Statues. 
The building official may require the owner to employ an inspection service in the following instances: 
1.  For buildings or additions of Type I construction 
2.  For all major structural alterations 
3.  Where the concrete design is based on compressive strength in excess of 3000 pounds per square inch 
4.  For pile driving 
5.  For buildings with area greater than 20,000 square foot 
6.  For buildings more than 2 stories in height; or 
7.  For buildings and structures of unusual design or methods of construction 
Such inspectors shall be present when work is underway on the structural elements of the building to adequately attest to its compliance. Such inspectors shall be a registered architect, or engineer. An employee of the architect or engineer licensed under Chapter 468, Part XII, Florida Statutes may perform the inspections, under the direction of and with final certification from the architect or engineer. Such inspectors shall submit weekly progress reports including the daily inspections to the building official, and including a code compliance opinion of the Resident Inspector. 
At the completion of the construction work or project, the architect or engineer shall submit a certificate of compliance to the building official, stating that the work was done in compliance with this code and in accordance with the permitted drawing. Final inspection shall be made by the building official before a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion is issued; and confirmation inspections may be made at any time to monitor activities and resident inspectors. 
110.1.3 Affidavit for inspection. With specific prior approval of, and in a format acceptable to the building official, an affidavit for certification of inspection may be accepted from the permit qualifier; when accompanied by extensive photographic evidence of sufficient detail to demonstrate code compliance. The photographic evidence shall be comprehensive in the display of the installation and/or construction and job location identifiers. The affidavit and accompanying photographs shall be provided to the inspector onsite, at the next scheduled inspection. If the photographs are found to be insufficient by the building official to demonstrate compliance with this code and/or the permitted document, or clearly display location identifiers, or are missing, the inspector shall require the contractor to obtain the services of a Registered Florida Professional Engineer to inspect and certify the installation and/or construction. 
110.1.3.1 Exception: Affidavits may not be accepted for inspection of elements of construction which require inspection by the local jurisdiction under the requirements of Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 59 and 60, and the local flood damage prevention ordinance. 
110.2 Preliminary inspection. Subject to the limitations of F.S. Chapter 553, before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
110.2.1 Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He/she may inspect the buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, before, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He/she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all observed violations of the technical codes. Additional regulations in Florida Building Code, Existing Building Volume, may apply. 
110.3 Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent, shall make the following inspections, and such other inspections as deemed necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes. The building official shall determine the timing and sequencing of when inspections occur and what elements are inspected at each inspection. A complete survey, or special purpose survey may be required before an inspection is approved. 
A.  Building: 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated, any required reinforcing steel is in place, forms erected and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
• Stem-wall 
• Monolithic slab-on-grade 
• Piling/pile caps 
• Footers/grade beams 
1.1.  Slab/Floor Inspection: Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel or framing members installed and all building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
A foundation/Form board survey prepared and certified by a registered surveyor may be required, prior to approval of the slab inspection. The survey shall certify placement of the building on the site, illustrate all surrounding setback dimensions and shall be available at the job site for review by the building inspector. In lieu of providing a survey, the contractor may elect to uncover all property line markers and string-up all property lines in preparation for inspection. 
1.2.  In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification as required in Section 1612.5, shall be submitted to the building official. 
2.  Shell Inspections: 
2.1.  Lintel/tie beams/columns/masonry units. To be made after masonry units, forms, reinforcing steel, shoring, conduit, piping accessories, and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed. 
2.2.  Sheathing inspection. To be made either as part of a dry-in inspection or done separately at the request of the contractor after all roof and wall sheathing and fasteners are complete and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
• Roof sheathing 
• Wall sheathing 
• Floor sheathing 
• Continuous air barrier 
• Sheathing fasteners 
• Roof/wall dry-in 
• Gypsum board, as required 
• Sheathing/cladding inspection 
NOTE: Sheathing fasteners installed and found to be missing the structural member (shiners) shall be corrected prior to installation of the dry-in material. 
2.3.  Roofing inspection. Shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
• Dry-in 
• Insulation 
• Roof coverings (including in-progress) 
• Flashing 
2.3.1.  Re-Roof Sheathing Inspection is required prior to application of the roof covering. An affidavit by Engineer or Architect issued in strict compliance with section 110.1.3 may be accepted at the discretion of the building official. 
2.4.  Framing inspection. To be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete and are approved, and shall at a minimum include the following building components: 
• Window/door framing and installation. Verify rough opening dimensions are within tolerances, buck and attachments 
• Window U-factor/SHGC as indicated on approved calculations 
• Window/door buck attachment 
• Vertical cells/columns complete, if applicable 
• Lintel/tie beams complete, if applicable 
• Framing/trusses/bracing/connectors (including truss layout and engineered drawings) 
• Draft stopping/fire blocking 
• Curtain wall framing 
• Fire resistant assemblies joints and penetrations, as required 
• Lath, as required 
• Accessibility 
2.5.  Insulation Inspection: To be made after the framing inspection is approved and the insulation is in place, according to approved energy calculation submittal. Includes wall and ceiling insulation, thermal and ignition barriers. 
Lath/Drywall, as required Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly in a single-family dwelling, unless otherwise determined by the building official. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed, all sub-trade inspections have passed and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
3.1.  In flood hazard areas, as part of the final inspection, a final certification of the lowest floor elevation shall be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction. 
Swimming pool inspection. 
• First inspection to be made after excavation and installation of reinforcing steel, bonding and main drain and prior to placing of concrete. 
• Perimeter piping inspection/pressure test to be made prior to backfill and preparation of the pool deck (if any). 
• Light niche/wet niche inspection. To inspect the bonding of underwater light fixtures prior to filling the pool with water. 
• Pool deck inspection to be made prior to placing concrete in the pool deck with all required bonding connections completed. 
• Final inspection to be made when the swimming pool is complete and all required enclosure requirements are in place. 
• In order to pass final inspection and receive a certificate of completion, a residential swimming pool must meet the requirements relating to pool safety features as described in Section 424.2.17 of this code. 
• Final electric inspection to be made prior to filling the swimming pool with water. 
• Final permanent barrier inspection to be made prior to filling the swimming pool with water. 
Demolition inspections. 
• First inspection (pre-demolition) to be made after all utility connections have been disconnected and secured in such manner that no unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall exist during or after demolition operations. 
• Final inspection to be made after all demolition work is completed. 
Manufactured building inspections. The building department shall inspect construction of foundations; connecting buildings to foundations; installation of parts identified on plans as site installed items, joining the modules, including utility crossovers; utility connections from the building to utility lines on site; and any other work done on site which requires compliance with the Florida Building Code. (See also Section 107.3.5 Manufactured/Modular Buildings) Additional inspections may be required for public educational facilities (see Section 423.27.20). 
Impact-resistant coverings. Where impact resistant coverings or impact resistant systems are installed the building official shall perform inspections at the request of the applicant, on all impact-resistant coverings or impact resistant systems to determine the following: 
• The system indicated on the plans was installed. 
• The system is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and the product approval. 
B.  Electrical: 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable is installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the building is dried-in, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Low Voltage. To be made for security, alarm, elevator, and special uses prior to being covered from view. 
4.  Power release inspection. To be made after building electrical system is substantially complete, or completed in phases, with all circuitry installed and electrical fixtures and devices in place, or properly tagged and safed-off. 
5.  Final inspection. To be made after the building electrical system is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected, tested and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
6.  Existing Swimming Pools. To be made after all repairs or alterations are complete, all required electrical equipment, GFCI protection, and equipotential bonding are in place on said alterations or repairs. 
C.  Plumbing: 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping is installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, vent, water, and other piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building plumbing system is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Section 312 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing for required tests. 
D.  Mechanical: 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping is installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the building is dried-in, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building mechanical system is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
E.  Gas: 
1.  Underground piping and tanks. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground gas piping is installed, and before backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
3.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
4.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
F.  Site Debris 
1.  The contractor and/or owner of any active or inactive construction project shall be responsible for the clean-up and removal of all construction debris or any other miscellaneous discarded articles during the course of the construction project and prior to receiving final inspection approval. Construction job sites must be kept clean and in a safe condition at all times. (See also Section 110.9) 
2.  All debris shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent it from being spread by any means. 
110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. (See also Section 110.3 Building) 
110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Reserved. (See Section 110.3 Building 1.1). 
110.3.3 Lowest Floor elevation. (Reserved). (See Section 110.3 Building 1.2). 
110.3.4 Frame Inspection. (Reserved). (See Section 110.3 Shell 2.4). 
110.3.5 Lath and Gypsum Board Inspection. (Reserved). (See Section 110.3 Shell 2.6). 
110.3.6 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved by the building official. 
110.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with FBC, Energy Conservation and confirm with the approved energy code submittal (by appropriate trade) and corresponding mandatory requirements and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: corresponding envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value and Solar Heat Gain Coefficient, duct system R-value, and HVAC lighting, electrical and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
110.3.8 Other Inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in Sections 110.3 through 110.3.7, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the Building Division. 
110.3.9 Special Inspections. (Reserved). 
110.3.10 Final Inspections prior to issuance of Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected, at various intervals, all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. In performing inspections, the building official shall give first priority to inspections of the construction, addition, or renovation to, any facilities owned or controlled by a state university, state community college or public school district. 
110.3.10.1 Flood hazard documentation. For properties located in a flood hazard area, all required documentation shall be submitted to the building official at the time of the final inspection. 
110.3.10.2 Energy Code documentation. As required by Section C408.2.4.1 of the Energy Conservation Volume, confirmation that the preliminary commissioning report has been received by building owner shall be provided at the time of final mechanical inspection. 
110.3.11 Termites. Building components and building surroundings required to be protected from termite damage in accordance with Section 1503.7 of this code, Section 2304.13 of this code or Section 2304.11.6 of this code, specifically required to be inspected for termites in accordance with Section 2114 of this code, or required to have chemical soil treatment in accordance with Section 1816 of this code shall not be covered or concealed until the release from the building official has been received. (Also refer to Sections 105.10 and 105.11 of this code) 
110.3.12 Impact Resistant coverings or systems. Where impact resistant coverings or systems are installed to meet requirements of this code, the building official shall schedule adequate inspections of impact resistant coverings or systems to determine the following: 
1.  The system indicated on the plans was installed. 
2.  The system is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and the product approval. 
110.3.13 Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. Certification that field welding and structural bolted connections meet design requirements shall be submitted to the building official, upon request. 
110.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code. 
110.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
110.7 Shoring. For threshold buildings, shoring and associated formwork or falsework shall be designed and inspected by a Florida licensed professional engineer, prior to any required mandatory inspections by the threshold building inspector. 
110.7.1 Other shoring. The Building Official may require engineered shoring drawings and procedures for reshoring for temporary support of vertical and horizontal loads and stabilization of foundation soils when applicable. Inspections are required to ensure the shoring is installed in accordance with the approved engineered shoring drawings. The Building Official may require the inspections to be made by qualified third parties when deemed necessary. (See also Section 110.1.2 Inspection Services). 
110.8 Threshold building. 
110.8.1 The enforcing agency shall require a special inspector to perform structural inspections on a threshold building pursuant to a structural inspection plan prepared by the engineer or architect of record. The structural inspection plan must be submitted to the enforcing agency prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a threshold building. The purpose of the structural inspection plans is to provide specific inspection procedures and schedules so that the building can be adequately inspected for compliance with the permitted documents. The special inspector may not serve as a surrogate in carrying out the responsibilities of the building official, the architect or the engineer of record. The contractor's contractual or statutory obligations are not relieved by any action of the special inspector. 
110.8.2 The special inspector shall determine that a professional engineer who specializes in shoring design has inspected the shoring and reshoring for conformance with the shoring and reshoring plans submitted to the enforcing agency. A fee simple title owner of a building, which does not meet the minimum size, height, occupancy, occupancy classification or number-of-stories criteria which would result in classification as a threshold building under Florida Statute 553.71(7), may designate such building as a threshold building, subject to more than the minimum number of inspections required by the Florida Building Code. 
110.8.3 The fee owner of a threshold building shall select and pay all costs of employing a special inspector, but the special inspector shall be responsible to the enforcement agency. The inspector shall be a person certified, licensed or registered under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes, as an engineer or under Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, as an architect. 
110.8.4 Each enforcement agency shall require that, on every threshold building: 
110.8.4.1 The special inspector, upon completion of the building and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, file a signed and sealed statement with the enforcement agency in substantially the following form: "To the best of my knowledge and belief, the above described construction of all structural load-bearing components complies with the permitted documents, and the shoring and reshoring conforms to the shoring and reshoring plans submitted to the enforcement agency." 
110.8.4.2 Any proposal to install an alternate structural product or system to which building codes apply shall be submitted to the enforcement agency for review for compliance with the codes and made part of the enforcement agency's recorded set of permit documents. 
110.8.4.3 All shoring and reshoring procedures, plans and details shall be submitted to the enforcement agency for recordkeeping. Each shoring and reshoring installation shall be supervised, inspected and certified to be in compliance with the shoring documents by the contractor. 
110.8.4.4 All plans for the building which are required to be signed and sealed by the architect or engineer of record contain a statement that, to the best of the architect's or engineer's knowledge, the plans and specifications comply with the applicable minimum building codes and the applicable fire safety standards as determined by the local authority in accordance with this section and Chapter 633, Florida Statutes. 
110.8.5 No enforcing agency may issue a building permit for construction of any threshold building except to a licensed general contractor, as defined in Section 489.105(3)(a), Florida Statutes, or to a licensed building contractor, as defined in Section 489.105(3)(b), Florida Statutes, within the scope of her or his license. The named contractor to whom the building permit is issued shall have the responsibility for supervision, direction, management and control of the construction activities on the project for which the building permit was issued. 
110.8.6 The building division may allow a special inspector to conduct the minimum structural inspection of threshold buildings required by this code, Section 553.73, Florida Statutes, without duplicative inspection by the Building Department. The building official is responsible for ensuring that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, or certified as a special inspector under Chapter 471 or 481, Florida Statutes. Inspections of threshold buildings required by Section 553.79(5), Florida Statutes, are in addition to the minimum inspections required by this code. 
110.9 Impact of construction. All construction activity regulated by this code shall be performed in a manner so as not to adversely impact the condition of adjacent property, unless such activity is permitted to affect said property pursuant to a consent granted by the applicable property owner, under terms or conditions agreeable to the applicable property owner. This includes, but is not limited to, the control of dust, noise, water or drainage runoffs, debris, and the storage of construction materials. New construction activity shall not adversely impact legal historic surface water drainage flows serving adjacent properties, and may require special drainage design complying with engineering standards to preserve the positive drainage patterns of the affected sites. Accordingly, developers, contractors and owners of all new residential development, including additions, pools, patios, driveways, decks or similar items, on existing properties resulting in a significant decrease of permeable land area on any parcel or has altered the drainage flow on the developed property shall, as a permit condition, provide a professionally prepared drainage plan clearly indicating compliance with this paragraph. Upon completion of the improvement, a certification from a licensed professional, as appropriate under Florida law, shall be submitted to the inspector in order to receive approval of the final inspection. 
SECTION 111
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLETION 
111.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a Certificate of Occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or other federal, state and local laws and ordinances of the jurisdiction. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under Section 105.2. 
111.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, or other agency whose approval is inherent in the building permitting process, the building official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy that contains the following: 
1.  The building permit number. 
2.  The address of the structure. 
3.  The name and address of the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
4.  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
5.  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
6.  For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, a statement that documentation of the as-built lowest floor elevation has been provided and is retained in the records of the building department. 
7.  The name of the building official. 
8.  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
9.  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of this code. 
10.  The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of this code. 
11.  The design occupant load. 
12.  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
13.  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit 
111.3 Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion may be issued for a portion or portions of a building that may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The building official may require, once all life safety issues have been complied with, an applicant to provide adequate cash surety for unfinished work or revision of plans until a permanent Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion is granted. The purpose of the cash surety is to insure completion of work under this permit. Such cash surety shall be equal to 110 percent of the estimated value of the remaining work, including labor and material, as determined by the design professional. The design professional shall submit a signed and sealed document attesting to the amount required to cover the cash surety. If work has not been completed and all finals requested within 90 days of issuance of the initial Temporary/Partial Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion, the jurisdiction retains the right to have the applicant surrender the cash surety. The jurisdiction then may use the surety to finish the remaining work. The surety shall be in the form of cash money, certified check, or cashier's check. Surety shall be returned upon approval of all final inspections and upon written request that has been approved by the building official. This provision is only for the Florida Building Code, all other Agency approvals necessary for construction must be secured prior to this provision being applied. 
111.4 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a Certificate of Occupancy or Completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
111.5 Certificate of Completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a Certificate of Completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
111.6 Fixturing and Stocking. The Building Official is authorized to issue approval for fixturing, stocking, training, or decorating, when appropriate, to allow the builder to prepare the structure for permanent occupancy. The building may not open to the general public or be used for the transaction of any commerce. Such approval must be conditioned upon the approval of the Fire Marshal, when applicable. 
111.7 Digital Submittal Requirements for New Construction. 
111.7.1 Building Footprints. The Building Official is authorized to require the submittal of digital shape (CAD) files, in a specific format, depicting a geo-referenced footprint with elevation for all new structures as a condition of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
111.7.2 Subdivision Topography. The Building Official is authorized to require the submittal of electronic topographical data and re-delineated 100-year floodplain boundaries for all new subdivisions or lots of record for the purposes of updating and maintaining the community's flood maps. 
SECTION 112
SERVICE UTILITIES 
112.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a Certificate of Occupancy or Completion is issued. The servicing utility company shall not connect the power supply until notified by the building official. 
112.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the, this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 101.4 in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life, property, or unsafe condition, or when such utility connection has been made without the approval required by Section 112.1 or 112.2 The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
SECTION 113
CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 
113.1 Establishment. The establishment, powers, membership, terms, quorum and voting of the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals are set forth in Article VI, Division 7, Sections 2-327 through 2-330 of the Village of Wellington Code of Ordinances. Additionally, the following shall apply: 
113.2 Secretary of board. The building official or his/her authorized representative shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
113.3 Powers. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power, as further defined in 113.4, to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
113.4 Local Construction Regulation Board. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals (CBAA) to convene as the Local Construction Regulation Board (LCRB), shall also constitute and act as the LCRB as provided in F.S. § 489.113. As the (LCRB) the CBAA may deny, suspend, revoke or limit the authority of a certified contractor to obtain a building permit or permits with specific conditions, if the board has found such contractor, through the public hearing process, to be guilty of fraud or a willful building code violation within the Village of Wellington. The board may also, deny, suspend, revoke or limit the authority of a certified contractor to obtain a building permit or permit with specific conditions, if it has proof through the public hearing process, that a contractor has been found guilty in another county or municipality within the past 12 months, of fraud or a willful building code violation and after providing notice of an opportunity to be heard to the contractor, finds that such fraud or violation would have been fraud or a violation if committed in the county or municipality that the local construction board represents. Notification of and information concerning such permit denial shall be submitted to the department within 15 days after the local construction regulation board decides to deny the permit. 
113.5 Appeals. 
113.5.1 Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
1.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
2.  The provisions of this code do not apply to this specific case. 
3.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case, which the building official has rejected or refused. 
4.  The true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations hereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
113.5.2 Variances. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
4.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
5.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
113.5.2.1 Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this code. 
113.5.3 Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
113.5.4 Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system, which in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in the order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
113.6 Procedures of the board. 
113.6.1 Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
113.6.2 Decisions. The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final; subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
SECTION 114
VIOLATIONS 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, without full compliance with applicable codes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of applicable codes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. Nothing in this section shall prevent the authority having jurisdiction from imposing fines, liens, or seek injunction relief, or exercising other enforcement powers as permitted by law. Code enforcement and penalties of 162 Florida Statutes Part I shall be authorized if building work begins without payment of all required fees, and for the purposes of enforcing this code, code officials licensed under Florida Statute 468 Part XII are deemed "Code Inspectors", as defined in Florida Statute 162.04. 
SECTION 115
STOP WORK ORDER 
115.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
SECTION 116
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT 
116.1 Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with this code. The extent of repairs shall be determined by the building official. 
When the building official determines that an unsafe building, structure or service system cannot be reasonably repaired in accordance with this or the technical codes, it shall be demolished in accordance with this section. 
116.1.1 When the building official determines a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or portion thereof is unsafe, as set forth in this code he/she shall, in accordance with established procedure for legal notices, give the owner, agent or person in control of such building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice shall require the owner within a stated time either to complete specified repairs or improvements, or to demolish and remove the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or portion thereof. 
116.1.2 If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing systems or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the specified repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the building official. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice stating: THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or its officers, agents, or other servants, to remove such notice without written permission of the building official, or for any person to enter the building, or use such systems except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing same. 
116.1.3 The owner, agent or person in control shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the building official, as provided hereinafter, and to appear before the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals at a specified time and place to show cause why he should not comply with said notice. 
116.1.4 In case the owner, agent, or person in control cannot be found within the stated time limit, or, if such owner, agent, or person in control shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish, and remove said building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or portion thereof, the building official, after having ascertained the cost, shall cause such building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or portion thereof, to be demolished, secured, or required to remain vacant or unused. 
116.1.5 The decision of the building official shall be final in cases of emergency, which, in the opinion of the building official, involve imminent danger to human life or health, or the property of others. He/she shall promptly cause such building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system or portion thereof to be made safe or cause its removal. For this purpose, he/she may at once enter such structure or land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, with such assistance and at such cost as he may deem necessary. He/she may order the vacating of adjacent structures and may require the protection of the public by appropriate fence or such other means as may be necessary, and for this purpose may close a public or private way. 
116.1.6 Costs incurred under 116.1.4 and 116.1.5 shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved. If charges are not paid within a ten-day period following the billing notification sent by certified mail, the owner of the premises will be charged in the following manner: 
1.  The building official shall assess the entire cost of such vacation, demolition, or removal against the real property upon which such cost was incurred, which assessment shall include but not be limited to all administrative costs, postal expenses, newspaper publication, and shall constitute a lien upon such property superior to all others except taxes. 
2.  The Clerk shall file such lien in the County's Official Record Book showing the nature of such lien, the amount thereof and an accurate legal description of the property, including the street address, which lien shall be effective from the date of filing and recite the names of all persons notified and interested persons. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the governing body may foreclose the lien in the same manner as mortgage liens are foreclosed. Such lien shall bear interest from date of abatement of nuisance at the rate of ten percent per annum and shall be enforceable if unsatisfied as other liens may be enforced by the governing agency. 
SECTION 117
VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to Section 553.73(5), Florida Statutes, the variance procedures adopted in the Article III, - Flood Damage Prevention of Wellington Code of Ordinances shall apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building Volume or, as applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential Volume. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building Volume. 
SECTION 118
SEVERABILITY 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2005-17, § 1, 11-3-05; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 2, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 2, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 1-23-18)  
Sec. 18-33. - Amendments to the Florida Building Code. 
Section 1609.3 of the Florida Building Code-Building, Chapter 16 Structural Loads is amended to read: 
1609.3 Basic wind speed. The ultimate design wind speed in miles per hour, for the development of wind loads, shall be determined by Figures 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), and 1609.3(3) as depicted on map Figure 1609 and is hereby added to this code. 
Village of Wellington—Figure 1609.3(1)
Ultimate Design Wind Speed — Risk Category II Buildings
 
Village of Wellington—Figure 1609.3(2)
Ultimate Design Wind Speed — Risk Category III and IV Buildings
 
Village of Wellington—Figure 1609.3(3)
Ultimate Design Wind Speed — Risk Category I Buildings
 
  
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 4, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2005-17, § 1, 11-3-05; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 3, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 3, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 2, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 1-23-18)  
Secs. 18-34—18-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, adopted Sept. 12, 2017, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 18-40—18-55, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2009-03, § 5, adopted Jan. 27, 2009. 
 
Sec. 18-40. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the Village of Wellington, hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-41. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-42. - Intent. 
The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-43. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-44. - Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-45. - Disclaimer of liability. 
This article shall not create liability on the part of the Village Council of the Village of Wellington or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-46. - General[—Conflict between requirements]. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-47. - Areas to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the Village of Wellington, as established in section 18-48 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-48. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
The Flood Insurance Study for Palm Beach County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated October 5, 2017 and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Village of Wellington Planning, Zoning and Building Department, located at 12300 Forest Hill Boulevard, Wellington, Florida 33414. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-49. - Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to sections 18-70 through 18-73 of this article the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-50. - Other laws. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-51. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-52. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-53. - Designation. 
The building official is designated as the floodplain administrator. The building official may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-54. - General[—Floodplain administrator]. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to sections 18-80 through 18-87 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-55. - Applications and permits. 
The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance, and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-56. - Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. 
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value of the building or structure per the valuation data contained in the records of the Office of the Property Appraiser of Palm Beach County, Florida, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; all valuation data and/or appraisals must be dated within six months of permit application date. 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-57. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-58. - Notices and orders. 
The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-59. - Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in sections 18-74 through 18-79 of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-60. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 18-56 of this article; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the Village of Wellington are modified. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-61. - Floodplain management records. 
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the Village of Wellington Planning, Zoning and Building Department, located at 12300 Forest Hill Boulevard, Wellington, Florida 33414. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-62. - Permits required. 
Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-63. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-64. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-65. - Application for a permit or approval. 
To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in sections 18-70 through 18-73 of this article. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-66. - Validity of permit or approval. 
The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-67. - Expiration. 
A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-68. - Suspension or revocation. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-69. - Other permits required. 
Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-70. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with section 18-71(2) or (3) of this article. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 18-71(1) of this article. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this article but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-71. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). 
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-72. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 18-73 of this article and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 18-73 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-73. - Submission of additional data. 
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-74. - General[—Development]. 
Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-75. - Development other than buildings and structures. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-76. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-77. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. 
Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 18-71(3)(b) of this article, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-78. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. 
As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 18-77 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-79. - Manufactured homes. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-80. - General[—Construction board of adjustment and appeals]. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-81. - Appeals. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-82. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 18-86 of this article, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 18-87 of this article, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The construction board of adjustment and appeals has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-83. - Restrictions in floodways. 
A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 18-72 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-84. - Historic buildings. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building Volume, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-85. - Functionally dependent uses. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 18-83, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-86. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
In reviewing requests for variances, the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-87. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the construction board of adjustment and appeals that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-88. - Violations. 
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-89. - Authority. 
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-90. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law per section 108.4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-91. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
A failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon a finding of such violation, be fined not more than $500.00 and shall pay all costs and expenses in the case. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Village of Wellington from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-92. - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-93. - Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. 
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-94. - Terms not defined. 
Where terms are not defined in this article or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-95. - Definitions. 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood. A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [See Florida Building Code, Building Volume, Section 202, "Basement (for flood loads)".] 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before October 1, 1999. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 1, 1999. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. 
Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building Volume. 
Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established per the valuation data contained in the records of the Office of the Property Appraiser of Palm Beach County, Florida, or by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after October 1, 1999 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 1, 1999. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [see in F.S. § 320.01) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1—A30, AE, A99, AH, V1—V30, VE or V. 
Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this article or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-96. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to section 18-64 of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of sections 18-118 through 18-121 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-97. - Minimum requirements. 
Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-98. - Subdivision plats. 
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 18-71(1) of this article; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of sections 18-99 through 18-103 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-99. - Minimum requirements. 
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-100. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-101. - Water supply facilities. 
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-102. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 18-72(1) of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-103. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
In Zone A, fill shall not be placed on land parcels of less than ten acres in area. Subject to the limitations of this article and where permitted, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code and ASTM D-698, Standard Test Methods for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil Using Standard Effort. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-104. - General[—Manufactured homes]. 
Manufactured homes shall not be placed in floodways. Where permitted, all manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-105. - Foundations. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this article. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to section 18-109 of this article are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-106. - Anchoring. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-107. - Elevation. 
Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with section 18-108 or 18-109 of this article, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-108. - General elevation requirement. 
Unless subject to the requirements of section 18-109 of this article, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-109. - Elevation requirements for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 18-108 of this article, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 48 inches in height above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-110. - Enclosures. 
Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 for such enclosed areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-111. - Utility equipment. 
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-112. - Temporary placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-113. - Permanent placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 18-112 of this article for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of sections 18-104 through 18-111 of this article for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-114. - Underground tanks. 
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-115. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 18-116 of this article shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-116. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-117. - Tank inlets and vents. 
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-118. - General requirements for other development. 
All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 18-102 of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed offload damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of the building code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-119. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 18-102 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-120. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 18-102 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-121. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 18-102 of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 18-72(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, § 2, 9-12-17)  
Sec. 18-122. - Technical amendments to the Florida Building Codes. 
(a)  [Florida Building Code, Residential.] The following amendments to the Florida Building Code, Residential are hereby adopted: 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Coastal A Zones shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus 1 foot, or at least 3 feet if a depth number is not specified. 
4.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
R408.7 Flood resistance. For buildings located in flood hazard areas as established in Table R301.2(1): 
1.  Walls enclosing the under-floor space shall be provided with flood openings in accordance with Section R322.2.2. 
2.  The finished ground level of the under-floor space shall be equal to or higher than the outside finished ground level on at least one side. 
(b)  [Florida Building Code, Building.] The following amendments to the Florida Building Code, Building are hereby adopted: 
1805.1.2.1 Flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, the finished ground level of an under-floor space such as a crawl space shall be equal to or higher than the outside finished ground level on at least one side. 
(Ord. No. 2017-14, §§ 3, 4, 9-12-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-14, §§ 3, 4, adopted Sept. 12, 2017, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included as § 18-122.  
Chapter 22 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(01—35), adopted April 11, 2006, amended Ch. 22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 22, §§ 22-31—22-65, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-20, § 1(01—35), adopted Dec. 13, 2005. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Minimum standards for cable television franchises, F.S. § 166.046. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as The Village of Wellington Cable Television Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(01), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any franchise agreement that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and as hereinafter amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. 
Access channel means any channel on a cable system set aside without charge by the franchisee for public, educational and/or local governmental use. 
Affiliate means any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application as defined herein. 
Application means any proposal, submission or request to (1) construct and operate a cable system within the village; (2) sell, assign or otherwise transfer a franchise or transfer control of the franchisee; (3) renew a franchise; (4) modify a franchise; or (5) seek any other relief from the village pursuant to this chapter, a franchise agreement, the Cable Communications Act, or other applicable law. An application includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, as well as any and all subsequent written amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence. 
Basic cable service or basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals, and public, educational, or governmental access channels. 
Communications Act means the Communications Act of 1934, and amendments thereto including, but not limited to Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as those Acts may hereinafter be amended. 
Cable service means (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming service; or (ii) other programming service, and (b) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service, or as otherwise permitted under applicable federal and state law. 
Cable system, cable television system, or system, means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the village. Such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility will be considered a cable system to the extent it is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on demand service; (iv) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating as an electric utility system. The foregoing definition of "cable system" shall not be deemed to circumscribe the valid authority of the village to regulate the activities of any other communications system or provider of communications services or facilities as permitted by applicable federal or state law. 
Control of a franchisee or applicant means possession of the ability to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of a franchisee or applicant, or the operation of a franchisee's cable system, either directly or indirectly, whether through ownership of voting securities, by contract or understanding, or in any other manner. 
Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
Franchise means the nonexclusive right granted by the village to a franchisee in a franchise agreement to construct, maintain and operate a cable system to provide cable services under, on, and over streets, roads and any other public ways, rights-of-way, or easements within all or specified areas of the village. The term does not include any license or permit that may be required by this chapter or other laws, ordinances or regulations of the village for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the village or for disturbing or carrying out any work on any street. 
Franchise agreement means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the village and a franchisee that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised. 
Franchise area means the entire area within the legal boundaries of the village and such other areas as may hereinafter be annexed or incorporated by the village or, alternatively, that area designated in a franchise agreement. 
Franchisee means any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter who has entered into a franchise agreement with the village. 
Gross revenues. As of the effective date of this chapter, the provisions of this definition are preempted pursuant to the Communications Service Tax Ch. 202, Florida Statutes and will remain preempted until such time as applicable law changes. Should applicable law change so as to allow the village to calculate franchise fees as a percentage of gross revenues, gross revenues shall mean, unless prohibited by applicable federal or state law, or as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, all revenues recognized according to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) generated by the franchisee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the village. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subsection, gross revenues include, but are not limited to, fees charged subscribers for basic service; fees charged subscribers for any optional, premium, per-channel or per-program service; fees charged subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; late fees; leased access fees; and shall include the following services to the extent such services are considered Title VI services according to applicable law: revenue from cable service converters, cable service remotes, or any other cable service equipment rentals; revenues from cable guides; revenues from leases of the cable system; advertising revenues allocable to the village based on a percentage of subscribers in the village divided by the subscribers in the cable system (such percentage shall then be multiplied by the total advertising revenue of the cable system to determine the allocable gross revenue stemming from advertising); and revenues from home shopping channels or other sources allocable to the village, provided that where certain home shopping channel or other such revenue is allocable to more than one franchise area due to common zip codes, the franchisee shall allocate the percentage of revenue to the village that is equivalent to the percentage of the subscribers of the village divided by the total subscribers for the allocable franchises within the zip code. Unless prohibited by applicable law, gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee imposed pursuant to section 22-47 hereof. Gross revenues shall not include revenues received from programmers and used by franchisee to market, promote or advertise a programming service; any revenue received by franchisee for payment in connection with PEG access or facilities as required by section 22-46 hereof; any taxes or fees on services furnished by the franchisee that are imposed upon any subscriber or user by the state, Palm Beach County, village or other governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of such governmental unit and that the franchisee passes on in full to the applicable authority. However, it is hereby expressly provided that franchise fees shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues. Further, franchise fees shall not be paid on subscriber deposits unless and until such deposits are applied to a customer account for services rendered. 
Institutional network means a communications system constructed, or operated by the franchisee for the village, the transmissions on which are generally available only to, and intended to be sent and received by, persons other than residential cable subscribers generally. 
Interconnection means the electronic connection of two or more cable systems for the purpose of sharing access channel programming. 
Law means all duly enacted and applicable federal, state, county and village laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders. 
Leased access channel means a channel designated in accordance with Section 612 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 532, for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the franchisee. 
Overbuild means a cable system constructed to serve subscribers in an area of the village actually served by an existing franchised cable system. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, but shall not mean the village unless required by applicable federal or state law. 
Service tier means a category of cable service provided by a franchisee and for which a separate charge is made by the franchisee. 
State of the art shall mean that level of technical performance, equipment, components and cable services (without reference to the content of the cable service) which has been developed and demonstrated to be generally accepted and used in the cable industry, excluding "tests" involving new products offered for one year or less. Nothing herein shall be construed to require a franchisee to employ any specific transmission technology or to carry any particular programming services. 
Street or streets means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, road, boulevard, concourse, driveway, freeway, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel, park, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, court, lane, path, alley, way, drive, circle, easement, or any other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements dedicated for compatible uses, or any other property in which the village holds any kind of property interest or over which the village exercises any type of lawful control, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon, as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to construct and operate a cable system. 
Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives cable service delivered over the cable system. Any person who lawfully receives cable service but is not billed on an individual basis shall not be considered a subscriber for the purpose of rate notification. 
Subscriber base means the total number of residential and commercial subscribers within the village. For purposes of calculating subscribers under bulk contracts, the franchisee shall count each individual unit served as one subscriber. Franchisee may use any lawful and reasonable equivalency measures provided it uses such measures uniformly for all franchise areas served by the cable system, or as provided for in a franchise agreement. 
System malfunction means any cable system equipment, facility or signal failure or malfunction that results in the loss of satisfactory service on one or more channels to one or more subscribers. A malfunction is major if it affects 200 or more subscribers. 
Transfer of a franchise means any transaction in which (1) any ownership or other interest in a franchisee or its cable system is transferred from one person or group of people to another person or group of people so that control of a franchisee or control of franchisee's cable system is transferred; or (2) the rights and/or obligations held by a franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person, group of people or entity. A transfer shall be considered "pro forma" only when it involves a transfer to a person, group of people or business entity that is a wholly owned or controlled affiliate or subsidiary of the franchisee or franchisee's parent entity and shall not result in a change in the ultimate parental control or ownership of the franchisee. 
Two-way capability means the incorporation into a cable system of all appropriate design and engineering characteristics and features so that two-way transmission, including, but not limited to, addressability, over the cable system can be implemented and activated. 
Video channel or channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel, including the associated audio signal, as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation or otherwise. 
Village means the Village of Wellington, Florida, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(02), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-33. - Intent and purposes. 
(a)  It is the intent of the village and the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the grant of one or more franchises for the construction and operation of a cable system within the village; to provide for the regulation, to the extent provided for by law, of each cable system within the village in the public interest; to provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration by a franchisee to the village for the use of streets by its cable system; to promote the widespread availability of quality cable service to village residents and businesses, the village, and other public institutions; to encourage the development of cable and other communications technology and cable systems as a means of communication between and among members of the public, village businesses, the village, and other public institutions; to promote competitive cable rates and cable services; to promote the safe and efficient use of village streets; to enhance and maximize the communicative potential of streets used by cable systems; and to encourage the provision of a diversity of information sources to village residents, businesses, the community, the village, and other public institutions by cable technology. 
(b)  Recognizing the continuing development of communications technology and uses, it is the policy of the village to encourage experimentation and innovation in the development of cable system uses, services, programming and techniques that will be of general benefit to the community to the extent all such experiments and innovations are consistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(03), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-34. - Grant of authority, franchise required. 
(a)  The village may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  No person may construct or operate a cable system over, on, or under public streets in the village without a franchise granted by the village, and no person may be granted a cable television franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the village pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Unless otherwise authorized by applicable law, any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is solely for the provision of cable service. Nothing herein shall (i) have the effect of authorizing, prohibiting or conditioning a franchisee's provision of other services as may be permitted by applicable federal or state law; or (ii) waive any right of the village, if any, to require a franchisee to obtain other authorizations, licenses, permits or registrations as the village may require under applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(04), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-35. - Franchise characteristics. 
(a)  A franchise authorizes use of village streets for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, ducts, conductors, amplifiers, vaults, and other facilities as necessary and pertinent to operate a cable television system within a specified area of the village, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(b)  A franchise is nonexclusive and will not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the village, or affect the village's right to authorize use of village streets to other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate. 
(c)  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets, and the village reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed within the streets. Such designation may include, but not be limited to, consideration of the availability of space in the rights-of-way. 
(d)  No transfer, whether by sale, assignment or change of control of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the village and unless application is made by the franchisee, and village approval obtained, pursuant to section 22-54 hereof and the franchise agreement. 
(e)  A franchise granted to an applicant pursuant to this chapter to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within the village, shall be deemed to constitute both a right and an obligation on the part of the franchisee to provide the services and facilities of a cable system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall constitute all of the terms and conditions of the franchise that are finally negotiated and agreed upon by the village and franchisee. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in the event that franchisee, its parent, affiliate or subsidiary elects to offer to subscribers video programming services through any means or method not included within the definition of a cable system, including, but not limited to, all "open video systems", franchisee shall remain subject to all terms and conditions of the cable television franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(05), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-36. - Franchisee subject to other laws; police power; no waiver. 
(a)  A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and village laws. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the village, the eminent domain power of the village and any other powers granted the village by the Constitution of the State of Florida. 
(b)  Subject to applicable law, except as may be specifically provided in this chapter or under the terms of a franchise agreement, the failure of the village, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this chapter or a franchise agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(06), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-37. - Interpretation of franchise terms. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all cable franchises. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall, throughout the term of a franchise, apply to a franchise agreement as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement, and the express terms of this chapter shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement unless such franchise agreement expressly provides otherwise. 
(c)  Except as to matters which are governed by federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(07), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-38. - Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer of franchises. 
(a)  A written application shall be filed with the village for (i) grant of an initial franchise; (ii) renewal of a franchise in accordance with Section 626 (a-g) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 546; (iii) modification of a franchise agreement; (iv) transfer of a franchise; or (v) any other relief from the village pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement. 
(b)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, to be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with five copies, and shall be accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in subsection 22-38(i) hereof, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all reasonably required information. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. The village manager may waive submission of certain information required herein upon request of the applicant for good cause shown. 
(c)  All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the village for public inspection. Where said application contains information designated in writing by the applicant as proprietary, the village shall not make such information available to the public to the extent it is permitted to keep the information confidential pursuant to applicable law. 
(d)  An application for the grant of a new franchise may be filed pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the village on an unsolicited basis. The village, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a request for proposals. If the village elects to issue a request for proposals upon receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended application in response to the request for proposals, or may inform the village that its unsolicited application should be considered in response to the request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An application which does not conform to the requirements of a request for proposals may be considered nonresponsive and denied on that basis. 
(e)  An application for the grant of an initial franchise, a transfer or change of control or a renewal shall contain, at minimum, the following information unless expressly waived in part by the village or as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of all persons with ten percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, including the names and addresses of parents or subsidiaries holding such ownership interests directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; the names and addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; and any other cable system ownership interest in excess of ten percent of each named person (other than the officers and directors of the applicant); provided that for an application for a renewal of a franchise, the information regarding cable system ownership shall be provided upon written request of the village. 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer, director or person with five percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable or telecommunications franchise or license revoked, or been found by any court or administrative agency to have violated a security or antitrust law, or to have committed a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person and a full explanation of the circumstances; 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel to the extent known; 
(4)  For an application for an initial franchise, or when requested in the case of a transfer or a renewal, a statement prepared by an independent certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and operation of the cable system proposed; 
(5)  A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction and operation, and identification of communities in Florida (or if applicant does not own any systems in Florida, identification of the 20 largest franchise areas served by applicant or its affiliates) which the applicant or any person controlling the applicant or having more than a five percent ownership interest in applicant has, or has had, a cable franchise or license or any interest therein; 
(6)  Identification of the area of the village to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the service area's boundaries; 
(7)  A description of the services and physical facilities proposed, or in the case of a transfer or renewal, any changes to the current physical facilities, including channel capacity, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities; upon request, the applicant shall make information on technical design available for inspection; 
(8)  Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed cable system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; 
(9)  If applicant is currently operating a cable system within the village, a description of the existing cable system and capacity and the operator's plans to upgrade the cable system, if any; 
(10)  If applicant or applicant's parent, or any subsidiary or affiliate of applicant is currently operating a SMATV system within the village, a list of all such locations; 
(11)  For an initial grant or in the case of a renewal or transfer and upon written request of the village for informational purposes, the proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services, and the applicant's ownership interest in any proposed cable services to be delivered over the cable system; 
(12)  An application for a renewal shall also include a demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the village; 
(13)  Upon written request of the village and for information purposes only, a description of any non-cable telecommunications services offered or proposed to be offered by the applicant or its parent, affiliate or subsidiary in Palm Beach County. 
(14)  Pro forma financial projections for the first five years of the franchise term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules. In the case of a transfer, such pro forma financial plan shall be provided if the transferee or its parent is not a publicly traded company. 
(15)  If an applicant for an initial franchise proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of the streets to accommodate an additional system; 
(16)  Upon written request of the village, any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and information that the village may reasonably request of the applicant in a timely manner that is relevant to the village's consideration of the application; and 
(17)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state law requirements. 
(f)  An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The specific modification requested; 
(2)  The justification for the requested modification, including the financial impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved; 
(3)  A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545; 
(4)  Any other information necessary for the village to make an informed determination on the application for modification; and 
(5)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and state law requirements. 
(g)  An application for renewal of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 22-53 hereof. 
(h)  An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 22-54 hereof. 
(i)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, to be acceptable for filing, an application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following amount, as appropriate: 
(1)  For a new or initial franchise: ..... $25,000.00 
(2)  For renewal of a franchise: ..... 20,000.00 
(3)  For a transfer of a franchise (other than a pro forma transfer): ..... 5,000.00 
(4)  For a pro forma transfer of a franchise: ..... 1,000.00 
(5)  For modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545: ..... 1,000.00 
(6)  For any other relief: ..... 500.00 
The purpose of the filing fee is to defray a portion of the village's cost in processing an application. The filing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed in a franchise agreement or credited against any tax, including, but not limited to, the Florida Communications Service Tax (Ch. 202. F.S.) or any substitute tax or fee, unless required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(08), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-39. - Grant of franchises. 
(a)  The village may grant a cable franchise for a period not to exceed 15 years plus such extensions as may be approved by the village to serve the village. 
(b)  In evaluating an application for a franchise, the village may, if applicable, and if required by applicable federal or state law, shall consider, among other things, the following factors: the applicant's technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the adequacy of the proposed construction arrangements, facilities, equipment, and services based on the public convenience, safety and welfare; the applicant's experience in constructing and operating cable systems and providing cable service in other communities. In the case of an initial grant, the village shall also consider the economic impact upon private property within the franchise area; the public need for such franchise, if any; the capacity of public rights-of-way to accommodate the cable system; the present and future use of the public rights-of-way to be used by the cable system; the potential disruption to existing users of the public rights-of-way to be used by the cable system and the resultant inconvenience which may occur to the public; the financial ability of the franchise applicant to perform; and whether the proposal will meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. Evaluation by the village shall not be based on the content of the programming the applicant proposes to provide. 
(c)  The village shall hold a public hearing to consider an application or applications, the applicant(s) shall be given at least ten days' prior notice of the hearing and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Based upon the application(s), the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the village manager or staff, and any other information relevant to the application(s), the village shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny a franchise application. 
(d)  As a condition precedent to the grant of a franchise, the applicant shall file an acceptance of the franchise accompanied by any and all bonds, certificates of insurance or other obligations as required in a franchise agreement no later than the date of the village council's consideration of the grant or denial of the application. This period may be extended for good cause by the village. If the acceptance is not filed with the village by the above-referenced date, or if the period is not extended by the village, the council may delay consideration of the application or deny the application. The village may, at its option, grant the applicant a short-term extension(s). The grant of such a short term extension(s) will not confer on the applicant the right to an automatic acceptance, transfer, modification or renewal. In the case of a transfer, the village shall grant an extension to this requirement as long as the franchisee keeps such insurance, bonds or other surety in place until 30 days after the transaction related to the transfer closes and the transferee has provided its insurance, bonds or other surety in place within 30 days following such closing. 
(e)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, applications for the grant of an initial franchise, a franchise renewal, a franchise agreement modification, or a franchise transfer may be subject to a processing fee in addition to the filing fee in an amount not to exceed the reasonable and justifiable out-of-pocket costs to the extent that the filing fee does not cover the costs incurred by the village in considering the application, including consulting and legal costs. Prior to the date of the resolution approving or denying the franchise agreement or modification or transfer thereof by the village council, the village shall notify the franchisee of the estimated amount of any processing fee and its method of calculation. 
This processing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed in a franchise agreement or any federal or state tax and shall not be passed through to subscribers as a separate line item unless required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(09), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-40. - Commencement of service. 
Any franchisee commencing initial construction of a cable television system after the effective date of this chapter shall commence construction within one year of the effective date of the franchise agreement and shall complete construction so as to offer service to all dwellings within the franchise area in compliance with the requirements of a franchise agreement, but in no event later than two years from the effective date of the franchise agreement unless an extension is granted by the village for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(10), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-41. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire term of the franchise including any renewals thereof, the following liability insurance coverage insuring the village to the extent applicable and the franchisee: worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida law and commercial general liability insurance with contractual coverage with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system, and the conduct of franchisee's business in the village, in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for bodily injury or death, broad form property damage liability, and insurance to cover infringement of copyrights. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be with insurance companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida and such companies shall have a minimum Best's Rating of A-1, or an equivalent rating. The village may require coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing liability exposure and limits or where required by law. 
(c)  A franchisee shall keep on file with the village certificates of insurance evidencing the above insurance coverage and evidencing that the village, its officers, boards, council, agents and employees are listed as additional insureds on the general liability policy. If a claim is filed such that the village claims insurance coverage, franchisee shall immediately respond to all reasonable requests by the village for information with respect to the scope of the insurance coverage. 
(d)  All general liability insurance policies shall provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the village. A franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the village which complies with this chapter. 
(e)  A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the village, its officials, boards, councils, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses arising out of the willful or negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors relating to construction, maintenance or operation of its cable system, and the conduct of franchisee's business in the village; provided, however, that franchisee's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the willful misconduct or negligence of the village, its officials, boards, agents or employees, or to claims arising from franchisee's provision of access channels for public, educational and/or governmental use pursuant to a franchise granted hereunder, to the extent such claims relate to programming and content on such channels, over which franchisee has no editorial control nor exercises administrative control. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the village's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings, and claims arising out of copyright infringement or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or providers of programs to be delivered by the cable system, claims arising out of Section 638 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. 558, and claims against the franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. If any such claim arises, the franchisee shall have the obligation and duty to defend the village and any other indemnified party hereunder; provided, however, franchisee may not agree to any settlement of claims affecting the village without the village attorney's approval. If the village attorney finds that separate representation to fully protect the interests of the village is necessary, franchisee shall consult with the village attorney on counsel that is acceptable to the village attorney. If franchisee is unwilling or unable to select counsel acceptable to the village attorney, whose acceptance shall only be withheld for good cause shown, franchisee shall pay all actual and reasonable expenses incurred by the village in defending itself with regard to any action, suit or proceeding subject to this indemnification. The village's expenses shall include all out of pocket expenses, attorney's fees and costs of the village attorney or assistants, or any village employees, outside attorneys or other agents. Notwithstanding the foregoing, franchisee shall not be required to indemnify the village pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement for actions relating to public, government and education access programming decisions outside of franchisee's control or for the village's use of the cable system or the use of public, government and education access channels, facilities or funding. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(11), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-42. - Security fund. 
(a)  The franchisee at its sole expense shall post and keep posted with the village a cash security deposit or nonrevocable letter of credit or a surety bond in a form and in an amount approved by the village to be used as a security fund to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of and compliance with all terms and provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement and other applicable law, compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the village, the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees, or taxes due the village which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system, The security fund shall remain in effect for the full term of the franchise plus, at minimum, an additional six months thereafter. The exact form and amount of the security fund as set forth in a franchise agreement shall be an amount necessary to protect the public, to provide adequate incentive to the franchisee to comply with this chapter and the franchise agreement, and to enable the village to effectively enforce compliance therewith. The franchise agreement shall provide for the procedures to be followed with respect to the security fund. 
(b)  The franchisee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable. 
(c)  The form and conditions of the bonds and the surety shall be acceptable and satisfactory to the village and surety shall be a nationally recognized surety company acceptable to the village, listed on the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and Acceptable Reinsuring Companies" as published in circular 570 (amended) by the Audit Staff, Bureau of Government Financial Operations, U.S. Treasury Department, all bonds shall be placed with sureties with a Best Rating of no less than A-VII. Bonds shall be executed and issued by a resident agent, licensed and having an office in Palm Beach, Dade, Broward or Martin Counties, Florida, representing such corporate sureties. If the franchisee is a partnership, the bond should be signed by each of the individuals who are partners; if a corporation, the bond should be signed in the correct corporate name by duly authorized officer, agent or attorney-in-fact. There should be executed an appropriate number of counterparts of the bond corresponding to the number of counterparts in the franchise. 
(d)  If the surety on any bond furnished by franchisee is declared bankrupt or becomes insolvent or its right to do business is terminated in the State of Florida or it ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (b), franchisee shall within ten days thereafter substitute another bond, surety or cash deposit which must be in conformance with subsection (c). 
(e)  The security fund shall be maintained at the amount specified in a franchise agreement, even if amounts have to be withdrawn and replenished pursuant to subsection (g). 
(f)  Following a determination by the village pursuant to section 22-55 that the franchisee has failed to comply with any provision of the franchise agreement which the village reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the security fund, the village may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the village shall notify the franchisee of the amount and the date thereof. 
(g)  Within 30 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to subsection (a) above, the franchisee shall pay to, or deposit with, the village a sum sufficient to restore such security fund to the amounts specified in subsection (a), whatever the case may be. Failure to replenish the security fund shall subject the franchisee to penalties. However, replenishment is without prejudice to the franchisee's right under section 22-55 to contest the validity of the village's withdrawal of money from the security fund. 
(h)  The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund posted pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the village may have under this chapter, the franchise agreement, or at law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right or remedy of the village. 
(i)  The portion of the security fund deposited pursuant to this section necessary to compensate the village for damages and costs sustained shall become the property of the village in the event that the franchise is canceled or terminated by reason of the default of the franchisee. The franchisee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof less any amount in dispute, without interest, as remains on deposit with the village six months after the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(12), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-43. - Construction bond. 
(a)  A franchise agreement shall provide that, prior to any cable system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other significant work in the public rights-of-way, a franchisee shall establish in the village's favor a construction bond in an amount specified in the franchise agreement or other authorization as determined by the village to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of construction of the cable system, upgrade, rebuild or other work in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  The form and conditions of the bonds and the surety shall be acceptable and satisfactory to the village and surety shall be a nationally recognized surety company acceptable to the village, listed on the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and Acceptable Reinsuring Companies" as published in circular 570 (amended) by the Audit Staff, Bureau of Government Financial Operations, U.S. Treasury Department, all bonds shall be placed with sureties with a Best Rating of no less than A-VII. Bonds shall be executed and issued by a resident agent, licensed and having an office in Palm Beach, Dade, Broward or Martin Counties, Florida, representing such corporate sureties. If the franchisee is a partnership, the bond should be signed by each of the individuals who are partners; if a corporation, the bond should be signed in the correct corporate name by duly authorized officer, agent or attorney-in-fact. There should be executed an appropriate number of counterparts of the bond corresponding to the number of counterparts in the franchise. 
(c)  If the surety on any bond furnished by franchisee is declared bankrupt or becomes insolvent or its right to do business is terminated in the State of Florida or it ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (b), franchisee shall within ten days thereafter substitute another bond, surety, or cash deposit which must be in conformance with subsection (b). 
(d)  In the event a franchisee subject to such a construction bond fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work in the public rights-of-way in a safe, timely and competent manner in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal or surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the village as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The village may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the security fund pursuant to section 22-43 where such amount exceeds that available under the security fund. 
(e)  The franchise agreement may specify that 60 days after completion of the cable system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work in the public rights-of-way and payment of all construction obligations of the cable system, the franchisee may eliminate the bond or reduce its amount unless the village has made a demand against the deposit or notified franchisee of a potential claim and requested maintenance of the security. However, the village may subsequently require the reestablishment of or an increase in the bond amount for any subsequent construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work in the public rights-of-way. 
(f)  The construction bond shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer and the village attorney, and shall provide that: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until ninety (90) days after receipt by the Village, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(g)  The rights reserved by the village with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the village may have under this chapter, the franchise agreement, or at law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall effect any other right or remedy of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(13), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-44. - Minimum facilities and services. 
(a)  The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all franchises granted by the village. The village may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee exceed these minimum requirements where it determines, under circumstances existing at the time of the application, that the additional requirements are necessary to meet the village's future cable-related needs and interests or to serve the public interest. 
(1)  Any cable system constructed, upgraded, reconstructed, or rebuilt after the effective date of this chapter shall have a minimum capacity of 750 MHz or the equivalent thereof available for immediate or potential use. A franchise agreement may provide for a larger minimum capacity requirement. 
(2)  The village shall require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee provide access channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and/or governmental use, which may include, but not be limited to, provision of an institutional network. 
(3)  The village may require any cable system operating pursuant to a franchise to cablecast village council meetings live to all subscribers. 
(4)  A cable system shall provide leased access channels as required by federal law. 
(5)  Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall provide no less than one cable service outlet per location to all village buildings (regardless of whether such facilities are owned or leased by the village) and all public schools within its franchise area not already served by another franchised cable operator at no cost to the village or school involved, and shall charge not more than its time and material costs for any additional service outlets or equipment provided to such facilities. 
(6)  Franchisee shall, at minimum, meet all FCC requirements for emergency alert systems. 
(7)  A franchisee shall transmit all imbedded signals, including closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired and audio signals for the visually impaired. 
(8)  Standard installation shall consist of a drop, not exceeding 125 feet from the cable plant to the nearest entry point of a subscriber's residence. Residential drops in excess of 125 feet may be charged according to the franchisee's rate schedule. 
a.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a franchisee may not be required by the village to provide cable service to any area already served by a franchised cable operator. 
b.  In the event a franchisee lawfully operating in a franchise area that is less than the entire village desires to provide service to an area of the village already being served by a franchised cable operator, then the franchisee wishing to expand service shall agree to construct and operate its cable system on terms no more favorable and no less burdensome than those pursuant to which the existing operator is subject. 
c.  A franchisee shall interconnect its PEG access channels with the PEG access channels of any adjacent cable systems owned by or affiliated with franchisee if such interconnection is technically and economically feasible. Upon the written request of the village and as required in a franchise agreement, franchisee shall interconnect its PEG access channels to any or all other cable systems operating within the village for the purpose of transmitting PEG programming if (i) such interconnection is technically feasible, (ii) the costs of such interconnection shall be shared among franchisees on an equitable basis and (iii) such other operator(s) provide funding for PEG access equivalent to the amount provided by franchisee. 
d.  A franchisee shall locate each government access channel on the same channel number throughout the village. 
e.  In an initial or renewal franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, a franchisee shall agree to maintain that level of technology to its cable system to satisfy the state-of-the-art requirement, as defined in section 22-32 herein subject to qualifications, conditions, and terms that may be expressly identified in a franchise agreement. 
f.  Pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 22-55, failure to comply with subsection 22-44(a)(1) shall result in the imposition of liquidated damages in the amount of $500.00 per day per violation, and failure to comply with any other part of this section 22-44 may result in the imposition of liquidated damages in the amount of $250.00 per day per violation or as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(14), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-45. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Any cable system within the village shall meet or exceed the technical standards of the FCC or other applicable federal or state technical standards, including any such standards as hereinafter may be amended or adopted. Antennas, supporting structures, and outside plant used in the cable system shall be designed to comply with all generally accepted industry practices and standards and with all federal, state, county, village and/or utility laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(b)  All construction, installation and maintenance shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, and all local codes, laws and accepted industry practices, and as hereinafter may be amended or changed. 
(c)  At the times required by FCC rules, the franchisee shall perform at its expense proof of performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the franchise agreement, and FCC requirements. Upon request, the franchisee shall provide the proof of performance test results promptly to the village. The village shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after their construction to ensure compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement, this chapter, and FCC standards. A franchisee has the right to be present at all such inspections. 
(d)  The village may require an annual proof of performance test, or other tests as specified in a franchise agreement or applicable law or regulation, to be performed promptly upon request and at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee shall provide the test results to the village within 30 days of completion. 
(e)  A franchisee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the facilities of any public utility, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(15), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-46. - Access channels and facilities. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of the village to require that all franchisees provide access channels, facilities, equipment and support sufficient to meet the needs and interests of the community in light of the costs thereof with respect to public, education and government activities as set forth in this section 22-46. 
(b)  A franchisee granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall provide to the village, a grant for PEG capital support, as set forth in a franchise agreement. 
(c)  A franchisee shall provide a minimum of one access channel and facilities dedicated to the exclusive use of the village and such other capital support for public, educational and/or governmental use as required in a franchise agreement. A franchisee shall provide at minimum one return line for each access channel then used by the village to the headend, as technically necessary for the operation of access channels referred to herein or as otherwise required by a franchise agreement. The village may increase the number of PEG access channels to a number not to exceed three, so long as a threshold use requirement is met for each channel beyond the first the village then utilizes. In order to request a second PEG access channel, the existing PEG access channel must be programmed at least six hours per day with nonrepetitive, locally produced programming, Monday through Friday, for a minimum of six consecutive weeks. Character-generated programming shall not be included for purposes of calculating the programming requirement. Once the threshold is met and a second access channel given, the first access channel must maintain the threshold requirement. After attaining the threshold requirement, if the first access channel fails to meet the threshold for four consecutive months, the second access channel may be reclaimed by franchisee upon 60 days' written notice. Under no circumstances shall be village lose the right to its first access channel. 
(d)  During the franchise term, the franchisee shall provide, as specified in a franchise agreement or otherwise agreed to, such equipment, facilities, technical and capital support as the village council may determine is useful for the production and cable casting of programming on the public, education and government channels. 
(e)  As may be required in a franchise agreement or otherwise agreed to, a franchisee shall tape or cablecast live events held in the village as may be designated by the village. 
(f)  An application for an initial grant, renewal or transfer of a franchise may, or at the village's request shall, include proposals for the provision of an institutional network interconnecting village, educational institutions and/or other public facilities as designated by the village. 
(g)  An application for an initial grant, renewal or transfer of a franchise may, or at the village's request shall, subject to subsection 22-44(d), include a proposal for the interconnection of franchisee to any or all other cable systems operating within Palm Beach County for purposes of providing or sharing PEG access channels. Where applicable, an applicant shall include in the application a statement outlining the status of the interconnection of its cable system to any and all cable systems operating within Palm Beach County. 
(h)  A franchise agreement may provide for additional capital grants in lieu of or in addition to some or all of the facilities, equipment, and services referenced in this section. 
(i)  The facilities, equipment, monetary grant and all other support to be provided by a franchisee and as set forth in a franchise agreement constitute capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by franchisee for public, educational or government access facilities within the meaning of Section 622(g)(2)(C) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(C), and such grant does not constitute a franchise fee or tax within the meaning of the Communications Act, state law, village code or a franchise agreement. The village shall use the facilities, equipment, monetary grant and all other support to be provided by franchisee hereunder in a manner consistent with Section 622(g)(2)(C) of the Communications Act. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(16), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-47. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  As of the effective date hereof, the State of Florida Communications Service Tax, (F.S., Ch. 202), prohibits the obligations imposed on a Franchisee in this section and this section 22-47 is severable from this chapter and has no effect on the remaining valid portions of this chapter. However, if state or federal law allows the village to impose the requirements of this section, the village expressly reserves the right to do so. 
(b)  If permitted by applicable law, a franchisee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a franchise pursuant to this chapter for the use of the village's streets to construct and operate a cable system, shall pay to the village a franchise fee in an amount up to a maximum of either (i) five percent of the franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable system within the village during the term of its franchise; or (ii) in the event the Communications Act or other applicable law is amended to permit the village to assess a franchise fee of a greater amount than that specified in (i) above, the franchisee agrees to pay to the village the new amount after a public hearing in which the public and franchisee are given an opportunity to comment on the impact of the higher fee. In no event shall a franchisee pay a franchise fee greater than the maximum permitted by applicable law. 
(c)  A franchisee shall pay the franchise fee due to the village on a quarterly basis. Payment for each month shall be made to the village not later than 45 calendar days after the end of each calendar month. 
(d)  A franchisee shall file with the village within 60 days after the expiration of each calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is in force, a financial statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year or portion thereof and a detailed explanation of the method of computation. The statement shall be certified by a duly authorized corporate officer. The franchisee will bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements. 
(e)  Subject to applicable law, any acceptance by the village of any franchise fee payment shall not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the village may have for additional sums payable. 
(f)  The franchise fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any other tax, fee or assessment, subject to applicable law. 
(g)  If permitted by applicable law, the village, or its representative, may from time to time but not more than once in any 12-month period, and upon reasonable notice, inspect, audit any and all books and records of the franchisee relevant to the determination of gross revenues and the computation of franchise fees due, and may re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under the franchise. In the case of any franchise granted, renewed, modified or transferred on or after the effective date hereof the cost of the audit will be borne by the franchisee if, as a result of the audit, the village determines that the franchisee has underpaid the franchise fees owned in an amount equal to or exceeding two percent of the franchise fees actually paid. A franchisee shall make all books and records necessary to satisfactorily perform the audit readily available to the auditors in Palm Beach County for inspection and copying. 
(h)  In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the village on or before the due date set forth in subsection (c) above, any franchisee granted an initial franchise, renewal, modification or transfer on or after the date hereof shall pay a late charge of 18 percent per annum of the amount of the unpaid franchise fee payment; provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under Florida law. Any interest and/or late charges paid by franchisee is intended to be a charge incidental to the enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622 (g)(2)(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed by this chapter or any franchise agreement. 
(i)  Unless prohibited by law, when a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee shall file with the village within 90 calendar days of the date it ceases operations in the village, a financial statement, audited by an independent certified public accountant and certified by the franchisee's chief or other duly authorized financial officer, showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments will be made at that time for franchise fees due to the date that the franchisee's operations ceased. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(17), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-48. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The franchisee shall submit reports to the village quarterly according to the following schedule: January through March are due on or before April 25, April through June are due on or before July 25, July through September are due on or before October 25 and October through December are due on or before January 25 of each year or as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement. 
The quarterly report shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Number of homes passed, number of cable plant miles, number of new installs, number of disconnects and net result of new installs and disconnects. 
(2)  Telephone reports, broken down by quarter, indicating the number of calls received, number of calls abandoned, number of calls receiving a busy signal and percentage of total calls for which a busy signal was received. 
(3)  A summary by quarter for the number of standard installations performed within seven days, number of unplanned service interruptions, the hours in which planned service interruptions have occurred, number of unplanned service interruptions by duration, number of service interruptions responded to within 24 hours, number of other service problems responded to within 36 hours, preventative measures to reduce or eliminate service interruptions and any other information that may be reasonably required to monitor the franchisee's compliance with this chapter. A franchisee may comply with the requirements of this subsection by providing to the village a copy of the actual written complaint and/or service interruption logs maintained by franchisee. 
(4)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, revenue information, including, but not limited to number of subscribers for each type of cable service offered, and the gross revenue from all sources attributable to the operations of the cable system by the franchisee in the village, stating separately by category each source and the amount of revenue attributable thereto. As of the date of this chapter, the obligations imposed on franchisee in this section to provide an annual financial statement are prohibited by the State of Florida Simplified Communications Service Tax, F.S., Ch. 202, and this obligation is severable from this chapter and has no effect on the remaining valid provisions hereof. However, if state or federal law allows the village to impose the requirements of this section, the village expressly reserves the right to do so. 
(b)  Within six months of the close of its fiscal year, the franchisee shall provide an annual report to the village that includes the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the activities of the previous year in development of the cable system, including as pertains to cable services, initiated or discontinued policy changes enacted during the previous year, number of cable subscribers for each tier or type of cable service or cable product (including gains and losses), homes passed and miles of cable distribution plant in service. The summary shall also include a comparison of any construction, including cable system upgrades, during the year with any projections previously provided to the village, as well as rate and charge increases and/or decreases for the previous fiscal year. 
(2)  The web-site addresses to the franchisee's ultimate parent annual report and 10-K as filed with the SEC, and all filings made with the State of Florida under the Communications Services Tax Simplification Law. Unless prohibited by applicable law, to verify franchise fee payments, franchisee shall provide, upon written request, an annual financial report to include a statement of sources of revenues for the franchise area. The statement shall be audited if franchisee has audited statements prepared in its normal course of business. If not, the statements shall be certified by the chief financial officer of the franchisee. The financial report shall include notes to the financial statements that specify all significant accounting policies and practices upon which it is based. As of the date of this chapter, the obligations imposed on franchisee in this section to provide an annual financial statement are prohibited by the State of Florida Simplified Communications Service Tax, F.S., Ch. 202, and this obligation is severable from this chapter and has no effect on the remaining valid provisions hereof. However, if state or federal law allows the village to impose the requirements of this section, the village expressly reserves the right to do so. 
(3)  Where applicable, a copy of updated maps depicting the location of all trunk lines and feeder lines and associated devices in the village to the extent such locations have changed. Upon request of the village, such maps shall be provided in digitized form at the expense of the franchisee. 
(4)  A summary of written subscriber or resident complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition. Where complaints involve recurrent cable system problems, the nature of each problem and the corrective measures taken shall be identified. More detailed information concerning complaints shall be submitted upon written request of the village, subject to franchisee's obligation to maintain subscriber privacy in accordance with federal law. 
(5)  Upon written request, and if not otherwise provided, a summary of the number of unplanned service interruptions, the hours in which planned service interruptions have occurred and the number of unplanned service interruptions by duration, including preventative measures to eliminate reoccurrence. 
(6)  Upon written request, if the franchisee is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors; the officers and members of the board of directors of any parent corporation; and if the franchisee or parent corporation stock or ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(7)  Upon written request, if the franchisee is a partnership, a list of the partners, including any limited partners, and addresses; and if the general partner is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors or the corporate general partner and the officers and directors of any parent corporation; and where the general partner or parent corporation ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(8)  Upon written request, a list of all people holding five percent or more ownership or otherwise cognizable interest in the franchisee pursuant to the Communications Act and 47 C.F.R. 76.501. 
(9)  A copy of the rules and regulations of the franchisee applicable to subscribers of the cable system. 
(10)  A report on the number of senior citizens, economically disadvantaged or disabled subscribers receiving any rate discounts and the amount of any such discounts for specific cable services if franchisee offers separate rates or discounts for those categories of subscribers. 
(11)  A report on the number of multiple dwelling buildings and units therein receiving cable service under bulk agreements. 
(12)  A full schedule and description of services, service hours and location of the customer service office of the franchisee or offices available to subscribers, and a schedule of all rates, fees and charges for all cable services provided over the cable system. 
(13)  Upon written request, a report on the number of total subscribers served by the franchisee in the cable system, with a breakdown by the types of cable services received by subscribers. 
(14)  Upon written request, a copy of any filing made to the FCC pursuant to Equal Employment Opportunity Council requirements. 
(c)  Upon each written request by the village made not more than once annually, a franchisee shall within 45 days of receipt of the request, provide the following documents to the village, without regard to whether the documents are filed by the franchisee or an affiliate: 
(1)  If not otherwise available, annual financial report of the franchisee or its parent or any affiliate of franchisee that controls franchisee and issues an annual financial report. 
(2)  Copyright filings reflecting the operation of the cable system. 
(3)  Any pleadings, petitions, applications, communications, reports and documents (collectively referred to as "filings") submitted within the previous 12 months by or on behalf of the franchisee to the FCC, SEC or any state or federal agency, court or regulatory council that may directly and adversely impact the operation of the franchisee's cable system in the village or that may adversely impact the rights or obligations of the village under this chapter or the franchise agreement and any and all responses, if any, to such filings. 
(4)  Any and all notices of deficiency, forfeiture or documents instituting any investigation, civil or criminal proceeding issued by any state or federal agency regarding the cable system, franchisee or any affiliate of franchisee, provided, however, that any such notice or documents relating to an affiliate of the franchisee need be provided only to the extent the same may directly and adversely affect or bear on operations of the franchisee in the village. For example, a notice that an affiliate that has a management contract for the cable system located in the village was not in compliance with the FCC's EEO requirements would be deemed to affect or bear on operations in the village. 
(d)  The franchisee shall, upon written request, furnish to the village such additional reports as a franchisee may prepare as a customary business practice with respect to its operations of the cable system, which in the village's discretion are reasonable and necessary for the administration and/or enforcement of this chapter. 
(e)  A franchisee shall provide the village, within 30 days of filing or receipt of any petition or filings with any federal, state, or local agencies or courts, which may, in the reasonable judgment of the franchisee, adversely impact the construction, operation or maintenance of franchisee's cable system, affect village and/or subscribers regarding this chapter or a franchise agreement, including, but not limited to, any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. In any administrative or legal proceeding in which franchisee is a party, which in the reasonable judgment of franchisee adversely impacts the construction or operation of its cable system in the village, franchisee shall provide a copy of any filed document that is available for public dissemination, upon written request of the village, within five days. To the extent the village desires and may properly participate in the proceeding, franchisee agrees that it will not oppose any necessary extension or tolling of time that may allow the village's participation in such matter. However, the franchisee may oppose or object to any extension of time that exceeds the period of time used by franchisee to provide a copy of the requested filing to the village. 
(f)  A franchisee shall make a complete set of books and records available for inspection and audit by the village in Palm Beach County, for purposes of ascertaining compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement, subject to subsection (g) below. Such inspection and audit shall be upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. 
(g)  Any materials requested by the village which are deemed proprietary and confidential by franchisee shall be made available for review and inspection by the village at a location in Palm Beach County (but not copying or removal, unless otherwise required by federal or state law, including but not limited to the public records law of the State of Florida). The village shall accord all books and records that it inspects under this section the degree of confidentiality such books and records are entitled to under federal and state law. A franchisee's books and records shall not constitute public records, except to the extent required by federal and state law. To the extent a franchisee considers any books or records that it is required to produce to be confidential or otherwise protected from public disclosure, franchisee shall designate which documents it views as protected and provide a written explanation to the village of the legal basis for franchisee's claim of protection. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(18), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-49. - Customer service requirements. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain all parts of its cable system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate, and prompt service for all of its subscribers and facilities. 
(b)  Cable system office. Unless this requirement is expressly waived or modified by a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall maintain a subscriber service center located within the village, which shall include a place where subscribers may pay their bills, pick up and return converters or other equipment and initiate installations or other action with respect to cable service. This service office shall be open during normal business hours, as defined below, which as of the effective date of this chapter, are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
(c)  Telephone availability. Franchisee shall maintain a publicly-listed local, toll-free telephone number and employ a sufficient number of telephone lines, knowledgeable personnel and answering equipment to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public to contact the franchisee on a full-time basis, 24 hours per day, seven days per week including holidays. Knowledgeable, qualified franchisee representatives will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries. Franchisee shall comply with the telephone answer time standards set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Franchisee shall answer all subscriber service and repair telephone calls made under normal operating conditions, as defined below, within 30 seconds, including wait time and within an additional 30 seconds to transfer the call. Under normal operating conditions, subscribers shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(e)  Franchisee must meet each of the following standards no less than 95 percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installation work shall be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed except in those instances where a subscriber specifically requests an installation date beyond the seven business day period. "Standard" installations are up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. If scheduled installation is neither started nor completed as scheduled, the subscriber will be telephoned by an employee of the franchise the same day. If the call to the subscriber is not answered, an employee of the franchisee shall telephone the subscriber the next day; 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the franchisee, the franchisee will respond to service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. Other service problems will be responded to promptly and in no event later than 48 hours after the problem becomes known. All service interruptions and service problems within the control of franchisee will be corrected within 72 hours after receipt of a complaint; 
(3)  The appointment window alternatives made available for installations, service calls, repairs, and other installation activities will be either a specific time, a four-hour time block during normal business hours, or at the election and discretion of the subscriber, "all day;" 
(4)  Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment; and 
(5)  If, at any time, an installer or technician is running more than 30 minutes late for a scheduled appointment, an attempt to contact the subscriber will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time which is convenient for the subscriber. 
(f)  For purposes of this section 22-49, the term "Normal Business Hours" shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers, which as of the effective date of this chapter, are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturday, or as otherwise defined by the FCC. In all cases, normal business hours shall include either some evening hours at least one night per week or some weekend hours. The term "normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of the franchisee, or as otherwise defined by the FCC. Those conditions which are not within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the franchisee shall include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increase, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and routine maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
(g)  Disconnection. 
(1)  Voluntary disconnection. 
a.  A Subscriber may terminate service at any time. 
b.  A franchisee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests from the franchisee's cable system. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination of service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee. So long as the subscriber returns equipment to franchisee's service center located in the village or makes available to franchisee to pick up within three business days of the disconnection, no charge may be imposed by any franchisee for such voluntary disconnection or for any cable services delivered after the date of disconnection request. 
c.  A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to disconnect the franchisee's equipment. 
d.  Any security deposit and/or other funds due the subscriber shall be refunded on disconnected accounts after the converter has been recovered by the franchisee. The refund process shall take a maximum of 45 days from the date disconnection was requested to the date the subscriber receives the refund. 
(2)  Involuntary disconnection. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber or other fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet; however, such disconnection shall not be effected until 45 days after the date on which the applicable monthly bill was sent to the subscriber and advance written notice of intent to disconnect to the subscriber in question. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement provided that the message is in bold or large type or other similar manner designed to bring the information to the subscriber's attention. If the subscriber pays within 45 days after the date on which the applicable monthly bill was sent and after notice of disconnection has been given, the franchisee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate cable service. Franchisee reserves the right to deny cable service to any subscriber who has been repeatedly disconnected for nonpayment of such services to the extent such rights are consistent with applicable state and federal law. 
(3)  With respect to any disconnection, whether requested or involuntary, a franchisee shall comply with the rules and regulations of the FCC and applicable law regarding ownership, sale, removal and abandonment of home wiring. 
(h)  Franchisee shall intentionally interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Franchisee shall use its best efforts to insure that such interruptions shall occur only during the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Franchisee shall maintain a written log for all intentional service interruptions. 
(i)  Franchisee shall notify the village manager or designee immediately if a service interruption affects 200 or more subscribers for a time period greater than four hours. 
(j)  Franchisee shall cause all its field employees to wear a picture identification badge indicating their employment by franchisee. This badge shall be clearly visible to the public. 
(k)  A franchisee shall develop written procedures for the investigation and resolution of all subscriber or village resident complaints that are received by the village. Such procedures shall be submitted to the village manager or designee. A subscriber or village resident who has not been satisfied by following the franchisee's procedures may file a written complaint with the village manager or designee who will investigate the matter and in consultation with the franchisee, as appropriate, attempt to resolve the matter. A franchisee's performance in resolving subscriber and resident complaints in a fair and equitable manner will be considered in connection with the franchisee's renewal application. Franchisee shall maintain a complete list of all complaints received during the previous 12 months from subscribers that required a service call and were not resolved within seven days of receipt and the measures taken to resolve them. This list shall be compiled on a quarterly basis and, if such unresolved complaints exist, submitted to the village upon request. In providing such information, franchisee shall be obligated to protect subscriber privacy in accordance with federal law. 
(l)  Franchisee shall permit the village manager or designee to inspect and test the cable system's technical equipment and facilities upon reasonable notice which shall be not less than 72 hours except in the case of an emergency, as determined by the village manager or designee. 
(m)  Franchisee shall abide by the following requirements governing communications with subscribers, bills and refunds: 
(1)  Each franchisee shall provide to subscribers written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation, or at least once annually, and at any future time upon request by the subscriber: 
a.  How to use the cable service; 
b.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
c.  The products and services offered; 
d.  Prices and service options; 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the cable system; 
f.  The franchisee's procedures for the receipt and resolution of subscriber complaints and the franchisee's address and telephone number to which complaints may be reported if not otherwise provided. 
g.  The telephone number and address of the village's office designated to handle cable television complaints and inquiries; 
h.  The availability of a "lock-out" device; 
i.  The franchise's information collection and disclosure policies for the protection of a subscriber's privacy. 
(2)  In addition, each franchisee shall provide written notice in its monthly billing, at the request of the village manager, of any village meeting regarding requests or applications by the franchisee for renewal, transfer or modification of its license. The village manager shall make such a request in writing, with reasonable notice prior to the mailing of any billing by franchisee, such that franchisee's regular billing cycle shall not be interrupted. To the extent that any notice requested by the village would exceed the messaging limitations of the franchisee's billing system and would thus cause the franchisee to print and insert a separate document into the bill, the village may be requested to pay printing costs and incremental postage expenses for such notice. 
(3)  Franchisee's bills will be clear, concise and understandable. 
(4)  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than the earlier of 45 days or the subscriber's next billing cycle following the resolution of a refund request, or the return of the equipment supplied by the franchisee if cable service is terminated. 
(5)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(6)  A franchisee shall provide subscribers, the village manager, and the village council with at least 30 days' advance written notice of any changes in rates, charges, channel lineup, or initiations or discontinuations or changes of cable services offered over the cable system if such change is within the control of the franchisee, and in accordance with FCC regulations. 
(n)  A franchisee shall, upon an affected subscriber's request, provide a pro-rated 24-hour credit to the subscriber's account for any period of four hours or more within a 24-hour period during which a subscriber experienced an outage of service or substantial impairment of service, whether due to a cable system malfunction or other cause. 
(o)  Billing. 
(1)  The franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service change shall be pro-rated as appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit. 
(2)  The franchisee's billing statement must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(3)  The franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date. Any balance not received by the due date may be assessed a late charge consistent with applicable law. The late charge will appear on the following month's billing statement. 
a.  Franchisee shall provide reasonable notice to the village and subscribers of the amount of any processing fees for late payments and the manner of imposing such fees. Any late fee that may be imposed shall be in an amount and manner consistent with applicable state and federal law. Late charges on unpaid bills shall not exceed $5.00. Such fee shall be deemed to represent the franchisee's reasonable administrative costs, and in no event shall exceed 18 percent per annum on the unpaid balance or the maximum amount of interest allowed by law. If a subscriber disputes a bill on or before the due date, the franchisee shall waive a late fee during the period until a final resolution of the dispute is agreed upon between the franchisee and the subscriber. 
b.  Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the franchisee, its employees, or contractors, including failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(4)  The franchisee must notify the subscriber that he or she can remit payment in person at the franchisee's office in the village and inform the subscriber of the address of that office. 
(p)  Alteration of service. Except as incident to an upgrade or rebuild of the cable system, a franchisee may not substantially alter the cable service being provided to a subscriber (including by re-tiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) without the express affirmative permission of such subscriber, unless it complies with this subsection. 
(1)  If a franchisee wishes to alter the cable service being provided to a subscriber (including by re-tiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) in such a way that the subscriber will no longer be able to obtain the same package of cable services then the franchisee must provide the subscriber with 30 days' notice of such alteration, explain the substance and the full effect of the alteration, and provide the subscriber the right within the 30-day period following notice, to opt to receive any combination of cable services offered by the franchisee. 
(2)  Except as provided herein or under applicable federal, state or local law, no charge may be made for any cable service or product which the subscriber has not affirmatively indicated, in a manner separate and apart from payment of the regular monthly bill that the subscriber wishes to receive. 
(q)  Franchisee shall certify in writing to the village as of January 1 and July 1 of each year, based upon internal due diligence by the franchisee, that to the best of franchisee's knowledge it is in substantial compliance with the standards set forth in this section 22-49, said certification to be made as of a date within 30 days of January 1 and July 1. At the request of the village, for reasonable cause including but not limited to discrepancies between the reports provided to the village and the certification required herein, the franchisee shall submit such documentation, as may be required, to demonstrate franchisee's compliance with this section 22-49. This documentation shall be submitted within 30 days of the franchisee's receipt of the village's request. 
(r)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, franchisee shall not incorporate within any bulk residential subscriber contract the term of the franchise granted by the village as the length of the term of a bulk contract(s) franchisee shall make available to all residential bulk subscribers the same level of service provided to franchisee's residential subscribers in the village, including, but not limited to, the requirements of section 22-49 herein, unless the parties to the bulk contract have expressly agreed otherwise in writing. 
(s)  Responsibility for the administration of this chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and for the resolution of all complaints against the franchisee regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and related matters, is hereby delegated to the village manager or his designee, who is empowered, among other things, to settle, or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the cable system by franchisee, either on behalf of the village or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the public. In cases where requests for service have been ignored or in cases where the service provided is alleged to be in noncompliance with this chapter or a franchise agreement, the village manager or his designee shall have the power to require the franchisee to provide service consistent with the terms of the franchise, if in the opinion of the village manager or his designee such request for service is reasonable. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the village manager, including the franchisee, may appeal the matter to the village council for hearing and determination. The village council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the village manager. No adjustment, settlement, or compromise, whether instituted by the village manager or by the village council, shall be contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter and neither the village manager nor the village council, in the adjustment, settlement, or compromise of any controversy shall have the right or authority to add to, modify or delete any provision of the ordinance or of the franchise agreement, or to interfere with any rights of subscribers or any franchisee under applicable federal, or state law or private contract. 
(t)  The village manager or designee shall have the authority to assess fines for violations of this section 22-49 in accordance with the schedule set out below or as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement. The fines listed are to be assessed on a per violation basis with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation, except for those customer service standards set forth in subsections (d) and (e) above which are measured on a quarterly basis. With respect to such standards that are measured on a quarterly basis, the fines for such violations shall be assessed on a quarterly basis as follows; $10,000.00 per quarter if the franchisee falls below such standards by 20 percent or more. Prior to assessing any fines set forth in the schedule below, the village manager or designee shall following the procedures set forth in section 22-55 of this chapter. 
Schedule of Fines 
Single Violation of: 	Maximum Fines 
	
(a) Section 22-49 (a), hereof 	$250.00 
	
(b) Section 22-49 (b), hereof 	250.00 
	
(c) Section 22-49 (c), hereof 	$ as detailed above 
	
(d) Section 22-49 (d), hereof 	$ as detailed above 
	
(e) Section 22-49 (e)(1-5), hereof 	$ as detailed above 
	
(f) Section 22-49 (g)(1-3), hereof 	100.00 
	
(g) Section 22-49 (h), hereof 	175.00 
	
(h) Section 22-49 (i), hereof 	175.00 
	
(i) Section 22-49 (j), hereof 	175.00 
	
(j) Section 22-49 (k), hereof 	250.00 
	
(k) Section 22-49 (m)(1-5), hereof 	100.00 
	
(l) Section 22-49 (m)(6), hereof 	250.00 
	
(m) Section 22-49 (n), hereof 	100.00 
	
(n) Section 22-49 (o), hereof 	100.00 
	
(o) Section 22-49 (p), hereof 	100.00 
	
(p) Section 22-49 (q), hereof 	100.00 
	
(q) Section 22-49 (s), hereof 	100.00 
 
(1)  Prior to assessing a fine, the village manager or designee shall consider any justification or mitigating factor advanced in franchisee's written response, including, but not limited to rebates or credits to the subscriber, a cure or commencement of a cure of the violation, and the payment of any penalty to Palm Beach County for the same violation. The village manager or designee may, after consideration of the response of the franchisee, waive or reduce any proposed fine. 
(2)  Subsequent to the notice of proposed fine to franchisee and consideration of the franchisee's response, if any, and after following the procedures set forth in section 22-55 hereof, the village may issue an assessment of fine. Any fine will commence as of the date of the written notice specifying the violation at issue. The fine shall be paid within 30 days of written notice of assessment to the franchisee. The village may enforce payment of the refund or fine in any court having jurisdiction or if franchisee challenges the assessment in a court of competent jurisdiction, within 30 days of a final nonappealable decision that the assessment is valid. This fine shall constitute liquidated damages to the village for the violation and the village may enforce payment of the fine in any court having jurisdiction. It is the intent of the village to determine fines as a reasonable estimate of the damages suffered by the village and/or its subscribers, whether actual or potential, and may include without limitation, increased costs of administration, enforcement and other damages difficult to measure. 
(3)  Any person who intentionally files a false complaint against a franchisee shall be subject to a fine, payable to the village, in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation and $100.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(4)  Intentional misrepresentation by a franchisee in any response to a notice of proposed refund and/or fine shall be grounds for revocation of the franchise. 
(5)  In addition to complying with the customer service standards set forth in this chapter or in any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter, a franchisee shall comply with all customer service standards applicable to cable systems of the FCC and any other applicable law governing the operations of the cable system within the village. If during the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the FCC modifies the customer service standards applicable to franchisee, the village may modify this chapter to reflect any such new customer service standards. 
(u)  The village expressly reserves the right to consider violations of the customer service requirements in evaluating any renewal, modification or transfers of any franchise agreement. 
(v)  The village and franchisee recognize that the customer service standards set forth in this section 22-49 reflect the current operating procedures of franchisee. If franchisee's current operating procedures change during the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the village agrees to meet with franchisee to discuss appropriate modifications to such standards and to consider such reasonable modifications to the standards set forth herein as requested by a franchisee to reflect any such new operating procedures. Upon request of the franchisee, the village shall also discuss with franchisee the need to continue such regulation in light of the competition that franchisee may face in the provision of cable services to subscribers and to consider such reasonable modifications to the customer service standards set forth herein light of the competitive environment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, franchisee shall be obligated to comply with this section 22-49 unless modifications are agreed upon by the village and franchisee in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(19), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-50. - Subscriber privacy. 
(a)  A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers to the full extent required by Section 631 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551 and state law. 
(b)  Unless otherwise permitted by federal or state law, neither the franchisee nor its agents or employees shall, without the prior and specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, sell, or otherwise make available for commercial purposes the names, addresses or telephone numbers of any subscriber or subscribers, or any information which identifies the individual viewing habits of any subscriber or subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(20), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-51. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  No franchisee in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its cable system, or in any other respect, may unlawfully discriminate against any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a franchisee may offer promotional or discount rates to certain, but not all, subscribers for a limited time without violating the provisions of this section 22-51. A franchisee shall not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation, except for discounts for senior citizens, the economically disadvantaged or handicapped that are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A franchisee may also offer bulk discounts to multiple dwelling buildings to the extent such discounts are otherwise permissible by law. 
(b)  A franchisee shall not deny cable service to any potential subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscriber resides. 
(c)  The franchisee shall comply with federal, state and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(21), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-52. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved area taken up or any excavations made by a franchisee shall be done under the direction of the village under permits issued for work by the environmental and engineering services department of the village, and shall be done in such manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the village. A franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the village, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways, and easements of the village. 
(b)  Except to the extent required by law, a franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove, any of its property when required by the village by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, street resurfacing or widening, change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of municipal or public utility improvements; provided, however, that the franchisee shall, in all such cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. 
(c)  A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance, except in the case where the requesting person is the village, in which case no such payment shall be required. The franchisee shall be given not less than five calendar days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  A franchisee shall have the authority to trim the trees or other natural growth upon and overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables and other equipment of the franchisee, except that, at the option of the village, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the franchisee. 
(e)  A franchisee shall use, with the owner's permission, existing underground conduits or overhead utility facilities whenever feasible. Copies of agreements for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with the village as required by the franchise agreement or upon village request. 
(f)  All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. The village may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of a cable system installed in, on, or over the streets, as may be consistent with this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(g)  All safety practices required by law shall be used during construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or other utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents of the village of their use of any street or any other public rights-of-way. 
(h)  A franchisee shall, at all times: 
(1)  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the village's building code and electrical safety ordinances and any other applicable building or electrical safety code, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the village. 
(2)  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the village, wherever situated or located. 
(i)  On streets where both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground, either at the time of initial construction of a cable system or at any time thereafter, a franchisee's cable shall also be located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street and a subscriber's residence, a franchisee's cable must be located underground if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground. If either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a franchisee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial installation. 
(j)  In the event the use of any part of a cable system is discontinued for any reason so as to result in franchisee's failure to provide service to any portion of its franchise area for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street without complying with the requirements of this chapter or a franchise agreement, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or expired, the franchisee, within 30 days after written notice by the village, shall commence removal from the streets of all such property as the village may require. 
(k)  The village may extend the time for the removal of franchisee's equipment and facilities for a period not to exceed 180 days, and, thereafter, such equipment and facilities may be deemed abandoned. 
(l)  In the event of such removal or abandonment, the franchisee shall restore the area to as good a condition as prior to such removal or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(22), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-53. - Renewal of franchise. 
Renewal shall be conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 546. The following additional requirements, unless in conflict with applicable law, shall apply: 
(a)  Upon completion of the review and evaluation process set forth in Section 626(a)(1)(2) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546, should that process be invoked, the village shall notify the franchisee by certified or registered mail that it may file a formal renewal application in the form of a renewal proposal. The notice shall specify the information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for filing the application, which shall be no earlier than 30 calendar days following the date of the notice. 
(1)  The application shall comply with the requirements of section 22-38 hereof, to the extent applicable to franchise renewals and provide the specific information requested in the notice or such other information as is reasonably designated by the village in the notice requesting a formal renewal proposal. If the franchisee does not submit a formal renewal application by the date specified in the village's notice to the franchisee given pursuant to this subsection, which shall in no event be less than 120 days, the village may take such action as appropriate under law. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the formal renewal application, the village shall publish notice of its receipt and make copies available to the public. The village, following prior public notice of no less than ten days, may hold one or more public hearings on the renewal application. 
(b)  After the public hearing(s) on the renewal application is held, the village council may either award a franchise pursuant to a request for proposal, and thereby renew the franchise; or only after a public hearing, properly noticed, pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that sets forth the grounds that the franchise should not be renewed. 
(c)  If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be renewed, at the request of the franchisee or on its own initiative, the village will commence a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 546(c) to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A)-(D) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 546(c)(1)(A)-(D). Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in compliance with 47 U.S.C. § 546(b) shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1)(A)-(D), pursuant to the record of proceedings under 47 U.S.C. § 546(c). The village shall not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under Section 546(c)(1)(A) or on events considered under Section 546(c)(1)(B) unless the village has provided the franchisee with notice and opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the village has waived its right to object, or the franchisee gives written notice of a failure or inability to cure and the village fails to object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice. 
(d)  Any request to initiate a renewal process or proposal for renewal not submitted within the time period set forth in Section 626(a) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 546(a), or submitted within such time frame and the parties agree that the informal process shall be first initiated, shall be deemed an informal proposal for renewal and shall be governed in accordance with Section 626(h) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C., § 546(h). The village may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an informal proposal for renewal may be received. Following such public hearings or other procedures, the village council shall determine whether the franchise should be renewed and the terms and conditions of any renewal. If the village council grants a renewal application, the village and the franchisee shall agree on the terms of a franchise agreement, pursuant to the procedures specified herein, before such renewal becomes effective. 
(e)  If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied, the village may acquire ownership of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another person upon approval of the village council pursuant to Section 547 of the Communications Act. The village may not acquire ownership of the system or effect a transfer of ownership of the cable system while an appeal of a denial for renewal is pending in any court pursuant to the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(e). 
(f)  If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied and the village does not purchase the cable system or approve or effect a transfer of the cable system to another person, and no appeal to a court is pending, the village may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the village may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(23), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-54. - Transfers. 
(a)  No transfer, sale or assignment of any interest in a franchise shall occur without prior village approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  An application for a transfer, sale or assignment of any interest of a franchise shall meet the requirements of section 22-38 hereof, and provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including, but not limited to, details on the legal, financial, technical and other material and lawful qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. Except in the case of a pro forma transfer as defined herein, the application shall provide, at a minimum, the information required in section 22-38 or such other information as is specified in a franchise agreement in lieu of the information required in section 22-38. Upon written request, the applicant shall provide to the village as additional information any and all written information, other than the information required to be provided by this chapter and the franchise agreement, that has been provided to Palm Beach County in connection with the transfer if such information is relevant to the village. The village hereby reserves the right to request such additional information as it may reasonably require to consider the application, however, such requests shall not have the effect of tolling the 120-day automatic approval period provided by federal law. However, nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of the village's right to deny approval of a transfer within the 120-day period. 
(c)  The application process shall not include any pro forma transfers, as defined herein, that are related solely to any restructuring, recapitalization or refinancing which does not change the effective control of the franchisee or to any mortgages and pledges of franchisee's securities, but shall require proper notice to the village pursuant to the terms of the ordinance or the franchise agreement. 
(d)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a transfer of a franchise, the village council shall consider the legal, financial, technical and other lawful and material qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; whether the incumbent cable operator is in substantial compliance with the material terms of its franchise agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed commitment of the transferee to cure such noncompliance; and whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect cable services to subscribers. The village council shall not unreasonably withhold approval to any such transfer. However, nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of the village's right to deny approval of a transfer within the 120-day period. 
(e)  No franchise transfer application shall be granted unless the transferee, if the franchise holder, agrees in writing to abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and a franchise agreement, and to assume all obligations and liabilities of the previous franchisee, whether known or unknown. If such transferee will not be the holder of the franchise, such transferee will sign an acknowledgement ensuring compliance by the franchisee with the franchise agreement and this chapter. The village shall certify to franchisee, upon request, all issues of franchisee's performance that are known and pending. 
(f)  Subject to applicable law, approval by the village of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the village under this chapter or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(g)  Pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 22-55, failure to obtain the consent of the village with respect to this section 22-54 may result in the imposition of liquidated damages in the amount of $1,500.00 per day for failure to receive such consent of the village for a transfer or change of control; provided, however, that no such liquidated damages shall be owed if the village's denial of consent is unlawful or unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(24), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-55. - Franchise violations. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the village may apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates a provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement after following the procedures set forth in subsections (d)—(h) below. 
(1)  Impose liquidated damages in an amount of not less than $250.00 per day or part thereof per individual violation, or as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter or in a franchise agreement. Payment of liquidated damages by the franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to comply with the franchise agreement and the requirements of this chapter, provided, however, that cure of the alleged violation and payment of liquidated damages pursuant to this section shall be considered full and final resolution of the alleged violation and may not be considered as an event of noncompliance for such period. 
(2)  Revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures specified in section 22-56 hereof. 
(3)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy provided herein, the village may seek equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the village shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations and such other matters as the village determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(c)  Failure of the village to enforce any requirements of a franchise agreement or this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the village's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(d)  If the village (or the village manager or designee with respect to section 22-49 of this chapter) believes that franchisee has failed to perform any obligation under this chapter or a franchise agreement or has failed to perform in a timely manner, the village shall notify franchisee in writing, stating with reasonable specific village the nature of the alleged default. Franchisee shall have 30 days from the receipt of such notice to: 
(1)  Respond to the village, contesting the village's assertion that a default has occurred, and requesting a meeting in accordance with subsection (e), below; or 
(2)  Cure the default (except franchisee shall have 90 days with respect to customer service standards measured on a quarterly basis); or 
(3)  Notify the village that franchisee cannot cure the default within the 30 days (or 90 days where applicable), because of the nature of the default. In the event the default cannot be cured within the applicable time frame, franchisee shall promptly take all reasonable steps to cure the default and notify the village in writing and in detail as to the exact steps that will be taken and the projected completion date. In such case, the village shall set a meeting in accordance with subsection (e) below to determine whether additional time beyond the time specified above is indeed needed, and whether franchisee's proposed completion schedule and steps are reasonable. 
(e)  If franchisee does not cure the alleged default within the cure period stated above, or by the projected completion date under subsection (d)(3), or denies the default and requests a meeting in accordance with subsection (d)(1), or the village orders a meeting in accordance with subsection (d)(3), the village shall set a meeting to investigate said issues or the existence of the alleged default. The village shall notify franchisee of the meeting in writing and such meeting shall take place no less than 30 days after franchisee's receipt of notice of the meeting. At the meeting, franchisee shall be provided an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence in its defense. 
(f)  If, after the meeting, the village determines that the franchisee has corrected the violation or promptly commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from the village and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy the violation, or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
(g)  If, after the meeting, the village determine that a violation exists and that franchisee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or did not promptly commence and diligently process to correct the violation, the village may: 
(1)  Impose penalties and/or liquidated damages in accordance with subsection (a) above and withdraw such amount from the security fund required in this chapter or a franchise agreement as monetary damages; 
(2)  Recommend the revocation of this franchise pursuant to the procedures in section 22-56 below; or 
(3)  Recommend any other legal or equitable remedy available under this franchise or any applicable law. 
(h)  If the village (or the village manager or designee in the case of fines assessed in accordance with section 22-49 of this chapter) elects to assess liquidated damages in accordance with this section 22-55, then such election shall bar the village from instituting revocation proceedings for a period of 120 days. Thereafter, if the franchisee remains in noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter or a franchise agreement, the village may institute revocation proceedings against the franchisee in accordance with the provisions of section 22-56 below. 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any fines/liquidated damages imposed herein shall be calculated as accruing from the date of written notice to the franchisee of the violation. 
(2)  The determination as to whether a violation of this franchise has occurred shall be within the discretion of the village council, provided that any final determination may be subject to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(25), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-56. - Revocation. 
(a)  The village may revoke and rescind all rights and privileges associated with a franchise in the following circumstances, each of which represents a material breach of this franchise: 
(1)  If franchisee fails to perform any material obligation under this chapter or in a franchise agreement between under the village and franchisee; 
(2)  If franchisee willfully fails for more than 48 hours to provide continuous and uninterrupted cable service; 
(3)  If franchisee practices any fraud or deceit upon the village or subscribers; or 
(4)  If franchisee willfully makes a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of a franchise, a renewal or a transfer. 
(b)  Prior to forfeiture or termination of the franchise, the village shall give written notice by certified mail to the franchisee of its intent to revoke the franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. If within 30 days following receipt of such written notice from the village to the franchisee, the franchisee has not cured such violation or breach, or has not entered into a written agreement with the village on a program to cure the violation, or has not demonstrated that the violation is incurable, or has filed a written response to the village demonstrating that no violation has occurred, the village may then seek a termination of the franchise by the village council in accordance with this subsection. 
(c)  Any proceeding under the subsection above shall be conducted by the village council and open to the public. Franchisee shall be afforded at least 30 days' prior written notice of such proceeding. 
(1)  At such proceeding, franchisee shall be provided a fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce evidence, and to question witnesses. A complete verbatim record and transcript shall be made of such proceeding and the cost shall be shared equally between the parties. The village council shall hear any persons interested in the revocation, and shall allow franchisee an opportunity to state its position on the matter. 
(2)  Within 90 days after the hearing, the village council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise and declare that the franchise is revoked and the security fund forfeited; or if the breach at issue is capable of being cured by franchisee, direct franchisee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and in the manner and on the terms and conditions that the village council determines are reasonable under the circumstances. If the village determines that the franchise is to be revoked, the village shall set forth the reasons for such a decision and shall transmit a copy of the decision to the franchisee. Franchisee shall be bound by the village's decision to revoke the franchise unless it appeals the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction within 120 days of the date of the decision. 
(3)  Franchisee shall be entitled to such relief as the court may deem appropriate. 
(4)  The village council may at its sole discretion take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the village's rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. 
(d)  If the village revokes a franchise, or if, for any other reason, a franchisee abandons the cable system, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers for a period of 30 days, the following procedures and rights are effective: 
(1)  The village may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the village may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(2)  The village, by resolution of the village council, may acquire ownership, or effect a transfer of the cable system, in accordance with Section 627 of the Communications Act. 
(3)  If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee, the village may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the system. 
(e)  Where the village has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade or other specific obligation by a specified date, failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or upgrade, or to comply with such other specific obligations as required may result in revocation of the franchise, unless the village, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension of time. 
(f)  No adverse action against a franchisee may be taken by the village pursuant to this section except as consistent with the procedures set forth in this section or as otherwise provided by applicable law, including a noticed public hearing at which the franchisee is given an opportunity to participate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(26), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-57. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services from the franchisee as long as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied. 
(b)  In the event of a termination or transfer of a franchise for whatever reason, the franchisee shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. The franchisee shall cooperate with the village to operate the system for a temporary period following termination or transfer as necessary to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. The temporary period will not exceed six months without the franchisee's written consent. During such period, the cable system shall be operated under such terms and conditions as the village and the franchisee may agree, or such other terms and conditions that will continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers and that will provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator. 
(c)  In the event a franchisee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of the village or without just cause, the village may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the franchisee restores service under conditions acceptable to the village or until a permanent operator is selected. If the village is required to fulfill this obligation for the franchisee, the franchisee shall reimburse the village for all costs or damages resulting from the franchisee's failure to perform. Additionally, the franchisee will cooperate with the village to allow village employees and/or village agents access to the franchisee's facilities and premises for purposes of continuing system operation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(27), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-58. - Rates. 
(a)  At such time as federal law permits rate regulation, the village reserves all rights to implement and impose such regulation, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, by separate ordinance, by amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other lawful manner. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village from regulating rates for cable services to the full extent permitted by law. 
(c)  Should a franchisee desire to change any rate or charge, it shall comply with all laws with respect thereto. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a franchisee shall provide to the village manager notice of any and all changes to all subscriber rates no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(28), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-59. - Performance evaluation. 
The village may conduct periodic, but not more than once during any 12-month period unless for specific cause, performance evaluations of a franchisee as the village determines is necessary. A franchisee shall cooperate with these evaluations reasonably and in good faith. If the village implements a survey of cable subscribers in connection with a performance evaluation, the village may require a franchisee to distribute the village's questionnaire to its subscribers at the village's expense, provided that the franchisee shall have the right to review the questionnaire prior to its distribution by franchisee. Upon request and upon reimbursement of the village's copying costs, the franchisee may inspect or receive copies of all responses. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(29), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-60. - Administration. 
(a)  The village manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this chapter and franchise agreements. The village manager or designee shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the village, except for those actions specified in this chapter that are reserved to the village council. The village manager or designee may recommend that the council take certain actions with respect to the franchise. The village manager or designee shall keep the village council apprised of developments in cable and provide the village council with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the village council shall have the sole authority to regulate rates for cable services, grant franchises, authorize the entering into of franchise agreements, modify franchise agreements, renew or deny renewal of franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the transfer of a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(30), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-61. - Force majeure. 
In the event a franchisee's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchisee's franchise agreement is prevented by a cause or event not within the franchisee's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that franchisee uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this chapter and any franchise agreement granted or renewed hereunder, causes or events not within a franchisee's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes, loss of utility service not as a result of any action or inaction by franchisee and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court (unless such order is procured at franchisee's behest). Causes or events within franchisee's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, franchisee's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of franchisee's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(31), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-62. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all cable franchises granted, renewed, modified or transferred on or after the effective date hereof, and shall apply to all cable franchises granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(32), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-63. - Municipal cable system ownership authorized. 
(a)  To the full extent permitted by law, the village may acquire, construct, own and/or operate a cable system. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or expand in any way the ability or authority of the village to acquire, construct, own and/or operate a cable system to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(33), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-64. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The village reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  The village reserves the right to the extent permitted by applicable law to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire the property of the franchisee's cable system. Nothing herein is intended to restrict or expand such rights as granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida. 
(c)  The village shall at all times have the right, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, to examine and copy a franchisee's records and to inspect a franchisee's facilities to the extent needed to monitor a franchisee's compliance with and performance under this chapter and the franchisee's franchise agreement. However, the village shall not copy any records that have been identified as confidential and proprietary pursuant to Ch. 119 F.S. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(34), 4-11-06)  
Sec. 22-65. - Notices. 
All written correspondence between the village and franchisee shall be delivered via hand delivery, certified mail or such other means so as to provide a return receipt. Notice to the franchisee shall be deemed effective upon written receipt. Notice to the village shall be effective upon written receipt by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1(35), 4-11-06)  
Chapter 23 - COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-10, adopted April 23, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 23, §§ 23-1—23-18, and enacted a new Ch. 23 as set out herein. The former Ch. 23 pertained to communications facilities rights-of-way ordinance and derived from Ord. No. 2006-14, §§ 1—18, adopted July 11, 2006. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Title; authority. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Village of Wellington Communications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance. The village derives the authority for this chapter from F.S. ch. 166 and § 337.401. This chapter, and any rules, regulations, specifications and agreements adopted pursuant to this chapter, comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter, consistent with the village's obligation to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, to manage the public rights-of-way, and to ensure that the public is not inconvenienced by the use of the rights-of-way for the placement of wireline and wireless communications facilities, is to establish a process for managing, and enforcing uniform standards for acting upon requests for the placement of wireline and wireless communications facilities within the rights-of-way of the village. The village recognizes the importance of wireline and wireless communications facilities to provide high-quality communications service to the residents and businesses within the village, and the village also recognizes its obligation to comply with applicable federal and state law regarding the placement of wireline and wireless communications facilities in its rights-of-way. This chapter shall be interpreted at all times to be consistent with those federal and Florida provisions. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to and shall not be interpreted or applied to: 
(1)  Prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of communications services; 
(2)  Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent communications services; 
(3)  Regulate the installation, operation, collocation, modification or removal of communications facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of RF emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with all applicable FCC regulations; 
(4)  Prohibit or effectively prohibit any collocation or modification that the village may not deny under state or federal law; or 
(5)  Preempt any applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 2, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-3. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Antenna: Any apparatus designed for the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to telephonic, radio or television communications. Types of elements include, but are not limited to omni-directional (whip) antennas, sectionalized (panel) antennas, multi or single bay (FM and TV), yagi, or parabolic (dish) antennas. 
Applicable Codes: Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement F.S. § 337.401(7), the "Advanced Wireless Infrastructure Deployment Act," as amended. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance that may require a new utility pole that replaces an existing utility pole to be of substantially similar design, material, and color or that may require reasonable spacing requirements concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment. 
Application: A formal request, including all required and requested documentation and information submitted by an applicant to the village, for a communications facility permit. 
Applicant: A person filing an application for placement or modification of a communications facility in the rights-of-way. 
Base station: The electronic equipment utilized by the wireless communication provider(s) for the transmission and reception of radio signals. 
Collocation: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole within a public right-of-way subject to F.S. § 337.401, as amended from time to time. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way. Collocation outside of a public right-of-way means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes, where an eligible support structure is a tower or other structure that already has wireless communication equipment located thereon. 
Communications facility: A wireless communications facility or wireline communications facility. 
Communications service provider: A provider engaged in the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals, including video services, to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. The term includes providers of such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code, or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance, or routing without regard to whether such service is referred to as voice-over-Internet-protocol services or is classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value-added. 
Concealed: A tower, wireless support structure, or equipment cabinet that is not readily identifiable as such, and is designed to be aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed structure(s) and uses on a site. There are three types of concealed facilities: 1) antenna attachments; examples of antenna attachments include, but are not limited to the following: painted antenna and feed lines to match the color of an existing structure, or other architectural features that blend with an existing structure: 2) freestanding; freestanding concealed towers or wireless support structures usually have a secondary, obvious function which may be, but is not limited to the following: banner pole, streetlight, traffic signal light or light standard, and 3) equipment cabinets painted or vinyl "wrapped" to blend with surroundings or to project public art consistent with village regulations regarding same. 
Eligible facilities request: Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.60001(b)(3). 
Equipment cabinet: Any structure including cabinets, shelters, pedestals, and other similar structures that are used exclusively to contain radio or other equipment necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals 
Facility: Facilities, equipment and installations of any kind, including but not limited to any lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, conduit facilities, ducts, poles, towers, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, gates, meters, appurtenances, or other equipment. A reference to a facility refers both to the facility considered as a whole and the individual elements of the facility. 
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission or its lawful successor. 
Install: The placing of a facility in the right-of-way, whether initially or as part of the repair, modification, replacement, removal or expansion of an existing facility, and including any process by which a facility is placed within a right-of-way, including but not limited to attachment, construction, digging, excavation, placement, and pulling. 
Micro wireless facility: A small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Neutral host antenna: An antenna or an antenna array designed and utilized to provide services for more than one wireless provider, or a single wireless provider utilizing more than one frequency band or spectrum, for the same or similar type of services. 
Pass-through provider: Any person who places or maintains a communications facility in the roads or rights-of-way of a municipality or county that levies a tax pursuant to F.S. ch. 202 and who does not remit taxes imposed by the village pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. 
Permit: A permit issued pursuant to this chapter authorizing the placement or modification of a communications facility of a design specified in the permit at a particular location within the rights-of-way; and the modification of any existing support structure to which the communications facility is proposed to be attached. 
Permittee: Any person or entity granted a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
Personal wireless services: Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i). 
Pole: Any street, utility, traffic signal, streetlight, banner or any other pole in the ROW designed to support facilities in addition to wireless facilities. 
Right(s)-of-way or ROW: The term right(s)-of-way or ROW means the surface, the airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, alley, viaduct, elevated roadway, bridge, public easement, or any other public way for which the village is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to such property pursuant to applicable law, including rights of way owned or dedicated to the Acme Improvement District, a dependent special district of the village (collectively with Wellington, the "village"). "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal village property except as described above and shall not include village buildings, fixtures, or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Small wireless facility: A wireless communications facility that meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume, or in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements would fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
Underground areas: Those areas where there are no electrical facilities or facilities of the incumbent local exchange carrier in the right-of-way; or where the wires associated with the same are or are required to be located underground; or where the same are scheduled to be converted from overhead to underground. Electrical facilities are distribution facilities owned by an electric utility and do not include transmission facilities used or intended to be used to transmit electricity at nominal voltages in excess of 35,000 volts. 
Utility pole: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devises are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less unless the village grants a waiver for such pole. 
Village pole: A village-owned or controlled structure, utility pole, object, or equipment in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, street lights, traffic control structures, banner poles, bus shelters, or other poles, lighting fixtures, or electroliers. 
Wireless communications facility: Equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include: (a) The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated; (b) Wireline backhaul facilities; or (c) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
Wireless provider: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless infrastructure provider: A person who has been received a certificate from the Florida Public Service Commission to provide telecommunications service in Florida and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless communication facilities, or wireless support structures but is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services provider: A person or entity that provides wireless services as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Wireless support structure: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
Wireline communications facility: Equipment at a fixed location which enables wireline communications services between user equipment and a communications network, including wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireline communications. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 3, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-4. - Scope. 
(a)  In general. Unless exempted, every person who desires to place a communications facility in the rights-of-way or modify an existing communications facility in the rights-of-way must obtain a permit authorizing the placement or modification in accordance with this chapter. Except for small wireless facilities, facilities qualifying as eligible facilities requests, or any other type of facility expressly allowed in the right-of-way by state or federal law, no other communications facilities shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to: 
(1)  The placement or modification of communications facilities by the village or by any other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes. 
(2)  Routine maintenance of a wireless or wireline communications facility; 
(3)  Replacement of an existing wireless or wireline facilities with wireless or wireline facilities that are substantially similar or of the same or smaller size. 
(4)  Installation, placement, maintenance or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a wireless services provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting taxes under F.S. ch. 202; 
(5)  Any facilities located on public or private property outside the rights-of-way managed by the village. 
(c)  Other applicable requirements. In addition to the permit required herein, the placement of a communications facility in the rights-of-way requires the persons who will own or control those facilities to obtain all permits required by applicable law, and to comply with applicable law, including, but not limited to, applicable federal law governing radio frequency (RF) emissions, and the village Engineering Standards Manual or its successor, as may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  Public use. Except as otherwise provided by state law, any use of the right-of-way authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate to the village's use and use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 4, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-5. - Administration. 
(a)  Review by village engineer. The village engineer or his designee shall be responsible for administering this chapter. As part of the administration of this chapter, the village engineer may: 
(1)  Adopt regulations governing the placement and modification of communications facilities consistent with the requirements of this chapter and applicable state and federal law, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of conflicting applications for placement of both wireline and wireless communications facilities; 
(2)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Develop acceptable engineering standards for wireline and wireless communications facilities in particular corridors; 
(4)  Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information, or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a permit should be issued. 
(5)  Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for placement or modification of wireline and wireless communications facilities, and proposed changes to any wireless support structure consistent with this chapter; 
(6)  Determine the amount of and collect, as a condition of the completeness of any application, any fee established by this chapter that is allowed by state law; 
(7)  Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any application, notice to members of the public who may be affected by the placement or modification of any above ground wireline or wireless communications facility visible to the public and proposed changes to any above ground wireline or wireless support structure. Notice of the proposed work shall be in writing (e.g. doorhanger, letter) to property owners within 250 feet of the proposed location within such rights-of-way, as well as provide notification to any affected homeowners' association or neighborhood association in writing by letter, each concurrent with the application submittal; 
(8)  Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent with federal and state laws and regulations; 
(9)  Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny an application; and 
(10)  Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon applications for placement of personal wireless services facilities, including issuing written decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action on an application. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  Any person adversely affected by the decision of the village engineer pursuant to this chapter may appeal the village engineer's decision to the village manager, who may decide the issues de novo, and whose written decision will be the final decision of the village. An appeal by a wireless infrastructure provider which already has identified in its application a wireless service provider for such wireless communications facility must be taken jointly with such wireless service provider. All appeals must be filed within three business days of issuance of the written decision of the village engineer. 
(2)  Any appeal shall be conducted so that a timely written decision may be issued in accordance with applicable law including but not limited to F.S. § 337.401. 
(3)  An appeal or the availability of an appeal does not bar review of an application denial in a court of competent jurisdiction 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 5, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-6. - Registration. 
(a)  A communications services provider, as defined by Florida law, who desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the village shall first register with the village in accordance with this chapter. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this chapter, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this chapter governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of facilities that are not communications facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the village or another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from complying with applicable Codes. 
(c)  Each communications services provider who desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the village shall file a single registration with the village, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant under which it will transact business in the village and, if different, in the State of Florida; 
(2)  Name, address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration; 
(3)  The type of communications services that the applicant intends to provide within the village (if more than one, state all that apply), or, if none, state that the applicant is a pass-through provider. 
(4)  A copy of the applicant's current certificate of authorization or license or resale certificate to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Florida Department of Revenue, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal or state authority, if any; 
(5)  Evidence of the insurance coverage and any bond required under this chapter; 
(6)  If the registrant is a corporation or limited liability company, proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida, which may be satisfied by an electronic certificate of good standing from the Florida Department of State or by other means; and 
(7)  Acknowledgment that the applicant has received and reviewed a copy of this chapter, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement. 
(d)  The village shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be conducted by the village manager or his designee. If the village determines that the applicant submitted information in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the registration shall be effective and the village shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the village determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the village shall notify the applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The village shall so reply to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this section. An applicant has 30 days after receipt of a notice of non-effectiveness and denial of registration to appeal the decision. 
(e)  Cancellation of registration. A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the village stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way within the village and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Limited rights conferred by registration. Registration does not, in and of itself, establish a right to place or maintain or priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the village, but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for a permit from the village. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this chapter and further subject to any additional village ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. 
(g)  Registration renewal and updates. A registrant shall renew its registration with the village by October 1 of every two years in accordance with the registration requirements of subsection (c) of this section. Additionally, within 30 days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, a registrant shall provide updated information to the village. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the village restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  Permit required. In accordance with applicable village ordinances, codes, or regulations and except for the exemptions provided in this chapter, a permit is required for a communications services provider to place or maintain a communications facility in the public rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining such a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, all permitting requirements shall apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements of the village and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(i)  Insurance. At all times during the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way, including any time during placement or maintenance of communications facilities, the permittee shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and maintain satisfactory to the village, insurance coverage insuring the permittee and naming the village, its officers, boards, council, council members, agents and employees as additional insureds: workers' compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida law and commercial general liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the communications facilities, and the conduct of registrant's business in the village, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  $1,000,000.00 in any one accident for bodily injury, personal injury or death, property damage; 
(2)  $500,000.00 for personal injury to any one person; 
(3)  $250,000.00 for property damage in any one accident; 
(4)  Business automobile liability insurance valid in the State of Florida which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit, including bodily injury and property damage covering owned, leased, hired and non-owner vehicles. 
(5)  Workers' compensation valid in the State of Florida which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than the statutory limit for workers' compensation. 
(6)  Employer's liability insurance valid in the State of Florida which policy limit shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 each accident for employer's liability. 
(7)  All insurance providers used shall be admitted and duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall have been assigned by A. M. Best Company a minimum Financial Strength Rating of "A" and a minimum Financial Size Category of "IX" (i.e., a size of $250,000,000.00 to $500,000,000.00 based on capital, surplus, and conditional reserve funds). Insurance policies and certificates issued by non-admitted insurance companies are not acceptable. All liability policies shall name the village, its council members, officers, boards, agents and employees as additional insureds with respect to any covered liability arising out of the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way or other activities under this chapter. Each communications services provider shall furnish annually to the village certificates showing proof of all required insurance coverage. All liability coverage must be in occurrence form and in accordance with the limits specified. Claims made policies are not acceptable. No insurance policy shall be canceled, nor shall the occurrence or aggregate limits set forth herein be reduced, until the village has received at least 30 days' advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in policy coverage. Each communications services provider shall be responsible for notifying the village of such cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in coverage. All certificate(s) of insurance, including all endorsements and riders, evidencing insurance coverage shall be submitted to the village within 30 days after the date of registration with the village in order for a communications services provider to obtain a permit required for construction in the public rights-of-way. Each communications services provider shall, in the event of any such notice described above, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the village, written evidence of the issuance of replacement policies within 30 days following receipt by the village or the communications services provider of such notice. 
(8)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit a communications service provider's liability to the village to the limits of insurance certified or carried. 
A communications services provider may satisfy the insurance requirements of this chapter by providing documentation of self-insurance that, in the sole discretion of the village manager, demonstrates incontrovertibly the adequacy to defend and cover claims of any nature that might arise from the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public ROW. The communications services provider must be authorized as a self-insurer by the department of insurance under the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 6, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-7. - General standards for wireless communications facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(a)  Generally. Consistent with F.S. § 337.401, as may be amended, only small wireless facilities and micro wireless facilities may be considered for placement within the village's rights-of-way, and same shall be limited to the size parameters listed therein and any other design specifications detailed in this subdivision. Due to the unique nature of wireless signals and the specific equipment needed for transmission and reception of wireless signals, placement of wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Collocation or use of concealed facilities. A small or non-exempt micro wireless facility and any antennas in the public right-of-way shall, to the extent possible, be collocated on an existing power, light or other utility pole as illustrated in the examples in subsection (d)(5)vi. below. When collocation of an antenna or small wireless facility or non-exempt micro wireless facility is not possible, a freestanding new concealed facility is preferred, as illustrated in the examples in subsection (d)(5)vi. below. The applicant shall submit a permit application to the village engineer for approval prior to any installation which shall be processed in accordance with this Section and F.S. § 337.401(7). The village prefers that small wireless facilities and non-exempt micro wireless facilities located in the public right-of-way, whether collocated or freestanding, be technically capable of servicing a minimum of four wireless service providers with like technical facilities through the use of neutral host antenna. 
(2)  When collocation occurs upon village utility poles within the village's rights-of-way, in addition to the permit, the village shall require the communications service provider and/or owner, if different parties, to execute a lease agreement and remit an annual rent of $150.00 per village utility pole as provided for herein below. 
(3)  Height, setbacks and related location requirements. 
i.  The height limitation of a small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or structure upon which the small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facility is to be collocated. Unless waived by the village, the height for a new utility pole is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017, located in the same right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within 500 feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility pole within 500 feet, the village shall limit the height of the new utility pole to 50 feet. 
ii.  Except as otherwise provided herein, small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way shall conform to the standards and requirements set forth in the State of Florida Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. 
iii.  No antenna attached to a freestanding pole in the public rights-of-way with a ground mounted equipment, other than as a collocation with an existing power, light or other utility pole, or unless installed as a concealed facility, shall be permitted within 50 feet of any principal residential structure. 
iv.  An external box or cabinet housing the equipment connected to an antenna attached to a freestanding pole in the public rights-of-way shall be vaulted underground or, if located aboveground, wrapped with a design that screens it from view consistent with the requirements of this subdivision, or complies with the village public art program as set forth in chapter 54. 
v.  When collocation is not available, the village prefers the following locations for new small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro wireless facilities within a right-of-way: from most preferred to least preferred: 
1.  Within existing utility easements in the public right-of-way on the same side of the street as an existing pole line; 
2.  Within the public right-of-way behind sidewalks on the same side of the street as an existing pole line; 
3.  Within existing utility easements in the public right-of-way; 
4.  Behind sidewalks; 
5.  On the same side of the street as an existing pole line. 
Applicants should avoid proposing new small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facilities in the following locations: 
1.  Within or adjacent to residential property where no pole line exists; 
2.  In swale areas utilized for stormwater collection; 
3.  Closer to the travel way than permitted by Florida Department of Transportation minimum roadside offset standards. 
vi.  Small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless communications facilities shall be located in state or county arterial or collector rights-of-way, whenever possible. Placement of small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facilities in a village collector street, cul-de-sac, local street and marginal access street rights-of-way shall be discouraged unless the applicant cannot otherwise provide service to a particular customer or customers without doing so, and the ability to place facilities in such rights-of-way is necessary to accomplish requirements of nondiscriminatory treatment of the applicant in relation to the village's treatment of other communications service providers. In such circumstances, the applicant shall include with its village permit application, sufficient evidence consistent with industry standards, to justify such placement. Whenever small wireless facilities must be placed in a right-of-way with residential uses on one or both sides, neither poles, equipment, antennas or other structures shall be placed directly in front of a residential structure. If a right-of-way has residential structures on only one side, the small wireless facilities shall be located on the opposite side of the right-of-way whenever possible. All small wireless facilities shall be located in such a way that they do not unreasonably interfere with views from residential structures, such as placement that is at the farthest point from the principal structure within the property line. 
(c)  Concealment. All new small wireless facilities within a public right-of-way shall be constructed using concealment techniques, as further described in subsection (d) below. In all residential and non-residential districts, the concealment technique to be utilized shall be through the installation of either (i) a decorative banner pole capable of concealing all equipment and related appurtenances within the pole structure or located under the ground, or design wrapped on the ground adjacent to the wireless facility support structure; or (ii) a concealed facility designed to replicate existing standard or decorative street lights located in the applicable zoning district. In the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District, the concealment technique to be utilized may be through the installation of a decorative banner and/or pedestrian scale pole designed to be consistent with the equestrian nature of the Equestrian Preservation Areas, and capable of concealing all equipment and related appurtenances within the pole structure. The village engineer shall determine the applicable concealment technique for each proposed facility pursuant to the parameters described in subsection (d) below. In all instances, exterior looping of excess cable length installed on any small wireless facility or non-exempt micro wireless facility located in the public right-of-way is prohibited and all cabling and interconnecting wires must be concealed. 
(d)  Design standards. In addition to the concealment requirements set forth in subsection (c) above, wireless communication facilities shall meet all applicable design standards. Specifically: 
(1)  All underground portions of wireless communications facilities shall be placed in conduit using material subject to review and approval by the village engineer. The village engineer may permit the use of "trenchless technology" for installation in lieu of traditional installation methods but in all instances the underground portions of the wireless communications facility shall be contained within conduit material following installation. 
(2)  The village prefers that all underground facilities, poles, and all associated equipment should be placed in utility easements, dedicated for such a purpose, wherever utility easements exist, even if this means the underground facilities and associated equipment will be placed outside of the road right-of-way, on private property. 
(3)  All underground facilities must be buried at a minimum depth of 24-inches below existing grade. 
(4)  Conflicts between small wireless facilities (poles, underground facilities, and above ground equipment) and existing village-owned utilities including but not limited to potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage, and reclaimed water must be avoided, wherever possible. When avoiding conflicts with village-owned utilities is not feasible, the following minimum separations apply: 
1.  Horizontal separation: 10-ft preferred; 6-ft minimum 
2.  Vertical separation: 2-ft minimum 
3.  Small wireless facility underground conduit must be placed below existing village-owned utilities. 
4.  The village engineer has the authority to allow lesser separations from village-owned utility infrastructure where deemed necessary. 
(5)  The images below this section depict some examples of small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facility pole types deemed acceptable by the Village of Wellington. These depictions are not meant to be inclusive. Other similar pole types may be deemed acceptable by the Village of Wellington Engineering Department, on a case by case basis, but must be presented to the Engineering Department for approval. The exact pole type proposed by an applicant will be chosen by the Village of Wellington Engineering Department and shall be based on the character of the surrounding neighborhood and harmony of the proposed pole type with the surrounding neighborhood. The following small wireless or non-exempt micro wireless facility pole criteria must be met in order to achieve permit approval: 
i.  All equipment, meters, cables, or other attachments shall be either contained within the interior or concealed upon the exterior of the pole structure. 
ii.  The antenna element located on the top of the pole shall be encased in a shroud or other concealment element. Although the village recognizes that the antenna element may be larger in diameter than the pole itself, in no instance shall the antenna element have a diameter greater than two times that of the pole. 
iii.  The pole must include a street light, pedestrian pathway light, or both, depending on the proposed location of the pole, together with design elements to permit affixation of a banner to the pole. If the pole is to be placed in close proximity to a vehicular travel way, a street light shall be included in the design of the pole. The street light shall be placed at a height similar to that of other street lights already existing along the roadway. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of electricity for the light and the maintenance of same. If the pole is to be placed in close proximity to a pedestrian pathway, a pedestrian pathway light shall be included in the design of the pole. The pedestrian pathway light shall be placed at a height similar to that of other pedestrian pathway lights already existing along the pathway. If the proposed location of the pole is between a vehicular travel way and a pedestrian pathway, where existing lighting exists along the roadway and pedestrian pathway, then both a street light and a pedestrian pathway light shall be included in the design of the pole. Where existing lights exist, the type and character of the light, whether a street light, pedestrian pathway light, or both, shall be similar to that of the existing lights. 
iv.  The village's preference is for the equipment cabinet, meter, and any other required non-antenna equipment be built into the base of the pole. The village recognizes that this may not always be possible due to utility company requirements or space limitations such as, but not limited to, minimum sidewalk width or minimum roadside offsets. When these utility company requirements or space limitations exist, the village shall permit a separate cabinet to be installed adjacent to the proposed pole. A single cabinet including all necessary equipment is preferred and multiple cabinets or boxes shall not be permitted when a single cabinet can be utilized. When a separate cabinet is necessary, the proposed cabinet shall be covered on all exposed sides by a polymer wrap. The color and aesthetic design of the polymer wrap shall be selected by the Village of Wellington Engineering Department based on the subject location. The wrap design type shall be provided to the permittee in the permit approval package. 
v.  In each approved application for a new wireless communications facility in a right-of-way, the village shall be given the right by the permittee to attach and maintain a banner to the pole. The type of banner, wording, colors, and pictorial elements of the banner shall be chosen at the sole discretion of the village. 
vi.  All new proposed poles shall be painted either gray or green at the sole discretion of the Village of Wellington. The exact paint color of the proposed pole shall be selected by the Village of Wellington Engineering Department. The exact paint color shall be provided to the permittee in the permit approval package. The Village of Wellington reserves the right to change the preferred color(s) of any and all proposed poles, prior to permit approval, at its sole discretion. 
 
 
All collocations on existing utility poles shall utilize shrouds or canisters to conceal the antenna mounted on the top of the utility poles, such as the examples below, and shall either route transmission lines and cables through the interior of the poles when possible or use color matched conduit to conceal lines and cables on the exterior of the existing poles: 
 
(6)  The use of landscaping around any pole or external equipment, cabinet, box or vault may be required as a buffer to further achieve concealment. Such landscaping shall be consistent with the landscaping otherwise located in the public rights-of-way. Additional landscaping may be required if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties. In addition, for concealment purposes, all wireless communications facilities and accompanying equipment must blend into the surrounding environment by utilizing appropriate design wraps and/or colors as described above. As a condition of approval, the village engineer, or his/her designee, may require all buffering required in connection with the use of wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be maintained by the owner of such facilities at its own cost. 
(7)  All above ground installations associated with a wireless communications facility within the village right-of-way are subject to minimum roadside offset and clear zone requirements as specified in the latest edition of the Florida Department of Transportation standards manuals. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 7, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-8. - General standards for wireline communications facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(a)  Generally. The purpose of this section is to protect and limit deterioration and obstruction of the village rights-of-way resulting from the installation of utility poles within the village rights-of-way by communications service providers. The village herein adopts uniform regulations for the construction, placement, and maintenance of equipment and wireline communications facilities in the rights-of-way. Such rights-of-way within the village are a unique and physically limited resource that are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property and must be managed and controlled in the best interest of the citizens of the Village of Wellington, consistent with applicable federal and state law. When applicable, all wireline communications facilities proposed to be installed in the village's rights-of-way must comply with the undergrounding regulations contained in this section. 
(b)  This section does not authorize an applicant to place wireline communications facilities, including cables or wires, nor construct or install wireline facilities on a privately owned utility pole, a utility pole owned by an electric cooperative or a municipal electric utility, a privately owned communications facility support structure, or other private property without first obtaining the consent of the property owner. 
(c)  As part of a building, electrical, and/or an engineering permit application for a new utility pole to support a wireline communications facility, a site development plan shall be presented for approval to the village engineer. Each application for a proposed new utility pole to support a wireline communications facility shall include all requirements for site development plan approval as required by Article 7 of the Village Unified Land Development Code. The village engineer or his/her designee may waive all or some of these provisions for underground wireline facilities that comply with subsection (g) below in order to achieve the objectives of that subsection. Each application shall contain a rendering or photograph of the wireline communications facility including, but not limited to, colors and screening devices. 
(d)  As part of a building, electrical, and/or an engineering permit application for a new utility pole to support a wireline communications facility, a statement shall be submitted, including technical data demonstrating that all existing utility poles (including all potentially useable HVET poles) within the proposed service area have been examined, and found unacceptable for attachment of new wireline facility. The report shall include reasons why existing utility poles are not acceptable alternatives to a new freestanding wireline utility pole. The report regarding the adequacy of alternative existing facilities or the replacement or mitigation of existing facilities to meet the applicant's need or the needs of service providers indicating that no existing utility poles could accommodate the applicant's proposed facility shall consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing poles located within the geographic area meet the applicant's engineering requirements to attach wireline facilities to, and why. 
b.  Existing poles are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and cannot be increased in height. 
c.  Existing poles do not have sufficient structural integrity to support the applicant's proposed wireline communications facilities and related equipment, and the existing facility cannot be sufficiently improved or replaced. 
d.  Other limiting factors that render existing poles unsuitable. 
(e)  Wireline communications facilities; inside the village's rights-of-way. Because of the unique nature of communications services transmitted via wires, cables, fiber optic, or other hardline transmission equipment and the specific structures needed for construction and/or assembly of same, placement of wireline communications facilities in the public right-of-way shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All newly proposed wireline and/or pole fixtures for wireline communications facilities, whether above or below ground, must not unreasonably interfere with the presently existing infrastructure systems and other operations within the village's rights-of-way. Before consideration of constructing new infrastructure for hardline or wireline communications services, the communication services provider must show that other existing conduits or poles cannot be used. 
(2)  Any wireline communications system located within the village's rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601, as applicable, and any other applicable technical standards. 
(3)  Any wireline communications system shall perform all tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with the technical and performance standards established by applicable law. Unless an applicable law provides otherwise, all tests shall be conducted in accordance with federal rules and in accordance with the most recent edition of National Cable Television Association's "Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems," or such other manual as may be directed under FCC regulations. A written report of compliant test results shall be filed with the village within seven days of a request by the village. If a location fails to meet technical or performance specifications, the owner of the wireline communications facility, without requirement of additional notice or request from the village, shall promptly notify the village of such noncompliance, take corrective action, and retest the locations. 
(4)  Wireline communications facilities shall have the same distance separation requirements from any principal residential structure as wireless communications service facilities. 
(5)  The use of landscaping around any pole or external equipment, cabinet, box or vault associated with a wireline communications facility may be required as a buffer. Such landscaping shall be consistent with the landscaping otherwise located in the public rights-of-way. Additional landscaping may be required if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties. In addition, for concealment purposes, all wireline communications facilities and accompanying equipment must blend into the surrounding environment by utilizing appropriate design wraps and colors. As a condition of approval, the village engineer, or his/her designee, may require: all buffering required in connection with the use of wireline communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be maintained by the owner of such facilities at its own cost. 
[(6)  Reserved.] 
(7)  Minimum separation from village-owned equipment. 
a.  Utility poles for wireline communications facilities including appurtenances shall have a minimum horizontal separation often ten feet from any village-owned utility pole and village-owned underground facility. Ten feet shall be measured from closest outer diameter (OD) or outer edge (OE) to OD or OE. 
(8)  High voltage and "no trespassing" and other warning signs. 
a.  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the wireline communications facility or any accessory structures, "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and shall be spaced no more than 40 feet apart. 
b.  "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and shall be spaced no more than 40 feet apart. 
c.  The letters for the "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER" and "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be at least six inches in height. The two warning signs may be combined into one sign. The warning signs shall be installed at least five feet above the finished grade of the fence. 
d.  The warning signs may be attached to freestanding poles if the content of the signs may be obstructed by landscaping. 
e.  Signs noting federal registration (if required) shall be attached to the wireline communications facility in compliance with federal regulation. 
(9)  Equipment storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a wireline communications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the wireline communications facility, except when in use for ongoing work, and when repairs to same are being made. 
(10)  Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a pole for signs or advertising purposes including company name, banners, streamers, etc., shall be strictly prohibited. 
(11)  Accessory buildings or structures. All accessory buildings or structures shall meet all building design standards as listed in this Code, and in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code and shall be painted or constructed using neutral colors. All accessory buildings or structures shall require a building permit issued by the planning, zoning and building department. 
(12)  Colors. Except where superseded by the requirements of other county, state, or federal regulatory agencies possessing jurisdiction over poles, poles shall be painted or constructed in neutral colors, designed to blend into the surrounding environment. 
(13)  Inspection report. 
a.  Owners of utility poles used to support wireline communications facility owners shall submit a report to the village engineer certifying structural and electrical integrity every two years. 
b.  Inspections shall be conducted by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Florida. The results of such inspections shall be provided to the planning, zoning and building department. Based upon the results of an inspection, the building official may require repair or removal of a wireline communications facility. 
c.  Following the completion of construction of a wireline communications facility in the village, the owner shall submit a report to the village engineer certifying "as-built" compliance with the permitted structural and electrical parameters. The village shall conduct a post-construction inspection to verify the submitted report and confirm the constructed facility does not present a public safety hazard. 
(14)  Existing wireline infrastructure. 
a.  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, wireline communications facilities in existence as of _____, may be replaced with equal or less visually impacting facilities after approval by the village engineer or his/her designee, and same are processed through the permitting process outlined herein. 
(15)  System maintenance. Scheduled maintenance shall be performed so as to ensure the integrity of the structures and adjoining wirelines and to minimize potentially hazardous conditions, and to minimize the existence and effect of any downed lines in the village's rights-of-way. 
(16)  Modifications or replacements. Modification or replacement of any utility pole supporting wireline communications facilities in the village shall be subject to permit approval of the village engineer consistent with the requirements of this section. Any removal or replacement of communications facilities that substantially changes the physical dimensions of a wireline system shall be subject to permit approval. 
(f)  Cooperative determination. In the event an applicant demonstrates, in writing, to the satisfaction of the village engineer, or designee, that the operation of this section produces a result which is either: (i) overly burdensome and a hardship on the applicant, and is inconsistent with the general public welfare; or (ii) inconsistent with the intent of the particular provisions of this section, and inconsistent with the general public welfare, the applicant and the village engineer, or designee, shall cooperate to determine an appropriate location and aesthetic design for the utility pole for the proposed wireline communications facility. In any such cooperative determination there shall be a preference for collocation with existing wireline communications facilities or other utility facilities, or for use of unused space on existing wireline communications facilities. 
(g)  Underground installation; relocation. Any wireline communications facility to be located underground shall comply with the provisions of this subsection, to the extent not prohibited by federal law, state law or applicable PSC rules and regulations. 
(1)  Every applicant who places or constructs wireline communications facilities underground shall maintain appropriate participation in the regional notification center for subsurface installations. 
(2)  The applicant shall not in any way displace, damage, or destroy any wireline facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, sewer, water main, pipe, cable, conduit, fiber optic, or other pathway or any other facilities belonging to the village. The applicant shall be liable to the village for the costs of any repairs made necessary by any such displacement, damage or destruction, of facilities belonging to the village, and the applicant shall pay such costs upon demand. In the case of an emergency, the village may commence repairs without any prior notice to the applicant. The term emergency shall mean a condition that may affect the public's health, safety or welfare. In the event of an emergency, the village may cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing village employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within 30 days after the submission of the bill by the village to the applicant. In all other nonemergency circumstances, the applicant shall be given prior written notice. If such repairs are not performed in a reasonable and satisfactory manner within the 30 calendar days after receiving notice, the village may cause the repairs to be made at the facility owner's expense, utilizing village employees, agents or contractors, charge any and all costs, and require reimbursement within 30 days after the submission of the bill by the village to the applicant. 
(3)  Subject to F.S. § 337.403, whenever an order of the village requires such removal or change in the location of any wireline communications facility from the public rights-of-way, and the facility owner fails to remove or change the same at its own expense to conform to the directive within the time stated in the notice, the village may proceed to cause the communications facility to be removed. The expense thereby incurred, except as provided in F.S. § 337.403 shall be paid out of any money available therefor, and such expense shall be charged against the owner of the wireline communications facility and levied, collected and paid to the village. 
(4)  A final order of the village imposed pursuant to the Florida Statutes and applicable provisions of the Village Code, if any, shall constitute a lien on any property of the owner and may be enforced as provided therein. 
(5)  The village retains the right and privilege to cut or remove any wireline facilities located within the public rights-of-way as the village manager in his/her reasonable discretion may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the village shall attempt to notify the owner of the wireline facility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a wireline facility and shall notify the owner of the facility, if known, after cutting or removing a wireline facility. 
(6)  An applicant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower its wireline communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the applicant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The applicant shall be given not less than 30 days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 8, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-9. - Applications and decisions. 
(a)  Submission. All applications, including the full application, amendments, or supplements to an application, or responses to requests for information regarding an application, shall be submitted electronically through the village's permitting portal. 
(b)  Pre-application meeting. Prior to filing an application for a communications permit, an applicant is strongly encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting with the village engineer or his designee to discuss the proposed facility, the requirements of this chapter, and any potential impacts of the proposed facility. 
(c)  Content. An applicant shall submit an application on the form approved by the village engineer for this purpose, which may be updated from time-to-time. 
(d)  Completeness review. A communications permit application is deemed submitted or resubmitted on the date the application is received by the village engineer. The village engineer shall notify the applicant in writing via electronic mail within ten days after the date the application is initially submitted or additional information resubmitted, whether the application is properly completed in compliance with the village's requirements. If the application is not completed in compliance with the village's requirements, the village engineer shall so notify the applicant specifying any missing information or deficiencies which, if cured, make the application properly completed. An application is deemed complete if the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within ten days. Upon resubmission of information to cure the stated deficiencies, the village shall notify the applicant, in writing via electronic mail, no later than ten days after the additional information is submitted, of any remaining deficiencies that must be cured. If a specified deficiency is not properly cured when the applicant resubmits its application to comply with the notice of deficiencies, the village may continue to request the information until such time as the specified deficiency is cured, or may establish a reasonable time frame within which the required information to cure the application deficiency is to be provided. If the curative information is not provided within such time frame, the application will be considered withdrawn or closed for incompleteness. 
(e)  Consolidated application. A permit applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro wireless facilities within the village right-of-way may file a consolidated communications facility application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 30 small wireless facilities. If the permit application includes multiple small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro wireless facilities, the village may separately address small wireless facility or non-exempt micro wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. A consolidated communications facility application must include all the general permit application information required by this Section. 
(f)  Application decisions. Unless otherwise specified herein, the village shall grant or deny a properly completed application for small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro wireless facilities in the public right-of-way within 60 days or, as otherwise required by federal and state law, after the date the application is received. Failure to take any action on the permit application within that time shall be deemed to be approval of such application. Unless the parties engage in alternate location negotiations as provided herein below, the parties may mutually agree to extend the 60-day application review period. At the end of such extended time, the village shall grant or deny the permit application. A permit issued pursuant to this subdivision shall remain effective for one year unless extended by the village. If a permit is denied pursuant to this subdivision, the specific reasons for rejecting the permit application, including the specific code provisions on which the denial was based, shall be explained and set forth in writing via electronic mail to the permit applicant on the day the village denies the application. The permit applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and resubmit the application within 30 days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after receipt, otherwise the application is deemed approved. The subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. The village may deny an application for small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro wireless facilities in the public right-of-way if the proposed application: 
(i)  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
(ii)  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes. 
(iii)  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
(iv)  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual. 
(v)  Fails to comply with applicable Codes. 
(g)  Alternate location negotiation period for small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro facilities proposed in the public right-of-way. Within 14 days after receipt of an application to install a small wireless facilities or non-exempt micro facility within the public right-of-way, the village may request the applicant via e-mail to move the proposed small wireless facility or non-exempt micro wireless facility to another utility pole within the right-of-way or to construct a new utility pole or support structure within the right-of-way. The village and applicant shall negotiate the design, location and spacing of the alternate small wireless facility for 30 days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, the applicant shall either accept the proposed modification, which will thereafter be approved by the village, or reject the proposed modification in which event the village shall process the original application for a decision to be made within 90 days of original submission. Decisions issued by the village must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. 
(h)  Public notice. Prior to the issuance of any permit pertaining to the placement and maintenance of any communications facilities within the public rights-of-way located in residential zoning districts, the village engineer or designee may require the applicant to issue notice of the proposed work in writing (e.g. doorhanger, letter) to property owners within 250 feet of such rights-of-way, as well as provide notification to any affected home owners' association or neighborhood association (the "notification area") concurrent with the application submittal. The village may further require the applicant to hold a public information meeting for purposes of answering questions from affected property owners. Such public information meeting shall be held within ten days of the village's receipt of request for same. 
(i)  Waivers. Requests for waivers from any requirement of this section shall be made in writing to the village engineer or his or her designee. The village engineer may grant or deny a request for a waiver pursuant to this subsection. The village engineer may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated that, notwithstanding the issuance of a waiver, the village will be provided all information necessary to understand the nature of the construction or other activity to be conducted pursuant to the permit sought, or if otherwise required by law. The village engineer's decision as to any waiver request pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal in accordance with section 23-5(b) of this chapter. All waivers approved pursuant to this subsection shall be (1) granted only on a case-by-case basis, and (2) narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 9, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-10. - Consultants. 
The village engineer or village manager, as the case may be, is authorized, in its discretion, to select and retain independent consultant(s) with expertise in communications in connection with the review of any application under this chapter. Such independent consultant review may be retained on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with an application, including, but not limited to, application completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis, and/or verification of compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions standards 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 10, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-11. - Conditions of approval. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to any supplemental conditions assigned by the village engineer or village manager, as the case may be, all permits granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions, unless modified by the approving authority: 
(1)  Code compliance. The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with all applicable Codes, including federal, state and local laws, regulations and other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to use of rights-of-way. 
(2)  Inspections; emergencies. The village or its designee may enter onto the facility area to visually inspect the communications facility upon 48 hours prior notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections and may be present for any inspection of its communications facility by the village. The village reserves the right to examine or direct its designee to examine the facility and support, repair, disable, or remove any elements of the facility in an emergency when the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property. The village shall make every effort to contact the permittee prior to disabling or removing any facility elements, but in any case shall notify permittee within 24 hours of doing so. 
(3)  Contact. The permittee shall at all times maintain accurate contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall include a phone number, street mailing address and email address for at least one natural person. 
(4)  Indemnities. The permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village, its agents, officers, officials, and employees (i) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, writs of mandamus, and other actions or proceedings brought against the village or its agents, officers, officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the village's approval of the permit, and (ii) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and any and all claims, demands, law suits, or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or any of each one's agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors excepting therefrom any damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses that are the result of the negligent, intentional or willful and wanton acts of the village, its agents, officers, officials and employees. Further, permittees shall be strictly liable for interference caused by their facilities with the village's communications systems. Whenever the village encounters radio frequency interference with its public safety communications equipment, and it believes that such interference has been or is being caused by one or more wireless communications facilities, the village shall provide notification to all wireless providers operating in the village of possible interference with the public safety communications equipment, and upon such notifications, the wireless providers shall use their best efforts to cooperate and coordinate with the village and among themselves to investigate and mitigate the interference, if any, utilizing the procedures set forth in the joint wireless industry-public safety "Enhanced Best Practices Guide," released by the FCC in Appendix D of FCC 04-168 (released August 6, 2004), including the "good engineering practices," as may be amended or revised by the FCC from time to time in any successor regulations. If any wireless provider fails to cooperate with the village in complying with the wireless provider's obligations under this section or if the FCC makes a determination of radio frequency interference with the village public safety communications equipment, the wireless provider who failed to cooperate and/or the owner of the equipment that caused the interference shall be responsible, upon FCC determination of radio frequency interference, for reimbursing the village for all costs associated with ascertaining and resolving the interference, including but not limited to any engineering studies obtained by the village to determine the source of the interference. For the purposes of this subsection, failure to cooperate shall include failure to initiate any response or action as described in the "best practices guide" within 24 hours of village's notification. 
(5)  Adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid material adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, and removal of the facility. 
(6)  General maintenance; graffiti. The site and the facility, including, but not limited to, any landscaping, concealment elements, and related transmission equipment, must be maintained in a neat, orderly, and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans and conditions of approval. All graffiti on facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within seven days after notification from the village. 
(7)  RF exposure compliance. All facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. All applications must demonstrate compliance by including a certified analysis showing that the proposed facility satisfies the FCC's Radio-Frequency ("RF") exposure guidelines applicable on an individual basis, and on a cumulative basis (considering all frequencies, and all emitting sources as required by FCC regulations). After transmitter and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended operations of the facility, permittee or its representative must conduct on-site post-installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual compliance with the FCC OET Bulletin 65 RF emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled RF exposure in all sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be operating at maximum operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a distance where the RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general population limit. 
(8)  Testing. Testing of any back-up generators and other noise producing equipment associated with any communications facility located within a village right-of-way shall take place on weekdays only, and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except that testing is prohibited on holidays that fall on a weekday. In addition, testing is prohibited on weekend days. 
(9)  Utilities undergrounded. Extensions of electrical and communications land lines to serve any communications facility located in the village right-of-way shall be undergrounded where the existing electrical and communications facilities are located below grade. 
(10)  Other approvals. The permittee shall obtain all other applicable permits, approvals, and agreements necessary to install and operate the facility in conformance with federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations. 
(11)  Modifications. No changes shall be made to the approved plans without review and approval in accordance with this chapter subject to the exemptions provided in F.S. § 337.401(7)(e). 
(12)  Agreement with village. Permittee shall enter into the appropriate agreement with the village, as determined by the village, prior to constructing, attaching, or operating a facility on a village pole. Such agreement shall include provisions outlining the process for make-ready work as provided in F.S. § 337.401(7)(f) and 47 U.S.C. § 224 and implementing regulations, including provisions for good-faith estimates for such make-ready work necessary to support the proposed facility, or provide a replacement pole if the existing pole is incapable of hosting the facility. Alternatively, the village may require the permittee to provide such make-ready estimate at permittee's expense for the work necessary to support the facility, including a pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole replacement is required, the scope of the make-ready estimate shall include the design, fabrication and installation of a pole that is substantially similar in color, size, and composition to the existing pole. The replacement pole shall remain the property of the village. 
(13)  Village not liable. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to make or hold the village responsible or liable for any damage to persons or any property whatsoever, from any cause whatsoever, arising from the use, operation or condition of the permittee's wireline or wireless communications facilities; or by reason of any inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect. Nor shall the issuance of any permit or the approval or disapproval of any placement or maintenance of the permittee's wireline or wireless communications facilities as authorized herein constitute any representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by, nor create any liability upon, the village or any official, agent or employee 
(14)  Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to performing any permitted work in the village's rights-of-way, the village shall require the permittee and/or owner of the communications facility to establish in the village's favor a performance and payment bonds in an amount equal to a minimum of 110 percent of the cost of the work being permitted, exclusive of equipment cost to secure the restoration of the public rights-of-way, and to ensure the permittee's and/or owner's faithful performance of the construction or other obligations related to the work in the public rights-of-way, in accordance with applicable sections of the Village Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In the event a permittee and/or owner of the communications facility fails to complete the work in accordance with the provisions of the permit and this subdivision, or fails to complete all restoration work in the right-of-way as required by the village, including but not limited to repair or replacement of damaged landscaping, structures, hardscape, underground utility facilities, structures or equipment, or any other item or feature disturbed by the permitted work, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the village as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal of any property of the permittee or owner, or the cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
(c)  No less than 12 months after completion of the construction and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bonds, the permittee and/or owner of the communications facility may request the village engineer or his/her designee to remove the requirement to continue the bonds and the village, if the communications facility is completed, shall release the bonds within ten days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall require a new bond for any subsequent work performed in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  The bonds shall be issued by a surety; (i) authorized to do business in the State of Florida and having evidenced same by a certificate of good standing from the Florida Department of State, and (ii) having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; the bond shall be subject to the approval of the village attorney; and shall provide that: 
"Unless released by the Village, this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after receipt by the Village, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  The rights reserved by the village with respect to any bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the village may have under this section, or at law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the bonds will affect any other right the village may have. 
(15)  Conflicts with improvements. Except as may be otherwise provided by F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, for all communications facilities located within the right-of-way, the permittee shall remove or relocate, at its expense and without expense to the village, any or all of its facilities when such removal or relocation is deemed necessary by the village by reason of any change of grade, alignment, or width of any right-of-way, for installation of services, water pipes, drains, storm drains, power or signal lines, traffic control devices, right-of-way improvements, or for any other construction, repair, or improvement to the right-of-way. Any removal or relocation required under this paragraph shall be completed by permittee within 90 days of receipt of notice from the village. In the event permittee fails to abide by this timeframe, and permittee's failure to remove or relocate its facilities impedes the progress of the project that necessitated said removal or relocation, the village shall have the right to cure this deficiency, and recover the costs incurred in doing so by drawing on the required performance bond. In such a case, the village shall bear no liability for any damage or disruption to permittee's facilities or operations directly or indirectly resulting from the village's reasonable efforts to cure permittee's noncompliance with this paragraph. 
(16)  Vacation. Permittee shall notify the village engineer of the intent to vacate a facility at least 30 days prior to the vacation. 
(17)  Abandonment. If a facility is not operated for a continuous period of nine months, the wireless permit and any other permit or approval therefor shall be deemed abandoned and terminated automatically, unless before the end of the nine-month period (i) the village engineer has determined that the facility has resumed operations, or (ii) the village has received an application to transfer the permit to another service provider. No later than 90 days from the date the facility is determined to have ceased operation or the permittee has notified the village engineer of its intent to vacate the site, the permittee shall remove all equipment and improvements associated with the use and shall restore the site to its original condition to the satisfaction of the village engineer. The permittee shall provide written verification of the removal of the facilities within 30 days of the date the removal is completed. If the facility is not removed within 30 days after the permit has been discontinued pursuant to this subsection, the site shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and the village may cause the facility to be removed at permittee's expense. If there are two or more users of a single facility or support structure, then this provision shall apply to the specific elements or parts thereof that were abandoned, but will not be effective for the entirety thereof until all users cease use thereof. 
(18)  Encourage co-location. Where the facility site is capable of accommodating a co-located facility upon the same site, the owner and operator of the existing facility shall allow another carrier to co-locate its facilities and equipment thereon, provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions. 
(19)  Compliance. The permittee must at all times construct, operate, and maintain the facility in accordance with all permits, requirements, applicable codes, and approvals. 
(20)  Force majeure. In the event the village's or permittee's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the village's or permittee's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such permittee uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For the purposes of this section, cause or events not within the village's or permittee's control shall include, but not be limited to, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes, and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within a permittee's control, and thus not falling within this section shall include without limitation, permittee's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of permittee's directors, officers, employees, contractors, or agents. 
(b)  Eligible facilities requests. An application to add a second wireless communications facility to an existing wireless communications facility located within a right-of-way that meets the specifications for an "eligible facilities request" under section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, (47 USC § 1455(a)) and does not cause the existing wireless communications facility to exceed the definition of "small wireless facility" as defined herein shall be subject to the processing and approval by the village engineer or his/her designee pursuant to the processes outlined in this chapter and shall be subject to the following conditions, unless modified by the approving authority: 
(1)  General conditions. The conditions provided in section 23-7 of this chapter shall apply to the extent permissible by law. 
(2)  No permit term extension. The village's grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject wireless facility. The village's grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit will not extend the permit term for the underlying permit or any other underlying regulatory approval, and its term shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station. 
(3)  No waiver of standing. The village's grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the village to challenge Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, or any modification to Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 11, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-12. - Breach; termination of permit. 
(a)  For breach. A permit granted under this chapter may be revoked for failure to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable law. Upon revocation, the communications facility must be removed; provided that removal of a utility pole owned by the village, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a utility pole in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the village. All costs incurred by the village in connection with the revocation and removal shall be paid by entities who own or control any part of the communications facility. 
(b)  For installation without a permit. Any communications facility installed without a permit (except for those exempted by this chapter or pursuant to F.S. § 337.401) must be removed; provided that removal of a utility pole owned by the village, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a utility pole in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the village. All costs incurred by the village in connection with the revocation and removal shall be paid by entities who own or control any part of the personal wireless services facility. 
(c)  Municipal infraction. Any violation of this chapter will be subject to the same penalties as a violation of the Chapter II, Article IV, Division I of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 12, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-13. - Infrastructure controlled by village. 
The village, as a matter of policy, will negotiate agreements for use of village poles. The placement of small wireless facilities on village poles shall be subject to the agreement. The agreement shall specify the compensation to the village for use of the village pole as provided in F.S. § 337.401. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 13, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 23-14. - Nondiscrimination. 
In establishing the rights, obligations and conditions set forth in this chapter, it is the intent of the village to treat each applicant or public right-of-way user in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner, to the extent required by law, and with considerations that may be unique to the technologies, situation and legal status of each particular applicant or request for use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 14, 4-23-19)  
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Electrical and alarm system contracting, F.S. § 489.501 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 22, 2005, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-42, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to burglar alarms and derived from Ord. No. 96-09, § 1, adopted May 14, 1996. 
Editor's note— This article is based on chapter 16, article III, of the Palm Beach County Code of Ordinances. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Territorial application. 
This chapter applies to every residential and nonresidential land use within the incorporated village. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 26-32. - Palm Beach County Ordinance adopted. 
The Palm Beach County Code Chapter 16, Law Enforcement, Article III, Alarms, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as part of the Code so that violations of the Palm Beach County Ordinance are also violations of this Code. Where any conflict may exist between this Code and the Palm Beach County Ordinance, the Palm Beach County Ordinance will prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 2-22-05)  
Chapter 27 - REMOTE ACCESS TO COMMUNITIES 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Remote access to gated communities. 
(a)  All gated communities within the village are required to install a remote control system known as the "Linear Access Pro Receiver/Transmitter System", or any compatible system that meets the following specifications: 
(1)  Wireless based systems; 
(2)  Gate operators capable of remote activation from a distance of up to 250 feet by the use of a radio frequency, programmable transmitter; 
(3)  Transmitters are block-coded into the access Pro Receiver, or compatible receiver; 
(4)  Transmitters are capable of individual deletion from the system at any time; 
(5)  Outputs: 
a.  Relay: two form "C:relays, related at 1 amp @ 2 volts ac or dc; 
b.  LED display: three eight-segment displays to provide system activity and programming information; 
c.  LED indicators: front panel indicators are used in conjunction with LED display to provide transmitter and radio activity; 
(6)  Inputs: 
a.  RF: integral 318 MHz super regenerative receiver with - 94 dBm sensitivity (nominal); receives MegaCode format transmitters; 
b.  Open request terminal: contact closure to ground activates access relay; 
c.  Open button: pressing activates access relays; also used to clear trouble codes from MGT; 
d.  Keypad: integral 15-key silicone rubber keypad for system programming and interrogation; 
(7)  Power: 12 to 24 volts ac or dc, 250 mA maximum. 
(b)  Gated communities with the village shall install, at their expense, a remote control system at each entry point into their community in compliance with subsection (a) of this section no later than 120 days from the adoption of this section. 
(c)  Public safety personnel (fire, fire/rescue, police, etc.) shall be authorized to gain access to any gated community within the village to perform the duties of such public safety personnel in accordance with the law. 
(d)  Maintenance of the installed remote control system(s) shall be the responsibility of the community where it/they are installed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, 2-12-08)  
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Environmental control, F.S. ch. 403. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 30-31—30-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOT CLEARING AND DILAPIDATED PROPERTIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2008, amended the former Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 30-51—30-56, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 97-05, adopted Mar. 25, 1997 ;Ord. No. 99-06, §§ 1—6, adopted May 25, 1999; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 6, adopted Mar. 19, 2002. 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Adjacent property means the lot immediately adjoining a lot that is subject to review under this division. 
Department means the village planning, zoning, and building department. 
Developed property means any real property upon which a structure, paving, lake, waterway, water body, golf course or sports field improvement, or other improvement has been erected or installed. Overhead, underground, and other public or private franchised utility installations shall not be considered improvements for the purposes of this definition. 
Dilapidated structure means any unoccupied real property upon which all or a portion of the structure is not maintained in good repair, in a structurally sound manner, or in a sanitary manner, including but not limited to the following items when such items are visible from a public right-of-way, public property or adjacent property; broken window or door glass; broken or damaged windows or window frames; broken or damaged doors or entryways; broken or damaged garage doors; roofs with damage that may cause interior leaks; or unsecured or stagnant swimming pools. 
Landscaped areas means outdoor areas required to consist of or consisting of any of the following or combination thereof: grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, or palms; and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as rocks, pebbles, sand, walls, or fences, but excluding paving. 
Lot means any tract or parcel of land other than an approved landfill site. 
Native vegetation means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the village. Plant species that have been introduced by man are not native vegetation. 
Natural area means an area of native vegetative cover. 
Non-native means any plant not native to the State of Florida. 
Noxious vegetation means Schinus terebinthifolius (commonly known as Florida Holly or Brazilian Pepper); Melaleuca quinquenervia (commonly known as Punk Tree, Cajeput, or Paper Bark Tree); and Casuarina spp. (commonly known as Australian Pine). 
Owner means the owner of record of a lot as appears in the official records of Palm Beach County. 
Special magistrate means the special magistrate appointed as provided in Chapter 2, "Administration", Article 4, "Code Enforcement", Section 2-293, "Special Magistrate". 
Stagnant residential swimming pool means a pool with water that does not comply with the water clarity or turnover requirements as provided in Chapter 3, "General Standards", Section 303, "Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs", Section 303.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code or as provided in Sec. 9.1.3 of the American National Standards Institute/National Spa and Pool Institute 5-2003 (ANSI/NSPI-5 2003) "Standards for Residential Inground Swimming Pools." 
Undeveloped property means any real property that is not developed property. 
Unoccupied structure means any structure without the daily or normal use associated with the structure, including the residing of an individual or individuals overnight or the use equipment, merchandise, or machinery in any public, commercial or industrial building. 
Unsecured swimming pool means an existing swimming pool that is not in compliance with the pool barrier requirements of Section 4.2.4.1.3.1.9 or Section 424.2.17 of the 2004 edition of the Florida Building Code. 
Untended vegetation means grass, weeds, and underbrush allowed to grow in an uncontrolled manner, or not cared for or maintained on a regular basis. 
Waste shall be defined in section 46-23, Code of Ordinances of the Village of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-22-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-52. - Exemption. 
Natural areas, if the vegetation consists entirely of native vegetation, shall be exempt from the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 30-53. - Nuisance declared. 
It is hereby declared and determined by the village council that the following shall each individually, or in any combination, be considered nuisances when they exist upon a lot, an occupied structure or an unoccupied structure in the village: 
(1)  Accumulations of waste, yard trash or rubble, and debris. 
(2)  Excessive growth of grass, weeds, and low-growing vegetation. Such grass, weeds and low-growing vegetation shall be maintained as follows: 
Table 30.53-1 
Lot and Use 	Size of Lot 	Maximum Maintenance Height 
Undeveloped or Vacant—Residential and Non-Residential 	One-half acre or less 	6 inches on the entire lot 
Undeveloped or Vacant—Residential and Non-Residential 	Greater than one-half acre 	12 inches on the first 120 feet measuring from property line or pod line of the lot on all sides of the lot adjacent to a developed lot. 18 inches on the first 120 feet outside of the Urban Services area and in Little Ranches 
Developed or Partially Developed—Residential and Non-Residential 	One-half acre or less 	6 inches on the entire lot 
Developed or Partially Developed—Residential and Non-Residential 	Greater than one-half acre 	6 inches on the first 120 feet measuring from property line or pod line of the lot on any side of the lot 
Golf Course—Active, Inactive or Abandoned (Prior to Redevelopment) 	Any size 	6 inches on the entire lot(s) 
 
(3)  Noxious vegetation. 
(4)  Vegetation on developed or undeveloped property that creates a danger to public health, safety and welfare by creating a fire hazard; by providing a nesting, breeding or feeding area for sandflies, mosquitoes, rodents, snakes or other species of pests and vermin, or disease-bearing organisms; by impairing the vision of motorists or bicyclists or impeding pedestrians; or by adversely affecting the aesthetic appearance of the property upon which the vegetation is found and adjacent properties. 
(5)  Dilapidated structures. 
(6)  Private residential swimming pools that are unsecured or stagnant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 2019-01, § 2, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 30-54. - Nuisance abated. 
The village council further determines that any nuisance that is found in the village shall be abated in the following manner: 
(1)  If the nuisance consists of accumulations of waste, yard trash, or rubble and debris, it shall be abated in its entirety. 
(2)  If the nuisance consists of grass, weeds, and low-growing vegetation as provided in section 30-53(2) the nuisance shall be abated as provided in Table 30.53-1. 
(3)  If the nuisance consists noxious vegetation on developed or undeveloped lots inside the urban service area that are adjacent to developed lots, the nuisance shall be abated in its entirety if the lot is one-half acre or less. If the lot is greater than one-half acre, only so much of the nuisance shall be abated as lies within 120 feet of the boundary of an adjacent property that is developed and within 120 feet of a property line abutting a street. 
(4)  If the nuisance consists of vegetation that impairs the vision of motorists or bicyclists, or impedes pedestrians, the nuisance shall be abated so as to afford a clear, unobstructed view and safe pedestrian access. If the nuisance creates a danger to the health, safety and welfare in one or more of the ways provided in section 30-53(4), the nuisance shall be abated in its entirety. 
(5)  If the nuisance consists of an unoccupied structure containing broken window or door glass, broken or damaged windows or window frames, broken or damaged exterior doors or entryways, broken or damaged garage doors, an unsecured swimming pool, a stagnant swimming pool, or damaged roofs that may allow an interior leak, the nuisance shall be abated in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 2019-01, § 3, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 30-55. - Procedure for enforcement. 
(a)  Upon the finding by the village that a nuisance exists, the village will send a notice of nuisance to the property owner. 
(b)  If the nuisance has not been corrected within 21 days after mailing the notice of nuisance, a notice of violation shall be issued to the property owner that shall set forth: 
(1)  The code section violated and description of the nature of the violation; 
(2)  A demand that remedial action be completed within a maximum of 15 days from the date of the mailing, delivery, or posting of such notice; 
(3)  A statement that failure to remedy the violation will result in correction of the violation by the village at the expense of the property owner; and 
(4)  A statement that the notice of violation may be appealed pursuant to section 30-56. 
(c)  The notice of violation shall be mailed to the address of the property owner as shown by the tax rolls of the county by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall also be posted upon the property's front door or facade, or if there be no building, stapled to a stake sign and covered with plastic. The notice shall state that no further notice of village remedial actions to address violations of section of the Code will be given if the village effects remedial action and subsequently, the same condition or conditions occur. However, this shall be applicable only if the property owner remains the same according to the tax rolls of the county. If the property owner has changed, a new notice shall be provided. 
(d)  If the owner of the subject property fails to correct the violation as required by this section and the notice of violation by the date specified in the notice of violation, the village manager or designee may authorize the correction of the noncomplying condition by the village. The charge for the cost of abatement shall be levied in an amount equal to the actual cost to the village plus an administrative and operating fee of $250.00. The actual method of correction shall be determined by the village manager, and may, in the case of a dilapidated structure, include boarding of broken windows and doors. 
(e)  If the village effects abatement, the costs and administrative and operating fee shall be calculated, and an invoice sent to the property owner of record by regular mail. 
(f)  Failure to pay the full amount of any charges assessed pursuant to this section when due shall result in the Village of Wellington filing a lien in the public records of Palm Beach County, which lien when recorded shall constitute a lien against the property co-equal with the lien of state, county, district and municipal taxes and superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, charges (included but not limited to liens of proper recorded mortgages until paid). Such lien shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date of recordation until paid. The property owner shall be responsible for the cost of filing and/or release of the lien. A notice that a lien has been recorded shall be sent to the property owner at the owner's address according to the tax rolls of the county. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the department from pursuing enforcement of this division through the code enforcement process. 
(h)  The village enforcement personnel will keep a docket of these liens, and will notify the village governing body of liens which are not paid. The village may enforce the lien in any manner or method permitted by law. including instituting an action to foreclose the lien in a similar manner as mortgages are foreclosed after authorization given by the village council. Should the village council not give its approval, this shall not constitute an estoppel or waiver of the village and thereafter the village staff shall bring to the village council for consideration the foreclosure of each lien not satisfied periodically. Should the village enforce a lien, the village shall be able to recover all expenses, costs and attorney's fees, including those on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 30-56. - Appeals. 
The lot owner may file an appeal to the special magistrate for a hearing to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist, or to show that the condition does not constitute a nuisance. Any appeal must be filed within 15 days after the date of the initial notice of a nuisance sent by the department. Notice of the right to an appeal shall be included in the initial notice of nuisance to the lot owner. The owner's appeal shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the department and shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order in the amount of $100.00 made payable to the village. The amount shall constitute the fee necessary to defray the costs to the village, the department, and the special magistrate for processing and administering the appeal. The special magistrate shall give the lot owner seeking an appeal written notice of the date and location of the scheduled hearing and shall hear the appeal at its regularly scheduled agenda no later than 30 days after receipt of the appeal by the department. Failure to file an appeal or to appear before the special magistrate shall be deemed a waiver of the lot owner's rights to appeal the administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Secs. 30-57—30-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-71. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Village of Wellington Initial Stormwater Control Ordinance," and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 1.0, 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-72. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the village. This article is intended to comply with federal and state law and regulations regarding water quality. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 1.0(1.1), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-73. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:] 
Authorized official means any employee or agent of the village authorized in writing by the director to administer or enforce the provisions of this article. 
Director means the director of public works. 
Discharge means any direct or indirect entry of any solid, liquid or gaseous matter. 
Person means any natural individual, corporation, partnership, institution, or other entity. 
Site of industrial activity means any area or facility used for manufacturing, processing or storing of raw materials, as defined under 40 CFR Section 122.26(a)(14) of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended. 
Stormwater means any stormwater runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater system means the system of conveyances owned by the village used for collecting, storing, and transporting stormwater but not including any facilities intended to be used in accordance with applicable law for collecting and transporting sanitary or other wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 1.0(1.2), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-74. - Operation and maintenance responsibilities for stormwater systems. 
Water management systems within the village shall be operated and maintained in a manner that will ensure that development and redevelopment adequately accommodate stormwater to meet all federal, state, and local requirements. 
The village establishes the following regulations relating to the operation and maintenance of stormwater management systems within the village: 
(1)  The village will be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of the primary water management system in the village (backbone), which consists of canals, pump stations and other stormwater management facilities described in drainage facility map. 
(2)  The village will be responsible for the secondary water management system as defined by village rights-of-way and village-owned properties. 
(3)  All other stormwater management facilities shall be operated and maintained by either the individual property owner or a duly constituted home owners or property owners association having ownership or control of the property on which the facilities are located. 
(4)  Operation and maintenance responsibilities for stormwater management facilities on private property may be assumed by the village only pursuant to a written agreement between the parties and the execution of all necessary easements and/or rights of entry. 
(5)  The village will monitor all applications to modify the Surface Water Management Permit No. 50-00548-S (Master Permit for the Village of Wellington issued to Acme Improvement District) and will object to the issuance of any modification by South Florida Water Management District which is inconsistent with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, § 2, 4-27-04)  
Secs. 30-75—30-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 30-81. - General prohibitions. 
Any discharge into the stormwater system in violation of any federal, state, county, municipal or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 2.0(2.1), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-82. - Specific prohibitions. 
By adoption of industrial activity stormwater regulations or by issuance of industrial activity stormwater permits, or both, the director may impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of stormwater (including without limitation the designation of maximum levels of pollutants) discharged into the stormwater system from sites of industrial activity. Any promulgation of such regulations and issuance of permits by the director shall be in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 2.0(2.2), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-83. - Administrative orders. 
The director may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge determined by the director to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 2.0(2.3), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-84. - NPDES permits. 
Any person who holds a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall provide a copy of such permit to the director no later than the later of 60 calendar days after the effective date of this article or 60 calendar days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 2.0(2.4), 1-27-98)  
Secs. 30-85—30-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 30-91. - General prohibitions. 
Except as set forth under section 30-93 of this article or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 3.0(3.1), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-92. - Specific prohibitions. 
Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 3.0(3.2), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-93. - Authorized exceptions. 
Unless the director determines that it is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under section 30-91 of this article: flows from firefighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool contributions. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 3.0(3.3), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-94. - Illicit connections. 
No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in any discharge in violation of this article. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 3.0(3.4), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-95. - Administrative order. 
The director may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or any connection to the stormwater system, determined by the director to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 3.0(3.5), 1-27-98)  
Secs. 30-96—30-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SPILLS AND DUMPING 
 
Sec. 30-101. - General prohibitions. 
Except as set forth under section 30-93 of this article or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 4.0(4.1), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-102. - Specific prohibitions. 
Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 4.0(4.2), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-103. - Notification of spills. 
As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this article, such person shall immediately notify the director by telephoning (561) 791-4000, and if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and clean up of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the director at the public works department, Village of Wellington, 14000 Greenbriar Boulevard, Wellington, FL. 33414 within three calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 4.0(4.3), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-104. - Administrative order. 
The director may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater system, determined by the director to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 4.0(4.4), 1-27-98)  
Secs. 30-105—30-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-111. - Injunctive relief. 
Any violation of any provision of this article, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to injunctive relief if necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 5.0(5.1), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-112. - Continuing violation. 
A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any continuing violation of any provision of this article, or of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 5.0(5.2), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-113. - Enforcement actions. 
The director may take all actions necessary, including the issuance of notices of violation, the filing of court actions and/or referral of the matter to the local code enforcement board to require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and with any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 5.0(5.3), 1-27-98)  
Secs. 30-114—30-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING 
 
Sec. 30-121. - Authority for inspections. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulations or permits issued hereunder; provided that (a) if such property, building or facility is occupied, such authorized official shall first present proper credentials and request permission to enter, and (b) if such property, building or facility is unoccupied, such authorized official shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building or facility, and shall request permission to enter. Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state that the owner or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in such event that entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner or person in control refuses permission to enter after such request has been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or area-wide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including but not limited to random sampling and sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, non-stormwater discharges, or similar factors. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 6.0(6.1), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-122. - Authority for monitoring and sampling. 
Any authorized official may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of discharges to the stormwater system. During any inspections made to enforce the provisions of this article, or regulations or permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any samples deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 6.0(6.2), 1-27-98)  
Sec. 30-123. - Requirements for monitoring. 
The director may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility (including but not limited to a site of industrial activity) to undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the stormwater system and to furnish periodic reports. 
(Ord. No. 97-24, Art. 6.0(6.3), 1-27-98)  
Secs. 30-124—30-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 30-141. - Applicability. 
All provisions of this article shall be effective within the Village of Wellington and shall set restrictions, constraints, and prohibitions to enhance the village's water sources and provide a permanent water conservation measure. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from compliance with any applicable regulations enacted by any agency of the State of Florida having jurisdiction over water resources in the village. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 1, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 30-142. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a regulatory framework and guidance document which will help ensure consistent water and landscape irrigation conservation throughout the village. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 30-143. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply within this article: 
Impervious areas shall mean land surfaces which do not allow the penetration of water, including, but not limited to, paved roads, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, and highly compacted areas, including shell and clay. 
Landscape irrigation means the direct application of water by means other than precipitation. 
Low-volume irrigation system (micro-irrigation) means that type of equipment or irrigation device designed to provide small quantities of water on or below the soil surface as drops or tiny streams of spray through emitters or applicators placed along a water delivery line. Micro-irrigation includes, but is not limited to, methods or concepts such as bubbler, drip, trickler, mist or micro-spray, and subsurface irrigation. 
Water user means any person who directly or indirectly takes water from private or public utility systems, individual wells, or surface water. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 30-144. - Restrictions. 
(a)  All landscape irrigation shall adhere to the schedule of times defined by South Florida Water Management District as the schedule currently exists or may be modified by standards, rules, regulations or restrictions imposed by the South Florida Water Management District Board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause the operation of any irrigation system or device in a manner causing water to be wasted, including watering of impervious areas, other than which may occur incidental to the proper operation of the irrigation system. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause the operation of any irrigation system or device in a manner causing water to be directed onto any sidewalk or paved portion of a road right-of-way. 
(d)  Any irrigation system installed in new construction shall be a nonpotable water irrigation system. These systems shall be restricted to surface, well water, or water re-use only; the use of village potable water is prohibited. 
Note— The provisions of the above subsection (d) shall not apply to single-family residences which have been issued building permits prior to June 11, 1999. 
(e)  New installations of automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with a rain sensor device or switch which will override the irrigation cycle of the sprinkler system when adequate rainfall has occurred, pursuant to F.S. § 373.62. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of these restrictions will constitute a violation of the Village's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 4, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 2, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 30-145. - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation by hand watering using a self-canceling nozzle or low-volume irrigation system. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation by systems from which the sole source is treated wastewater effluent. 
(3)  Landscape irrigation by systems for system repair and maintenance; however, such operation shall be limited to ten minutes per zone per week. 
(4)  Flushing of water and sewer mains required for normal clearance and maintenance and for maintenance of water quality; however, where practical, contractors and utilities shall direct flushed water into pervious areas, flush at the minimum rate necessary for cleaning, and disperse the water in such a manner to benefit local vegetation. 
(5)  Landscape irrigation for purpose of watering in fungicides, insecticides, herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers as required by the manufacturer or by federal [or] state laws; however, this exemption applies only to licensed pest control operators and shall be limited to manufacturer's recommendations, which must be completed within 24 hours of application. Further, such operators must be on premises when such watering takes place outside the hours allowed for irrigation. 
(6)  Recirculating ornamental water features. 
(7)  Firefighting, health, or medical uses. 
(8)  Agricultural irrigation. 
(9)  Irrigation of clay tennis courts, limited to one hour two times per day. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 5, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 30-146. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute a violation of a village ordinance and may be punishable as pursuant to F.S. § 162.21. Each day in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and shall be referred to the code compliance division. 
(b)  In addition to the sanctions contained herein, the village may take appropriate action, including, but not limited to, administrative action and requests for temporary and permanent injunctions to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 6, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 3, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 30-147. - Variance relief. 
The village will recognize any variance granted by the South Florida Water Management District. Any person who has obtained such a variance may file a copy with the village. 
(Ord. No. 99-08, § 7, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 30-148, 30-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Application or apply: The actual physical deposition of fertilizer to turf or landscape plants in Wellington. 
(b)  Applicator: Any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants in Wellington. 
(c)  Approved disposal site: A real property in which a state or county registration or permit has been issued for the disposal and/or processing of livestock waste, as amended from time to time, and/or a plot of land that is conducting bona fide agricultural activities in accordance with F.S. § 193.461. 
(d)  Approved test: A soil test and livestock waste test from a governmental entity or commercial licensed laboratory that regularly performs soil testing and recommendations. 
(e)  Best management practices or "BMP": A practice, or combination of practices, based on research, field-testing, and expert review to be the most effective and practicable, including economic and technological considerations and means of achieving a desired result such as improving water quality in discharges to an acceptable level. 
(f)  Best management practices livestock waste (fertilization) management plan (BMPLW(F)MP): A comprehensive waste management plan covering all aspects of managing livestock manure, urine, and bedding waste and/or all aspects of managing fertilizer storage and application developed to prevent the uncontrolled release of pollutants from these wastes. 
(g)  Code compliance officer: Any designated employee or contractor of Wellington whose duty is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by Wellington. 
(h)  Commercial fertilizer applicator (except as provided in F.S. § 482.1562(9)): Any person or entity who applies fertilizer for payment or other consideration to property. 
(i)  Commercial livestock waste hauler: Person(s), firm(s), corporation(s), or other legal entity(ies) permitted by Wellington to provide livestock waste removal services for a fee within Wellington in accordance with terms and conditions established by this article. 
(j)  Common livestock waste storage area: A livestock waste storage area established for the temporary storage of livestock waste from off-site livestock facilities. 
(k)  Composting: The process by which biological decomposition of organic solid waste is carried out under controlled aerobic conditions, and which stabilizes the organic fraction into a material which can easily and safely be stored, handled, and used in an environmentally acceptable manner for a period of 30 to 90 days. 
(l)  Cover: The placement of a lid, roof or protective covering (tarp like) over a livestock waste storage area so as to shield the livestock waste from rain / stormwater intake. 
(m)  District: The South Florida Water Management District. 
(n)  Drainage basin: A topographic region in which all water drains to a common area. 
(o)  Everglades protection area: Water conservation areas 2A, 2B, 3A, and 3B, the Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge (Water Conservation Area 1), and the Everglades National Park. 
(p)  Drainage conveyance systems: Canals, detention/retention areas, grass swales, underground piping, drainage inlets, junction boxes, manholes are all components that store, collect, and convey rain/surface waters. Specifically above ground ports of entry or near surface components that store or collect rain/surface waters are herein referred to as drainage conveyance systems. 
(q)  Fertilizing or fertilization: The act of applying fertilizer to turf, specialized turf, or plants. 
(r)  Fertilizer: Any substance or mixture of substances that contains one or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other corrective measures to the soil. 
(s)  Institutional applicator: Any person other than a private, non-commercial or commercial applicator (unless such definitions also apply under the circumstances), that applies fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf and/or landscape plants. Institutional applicators shall include, but shall not be limited to, owners, managers, or employees of public lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business sites and any residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership. 
(t)  Livestock: All animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class. 
(u)  Livestock facility: Property under single ownership or control where livestock is raised and or boarded. 
(v)  Livestock waste: Wastes composed of excreta of animals and residual materials that have been used for bedding, sanitary, or feeding purposes for such animals. For purposes of this article, livestock waste that has been properly composted shall not be considered livestock waste. 
(w)  Livestock waste self-hauler: Property owner or authorized representative registered with Wellington to provide livestock waste removal services from their own property in accordance with the terms and conditions established by this article. 
(x)  Livestock waste storage area: An area constructed of impermeable material such as concrete or asphalt; with an impermeable cover; or a mechanical storage container that can be sealed, lifted, and transported. 
(y)  Manure test: An analysis of livestock waste by a qualified laboratory to determine the nutrient value and make up the owner's livestock, specifically the phosphorus content. 
(z)  Monitoring wells: Strategically located wells from which water samples are drawn for water quality analysis or measurement of ground water levels. 
(aa)  Paddock: A fenced grassed area of ¼ acre or less used primarily for exercise and secondarily for feeding of livestock. 
(bb)  Pasture: A fenced, grassed area of approximately more than ¼ acre used primarily for exercise and secondarily for feeding of livestock. 
(cc)  Prohibited application period: The time period during which a Flood Watch or Warning, a Tropical Storm Watch or Warning, or a Hurricane Watch or Warning is in effect for any portion of Palm Beach County, issued by the National Weather Service, or if heavy rain (two inches or more within a 24-hour period is likely). 
(dd)  Saturated soil: A soil in which the voids are filled with water. Saturation soil does not require flow. For the purposes of this article, soils shall be considered saturated if standing water is present or the pressure of a person standing on the soil causes the release of free water. 
(ee)  Slow release, controlled release, timed release, slowly-available, or insoluble nitrogen: Nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the plant longer than a reference rapid of quick release product. 
(ff)  Soil test: An analysis of a site soil sample by a qualified laboratory to determine fertilizer needs of the site, specifically phosphorus needs of the plants grown on the site. 
(gg)  Spreading: Refers to the human or mechanical means to distribute livestock waste or compost. Animal waste on pasture lands shall not be considered spreading of livestock waste. 
(hh)  Stormwater treatment areas "STAs": Those water quality treatment and water storage areas know as Stormwater Treatment Area 1 East (STA 1E) as described and depicted in the district's conceptual design document of February 15, 1994, and any modifications thereto. 
(ii)  Turf, sod, or lawn: An area of grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass. 
(jj)  Urban landscape: Pervious areas on residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, highway rights-of-way, or other nonagricultural lands that are planted with turf or horticultural plants. For the purposes of this section, agriculture has the same meaning as provided in F.S. § 570.02. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 1, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 3-26-13)  
Sec. 30-151. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these best management practices (BMPs) for livestock waste and fertilizer management is to comply with Policy 1.2.11 and 13 of the Conservation Element Wellington's Comprehensive Plan and to comply with the conditions of the Joint Cooperation Agreement between Wellington and the South Florida Water Management District which requires Wellington to implement a compliance-based pollution prevention program designed to reduce nutrient discharges, specifically phosphorus, from its surface water system into the Everglades protection area. Wellington is therefore implementing a BMPs program designed to reduce, abate, and prevent, directly and indirectly, phosphorus discharges to the surface water system within Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 2, 3-26-13)  
Sec. 30-152. - Applicability. 
These standards shall apply to all property within the boundaries of the Village of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 3, 3-26-13)  
Sec. 30-153. - Best management practices for livestock waste. 
Livestock waste shall be placed, or stored in a livestock waste storage area or water tight container such as a roll-off or dumpster which is associated with a permit issued by the Village of Wellington. Livestock waste shall not be placed, accepted, stored, or allowed to accumulate on any property in Wellington, except as provided herein. 
(a)  Management of livestock waste. 
(1)  Each livestock facility shall provide a storage area for livestock waste. 
(2)  Livestock waste shall be placed, or stored in a livestock waste storage area that meets the following requirements: 
a.  As of June 24, 2013, all new or reconstructed livestock waste storage area shall be constructed with an impermeable floor with sidewalls constructed of concrete block, concrete or molded resin based plastic on three sides. The storage area shall be designed and constructed to be water-tight with a cover which will not allow storm water discharge. The floor shall be impermeable and have a curb or rolled lip of asphalt or concrete not less than one inch in height or a slab pitched downward toward the rear wall of the storage area. (Minimum fall from front to rear of two inches); and 
b.  The livestock waste storage area shall be elevated to a minimum of six inches above the crown of road/access easement; or 12 inches below the residential finish floor whichever is greater; and 
c.  A building "permit" or a zoning compliance determination shall be obtained from the Village of Wellington prior to constructing or altering a livestock waste storage area within Wellington boundaries; and 
d.  The determination of the size of the livestock waste storage area is the responsibility of the property owner based upon the number of horses or livestock on the property and their daily generation of manure, urine and bedding material as well as intended frequency of removal for disposal. At no time shall livestock waste be allowed to accumulate beyond the threshold of the livestock waste storage area, and 
e.  Roll-off and dumpster containers may be used as livestock waste storage areas subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Roll-off and dumpster containers used as livestock waste storage areas shall be placed on a concrete or asphalt pad with at least a two inch curb around the entire storage area; and 
ii.  Roll-off and dumpster containers used as livestock waste storage areas shall meet the same elevation requirements as in [subsection] (2)b. 
iii.  Roll-off and dumpster containers must be water tight at all times. 
(3)  All equestrian facilities shall properly store livestock waste and shall have livestock waste removed from the facility as provided in this section. 
(b)  Location of waste storage facilities. 
(1)  Livestock waste storage and roll-off and dumpster containers shall be located: 
a.  At least five feet away from any adjacent structure roof overhang; 
b.  At least 50 feet away from any grassed drainage swale 
c.  At least 100 feet away from any drainage port of entry, body of water, public or private storm drainage conveyance system which has direct discharge into any body of water; 
d.  At least 100 feet away from a potable water supply well. 
e.  Within reasonable proximity to the stable/barn structure and in accordance with the minimum accessory use set back requirements. 
(2)  Extenuating circumstances; if compliance with the setback regulations is not possible because of properties unusual circumstances, the property owner may submit an alternate method of compliance. Mitigation measures such as berms, grading changes or secondary containment systems can be considered in addressing unique and unusual circumstances. If alternative measures are approved they must be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved specifications. Any alternate method of compliance must; 
a.  Meet the intent of these provisions, 
b.  Demonstrate the ability to mitigate water quality impacts 
c.  Provide a secondary method of containment and 
d.  Be supported by an engineering study. 
(c)  Livestock waste storage area maintenance. 
(1)  The removal and transportation of livestock waste on commercial and private properties within Wellington boundaries shall be done exclusively by either a registered commercial livestock waste hauler or a registered livestock waste self-hauler. 
(2)  Livestock waste shall be confined within the waste storage structure. 
(3)  Livestock waste storage area(s) shall be continuously maintained so that no stormwater runoff or any types of liquids/materials are allowed to be released. 
(4)  All livestock waste storage areas, containers and pads shall be inspected by a code compliance officer or building inspector annually for cracks, crevices, holes, and other damages. Repair shall be made as warranted to prevent spillage or discharge. 
(d)  Disposal of livestock waste. The disposal of livestock waste within Wellington must be accomplished by composting the waste, implementing a nutrient management program, or by hauling the waste off-site to an approved disposal site. 
(1)  [Composting of livestock waste:] Composting of livestock waste is permitted under the following conditions within Wellington's boundaries: 
a.  Large scale composting: Where the composter has received a permit from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to F.S. § 403.707, and in accordance with Chapter 62-709, Florida Administrative Code. The approved DEP Form shall be submitted to Wellington. A copy of any and all annual reports required to be filed with DEP shall be filed with Wellington annually. 
b.  Small scale composting: Where the composter proposes to spread compost within their property and is not required to obtain a permit from the DEP pursuant to F.S. § 403.707, and in accordance with Chapter 62-709, Florida Administrative Code, the composter shall prepare and submit a permit application to Wellington's Engineer as described in this section. This application entitled: Registration and Annual Reporting for Composting shall be completed and reviewed based on the following standards. 
i.  Property information: 
a)  The number of horses kept within the owner's properties. 
b)  The amount of livestock waste being generated monthly. 
c)  The amount of compost being generated monthly. 
d)  Provide an application with a site plan denoting area calculation of net available lands where compost will be spread along with the type of vegetation within the landscape areas, pastures, etc. 
e)  Setbacks from wells, drainage inlets and water bodies as referenced in section 30-153(b)(1). 
f)  Soil and compost test sample reports shall be submitted (UF-IFAS Soil Testing Laboratories) detailing the nutrient value of the composted waste and the nutrient uptake of the soil and vegetation. This report shall specify the animal units (horses) per acre which the properties vegetation can sustenance. 
ii.  Site plan of property to include: 
a)  A description of all structures located on property including proposed size, location, use and setbacks (Section 6.10.6 Development standards, (A) minimum setbacks). 
b)  Composting pad location and construction materials. 
c)  Livestock waste storage facility location and construction materials section 30-153(a)2a. 
iii.  Narrative to include: (see Composting Frequently Asked Questions) 
a)  A brief description of how the compost will be used. 
b)  A description of how odor and vectors will be controlled. 
c)  A description of how stormwater intrusion will be controlled and the type of cover to be provided in the storage structure. 
d)  The operating parameters to be followed for managing the process. 
e)  A description of how the facility will be closed. 
iv.  Application: 
a)  Completed application for registration and annual composting. 
b)  $25.00 non-refundable application fee made payable to Wellington. 
c)  Completed annual report for a solid waste management facility producing compost made from solid waste (Part C). 
v.  Compost spreading plan: 
a)  The spreading of livestock waste shall be prohibited within Wellington's boundaries, except as provided herein: 
1)  The property owner must prepare a best management practice livestock waste management plan (BMPLWMP) in accordance with Wellington requirements and submitted to Wellington's Engineer or designee, who will coordinate with all other departments for review and approval. Spreading of composted livestock waste is prohibited without an approved plan. All existing spreading plans shall be required to submit a new BMPLWMP by October 1, 2014, and all BMPLWMP's shall be subject to an annual renewal at which time the property owner shall submit to Wellington an annual report on spreading activates. 
2)  Livestock waste shall be composted before any spreading occurs. 
3)  Best management practices livestock waste management plans applications, which have been approved by Wellington, shall be reviewed annually to ensure practices are being followed as originally submitted and in accordance with the annual report. 
(2)  Nutrient management plan: A landowner may be considered exempt from composting livestock waste if a nutrient management plan is submitted to Wellington and approved. Annually the landowner shall submit a nutrient management plan to the village engineer for review and approval, based on the following standards: 
a.  Property information: 
i.  The number of horses kept within the owner's properties. 
ii.  The amount of livestock waste being generated monthly. 
iii.  Provide an application with a site plan denoting area calculation of net available lands where livestock waste will be spread along with the type of vegetation within the landscape areas, pastures, etc. 
iv.  Setbacks from wells, drainage inlets and water bodies as referenced in section 30-153(b)1. 
v.  Soil and manure test sample reports shall be submitted (UF- IFAS soil testing laboratories) detailing the nutrient value of the livestock waste and the nutrient uptake of the soil and vegetation. This report shall specify the animal units (horses) per acre which the properties vegetation can sustenance. Permit shall remain valid so long as testing meets the applicable state standard. 
(3)  Livestock waste hauling: 
a.  All commercial livestock waste haulers and/or livestock waste self- haulers shall be permitted and registered, as required, annually by Wellington. 
b.  Livestock waste may be moved from one livestock facility to another in Wellington only for. 
i.  The purpose of composting in an approved composting area; or 
ii.  Storage in a common livestock waste storage area for removal in bulk. 
c.  All livestock facilities within Wellington boundaries shall remove livestock waste by either a commercial livestock waste hauler or a livestock waste self-hauler that is registered by Wellington. 
d.  Disposal of livestock waste must be within an approved disposal site which is registered to operate under Florida Administrative Code Chapter 62-709.320, additionally the disposal facility must provide copies of all current valid permits annually to Wellington and must agree to periodic audits and provide copies of all load tickets to Wellington which were obtained from the haulers. 
e.  Commercial livestock waste haulers will pay a permit fee to the Village of Wellington as may be adjusted from time to time. Livestock waste self-haulers will not pay a fee. 
f.  Commercial livestock waste haulers and livestock waste self-haulers permits and registrations shall be subject to revocation for failure to abide by the terms of this article. 
g.  Hauling reports shall be provided by commercial livestock waste haulers and livestock self-haulers to Wellington quarterly. Hauling records shall identify the waste source, quantity in cubic yards, and the waste disposal site with quantity deposited in cubic yards within an approved site. Hauling records shall include signed load tickets or affidavits certifying the loads from both the source and disposal site owners. Failure to provide quarterly hauling records may result in the loss of the haulers permit in Wellington. Wellington reserves the right to audit the hauling record and load tickets from the generating properties and disposal sites which have been approved as a disposal site as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 2, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 4, 3-26-13)  
Sec. 30-154. - Best management practices for the application and storage of fertilizer. 
(a)  All fertilizers shall be stored in a dry storage area protected from rainfall and ponding. 
(b)  No fertilizer containing in excess of two percent phosphate/phosphorus (P 2 O 5 ) per guaranteed analysis label (as defined by F.S. ch. 576) shall be applied to turf grass, pastures, paddocks, or used in nurseries unless justified by a soil test. 
(c)  Fertilizer containing in excess of two percent phosphate/phosphorus (P 2 O 5 ) per guaranteed analysis label shall not be applied within ten feet of the edge of water or within ten feet of a drainage facility. 
(d)  All fertilizer shall be applied such that spreading of fertilizer on all impervious surfaces is minimized. 
(e)  Liquid fertilizers containing in excess of two percent phosphate/phosphorus (P 2 O 5 ) per guaranteed analysis label shall not be applied through an irrigation system within ten feet of the edge of water or within ten feet of a drainage facility. 
(f)  Liquid fertilizers containing in excess of two percent phosphate/phosphorus (P 2 O 5 ) per guaranteed analysis label shall not be applied through high or medium mist application or directed spray application within ten feet of the edge of water or within ten feet of a drainage facility. 
(g)  Wellington shall establish a public education program that is focused on the following: proper irrigation of landscaped areas; application rates of fertilizer; appropriate types of fertilizer for different plants; and proper use of organic fertilizers and soil amendments. 
(h)  Timing of fertilizer applications. 
(1)  No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus to turf and/or landscape during the prohibited application period and within the fertilizer free zones as identified in section 30-154(i)(1) below or to saturated soils. 
(2)  Fertilizer containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus shall not be applied before seeding or sodding a site, and shall not be applied for the first 30 days after seeding or sodding, except when hydro-seeding for temporary or permanent erosion control in an emergency situation (wildlife, etc.), or in accordance with the stormwater pollution plan for that site. 
(i)  Fertilizer free zones. 
(1)  Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten feet of any pond, stream, lake, canal, water body or wetland as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (Chapter 62-340), Florida Administrative Code or from the top of a headwall or lake bulkhead. Newly planted turf or landscape plants may be fertilized in its zone only for a 60-day period beginning no sooner than 30 days after planting if needed to allow the plants to become well established. Caution shall be used to prevent direct deposition of nutrients into the water. 
(j)  Fertilizer content and application rates. 
(1)  Fertilizers applied to turf within Wellington shall be formulated and applied in accordance with requirements and directions provided by Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code, Labeling Requirements for Urban Turf Fertilizers. Under Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code, required application rate and frequency maximums, which vary by plant and turf types, are found on the labeled fertilizer bag or container. 
(2)  Unless a soil or tissue deficiency has been verified by an approved test, nitrogen or phosphorus fertilizer shall not be applied to turf or landscape plants except as provided in section (1) above for turf, or in UF/IFAS recommendations for landscape plants, vegetable gardens, and fruit trees and shrubs. 
(3)  Fertilizer used for sports turf at golf courses shall be applied in accordance with the recommendations in "Best Management Practice for the Enhancement of Environmental Quality of Florida Golf Courses", published by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, dated January 2007. Fertilizer used at parks or athletic fields shall be applied in accordance with Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code. 
(k)  Fertilizer application practices. 
(1)  Spreader deflector shields shall be used when fertilizing via rotary (broadcast) spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, fertilizer-free zones and water bodies, including wetlands. Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. 
(2)  Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container 
(3)  In no case shall fertilizer be washed, swept, or blown off impervious surfaces into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, or water bodies. Property owners and managers are encouraged to use an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) strategy as currently recommended by the University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service publications. 
(l)  Management of grass clippings, vegetative matter. 
(1)  In no case shall grass clippings, vegetative material and/or vegetative debris intentionally be washed, swept, or blown on to or into storm water drains, ditches, conveyances, water bodies, wetlands, sidewalks or roadways. Any material that is inadvertently deposited shall be immediately removed to the maximum extent practicable. 
(m)  Training. 
(1)  All Commercial and Institutional Applicators of Fertilizer within Wellington shall abide by and successfully complete the six hour training program in the "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" offered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida/Palm Beach County Cooperative Extension Service "Florida Friendly Landscapes" program or approved equivalent program. 
(2)  Non-commercial and non-institutional applicators not otherwise required to be certified, such as private citizens on their own residential property, are encouraged to follow the recommendations of the University of Florida/IFAS "Florida Friendly Landscape Program" and label instructions when applying fertilizer. 
(n)  Licensing of commercial applicators. 
(1)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf of landscape plants (including, but not limited to, residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties, multi-family, equestrian and condominium properties) must ensure that the business owner or his/her designee holds the appropriate "Florida- Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" training certificate prior to the business owner obtaining a Local Business Tax Certificate or landscape registration. Owners for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to Turf and/or Landscape Plants shall provide proof of completion of the program to the Wellington. It is the responsibility of the business owner to maintain the "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" certificate to receive their Business Tax Receipt or landscape registration annually. 
(2)  After December 31, 2013, all commercial applicators of fertilizer within Wellington, shall have and carry in their possession at all times when applying fertilizer, evidence of certification by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services as a Commercial Fertilizer Applicator per Rule 5E-14.117(18) Florida Administrative Code. 
(3)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants (including, but not limited to, residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties multi-family, equestrian and condominium properties) must ensure that at least one employee has an appropriate "Florida- friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" training certificate prior to the business owner obtaining a Business Tax Receipt or landscape registration. Standard Business Tax Receipt (BTR) or landscape registration and transaction fees shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 5, 3-26-13)  
Sec. 30-155. - Commercial fertilizer applicators. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity which provides fertilization services for a fee within the Village of Wellington shall pay such an annual registration fee as may be adjusted from time to time. This registration fee may, from time to time, be adjusted by resolution of Wellington Council. 
(b)  Commercial fertilizer registrations shall be subject to revocation for failure to abide by the terms and conditions established in this and other regulations of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 2001-10, § 2, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 6, 3-26-13)  
Sec. 30-156. - Enforcement. 
Any owner, owner's representative, tenant or person violating any provision of this part may be subject to enforcement as provided in Chapter 2 Article IV, Division 1 and 2 of the Wellington Codes of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12, § 6, 3-26-13)  
Chapter 33 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-31, adopted Nov. 10, 1998, being nonspecifically amendatory, was included as herein set out at the discretion of the editor. See Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 33-1—33-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ROAD AND PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES IMPACT FEE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-51. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context otherwise clearly requires: 
Access improvements shall mean improvements designed and constructed to provide safe and adequate ingress and egress from a road impact construction, which include, but are not limited to, rights-of-way, easements, paving of adjacent or connecting roadways, turn lanes, deceleration and acceleration lanes, traffic control devices, signage and markings, and drainage and utilities. 
Accessory building or structure shall mean a detached, subordinate building, meeting all property development regulations, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to the use of the principal building or incidental to the previous use to which the vacant land is devoted, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal building or vacant land use. 
Alternative park impact fee shall mean any alternative fee calculated by the applicant and approved by the impact fee coordinator pursuant to section 33-152. 
Alternative parks and recreational impact fee study shall mean a study prepared by the applicant and submitted to the impact fee coordinator pursuant to section 33-152. 
Alternative road impact fee shall mean any alternative fee calculated by an applicant and approved by the impact fee coordinator pursuant to section 33-102. 
Apartment shall mean a rental dwelling unit located within the same building as other dwelling units. 
Applicant shall mean the person who applies for a building permit. 
Building shall mean any structure, either temporary or permanent, built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattels, or property of any kind. This term shall include tents, trailers, mobile homes, or any vehicles serving in any way the function of a building. This term shall not include temporary construction sheds or trailers erected to assist in construction and maintained during the term of a building permit. 
Building permit shall mean an official document or certificate issued by the village, under the authority of ordinance or law, authorizing the construction or siting of any building. "Building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings, such as a mobile home, that do not require a building permit in order to be constructed. 
Comprehensive plan shall mean the comprehensive plan of the village adopted and amended pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act as contained in part II, chapter 163, Florida Statutes, or its statutory successor in function. 
Condominium shall mean a single-family or time-sharing ownership unit that has at least one other similar unit within the same building structure. The term condominium includes all fee simple or titled multi-unit structures, including townhouses and duplexes. 
Council shall mean the council of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
County shall mean Palm Beach County, Florida, a political subdivision of the State of Florida. 
County road system shall mean the road system of the county as defined in section 334.03(6), Florida Statutes, or its statutory successor in function. 
Designated village road shall mean a road within the village street system which 1) is listed for improvement in the impact fee study; 2) is subsequently added pursuant to section 33-208; or 3) is required by a village development order to the extent that such required road improvement is demonstrated to exceed the improvements necessitated by the impact of the development approved by the development order. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a building, or portion thereof, designed for residential occupancy, consisting of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one or more persons. 
Encumbered shall mean monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligates the village to expend the encumbered amount for the delivery of goods, the completion of services, the conveyance of right-of-way by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
External trip shall mean any trip which either has its origins from or its destination to the road impact construction and which impacts the village street system. 
Governmental buildings or facilities shall mean property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the State of Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district, a school district, a municipal corporation, or a charter school organized and approved as a public school under section 228.056, Florida Statutes. 
Impact fee coordinator shall mean the person appointed by the village manager to perform such functions as designated under this chapter or the designee of such person. 
Impact fee land use category shall mean those categories of land use incorporated in the road impact fee rate schedule in section 33-101. 
Impact fee study shall mean the study adopted pursuant to section 33-54, as amended and supplemented pursuant to section 33-208. 
Mixed use road impact construction shall mean a road impact construction in which more than one impact fee land use category is contemplated with each category constituting a separate and identifiable enterprise not subordinate to or dependent on other enterprises within the road impact construction. 
Mobile home shall mean manufactured homes, trailers, campers or recreational vehicles. 
New net trip shall mean the average daily external trips, as adjusted by the impact fee study. 
Off-site improvements shall mean road improvements located outside of the boundaries of a road impact construction which are required by the village in order to serve external trips, but not including access improvements. 
Ordinance shall mean this road impact fee and parks and recreational facilities impact fee ordinance, including any amendments and supplements hereto. 
Owner shall mean the person holding legal title to the real property containing the road impact construction and the parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable. 
Park impact fee shall mean the fee imposed by the village pursuant to section 33-151 or, if applicable, the alternative park impact fee. 
Parks are those areas designed for diversified recreational and passive use by large numbers of people throughout the village. Such parks and facilities provide a variety of recreational activities and serve the entire incorporated area of the village. 
Parks and recreational facilities impact construction shall mean land development construction designed or intended to permit more dwelling units than the existing use of land. 
Person shall mean any individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, property owners' association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, governmental agency, or other legal entity. 
Residential shall mean apartments, condominiums, mobile homes, single-family detached houses or assisted living facilities, as that term is defined by section 400.402, Florida Statutes. 
Road impact construction shall mean land construction designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain more dwelling units, buildings or floor space than the existing use of land, or to otherwise change the use of the land in a manner that increases the generation of vehicular traffic or the number of external trips. 
Road impact fee shall mean the road impact fee imposed by the village pursuant to section 33-101, including any amendments or supplements thereto, or if applicable, the alternative road impact fee. 
Road impact fee rate shall mean a road impact fee imposed for a particular road impact construction under the applicable impact fee land use category established in the schedules listed in section 33-101, for road impact fees, as these schedules may be amended from time to time. 
Single-family detached house shall mean a home on an individual lot. 
Special master means a person who is a member in good standing with the Florida Bar, appointed by the village council, and authorized to hear and decide cases involving review of impact fees. 
Square footage shall mean the gross area measured in feet from the exterior faces of exterior walls or other exterior boundaries of the building, excluding areas within the interior of the building which are utilized for parking. 
State highway system shall mean the road system of the State of Florida as defined in section 334.03(25), Florida Statutes, or its statutory successor in function. 
Trip shall mean a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one trip end) to a destination (the other trip end). The word trip shall have the meaning which it has in commonly accepted traffic engineering practice. 
Trip generation or trip generator rate shall mean the maximum average daily trip generation rates for the applicable trip generation land use category, as adjusted by the impact fee study. 
Trip generation land use category shall mean the trip generation land use categories established in Trip Generation, 6th edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
Village shall mean the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
Village attorney shall mean the person appointed by the council to serve as its counsel or the designee of such person. 
Village engineer shall mean the person appointed by the council to serve as its engineer or the designee of such person. 
Village manager shall mean the chief administrative officer of the village, appointed by the council or the designee of such person. 
Village park system shall include all parks operated by the village, but does not include those parks and recreational facilities that are operated by the county. 
Village street system shall mean the road system of the village as defined in section 334.03(3), Florida Statutes, or its statutory successor in function, but shall not include any roads within the county road system or the state highway system. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 1.01, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 1, 1-28-03)  
Sec. 33-52. - Rules of construction. 
For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise stated herein, the rules of construction, as provided in article 3, section 3.1, Village of Wellington Uniform Land Development Code, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 1.02, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 2, 1-28-03)  
Sec. 33-53. - Findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article VIII, section 2(b), Florida Constitution, and sections 166.021 and 166.041, Florida Statutes, the council has all powers of local self-government to perform municipal functions, except when prohibited by law, and such powers may be exercised by the enactment of legislation in the form of village ordinances. 
(2)  The council may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose, except when expressly prohibited by law, and the council may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in (a), (b), (c), and (d) of section 166.021(3), Florida Statutes. The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of section 166.021(3), Florida Statutes, is not relevant to the imposition of a road impact fee or a park impact fee. 
(3)  The council specifically finds that the village park system and the village street system benefit all residents of the village, and therefore, the park impact fee and the road impact fee shall be imposed in all incorporated areas of the village. 
(4)  Development necessitated by the growth contemplated in the comprehensive plan will require improvements and additions to the village street system and the village park system to accommodate the traffic generated by such growth and maintain the standards of service adopted by the village. 
(5)  Future growth, as represented by road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction, should contribute its fair share to the cost of improvements and additions to the village street system and village park system that are required to accommodate the traffic generated by such growth and the use of such parks and recreational facilities by such growth. 
(6)  The required improvements and additions to the village street system and village park system needed to eliminate any deficiencies between the existing village street system and village park system and the levels of service adopted by the village shall be financed by revenue sources of the village other than road impact fees and park impact fees. 
(7)  Implementation of a road impact fee and a park impact fee to require future road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction to contribute its fair share to the cost of required transportation and park capital improvements and additions is an integral and vital element of the regulatory plan of growth management incorporated in the comprehensive plan of the village. 
(8)  The imposition of a park impact fee and a road impact fee is to provide a source of revenue to fund the construction or improvement of the village park system and the village street system, respectively, necessitated by growth as delineated in the capital improvement element of the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  The council expressly finds that the schedule of improvements and additions to the designated village roads, as contained in the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study for Roads and Parks and Recreational Facilities, Village of Wellington, Florida," provides a benefit to all road impact construction within the village in excess of the road impact fee. 
(10)  The village has the statutory responsibility to provide and maintain roads in the village street system. Road impact construction occurring within the village impacts upon the village street system; therefore, road impact construction should pay its fair share of the cost of providing the improvements and additions to the designated village roads. In recognition of these findings, it is the intent of the council that, upon approval and adoption of this chapter and the impact fee study by the council, the village shall impose a road impact fee to provide the cost of growth-required improvements and additions to designated village roads. 
(11)  The projected capital improvements and additions to designated village roads and the allocation of projected costs between those improvements and additions necessary to serve existing development and those improvements and additions required to accommodate the growth represented by road impact construction as presented in the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study for Roads and Parks and Recreational Facilities, Village of Wellington, Florida" is hereby approved and adopted by the village, and such projections are hereby found to be in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(12)  Transportation planning is an evolving process and the capital improvements and additions to the village street system identified upon the date of the adoption of this chapter constitute projections of growth patterns and transportation improvements and additions based upon present knowledge and judgment. Therefore, in recognition of changing growth patterns and the dynamic nature of population growth, it is the intent of the council that the identified improvements and additions to the village street system be reviewed and adjusted periodically, pursuant to section 33-208, to ensure that road impact fees are imposed equitably and lawfully and are utilized effectively based upon actual and anticipated traffic conditions at the time of their imposition. 
(13)  The process of transportation planning requires the coordination of improvements and additions to the state highway system, village street system and county road system. However, the road impact fee imposed by the village pursuant to section 33-101 will not be used to finance any road improvements to the county road system or the state highway system. Furthermore, this chapter shall not be construed to permit the expending or encumbering of any monies collected through road impact fees for the construction of improvements or additions to roads which are not contained within the village street system. 
(14)  The projected standards for parks and recreational facilities for the village park system as presented in the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study for Roads and Parks and Recreational Facilities, Village of Wellington, Florida" is hereby approved and adopted by the village, and such projections are hereby found to be in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(15)  The council expressly finds that the maintenance of the standards for parks and recreational facilities, as contained in the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study for Roads and Parks and Recreational Facilities, Village of Wellington, Florida" provides a benefit to all parks and recreational facilities impact construction within the village in excess of the park impact fee. 
(16)  The village has the responsibility to provide parks in the village park system. Parks and recreational facilities impact construction occurring within the village impacts upon the village park system; therefore, parks and recreational facilities impact construction should pay its fair share of the cost of maintaining the village's standard of service. In recognition of these findings, it is the intent of the council that, upon approval and adoption of this chapter and the impact fee study by the council, the village shall impose a park impact fee to provide the cost of growth-required additions to the village park system. 
(17)  Capital planning is an evolving process, and the standard of service for the village park system constitutes a projection of anticipated needs for parks and recreational facilities, based upon present knowledge and judgment. Therefore, in recognition of changing growth patterns and the dynamic nature of population growth, it is the intent of the council that the standard of service for the village park system and the park impact fee imposed be reviewed and adjusted periodically, pursuant to section 33-208, to ensure that park impact fees are imposed equitably and lawfully, based upon actual and anticipated growth at the time of their imposition. 
(18)  This chapter shall not be construed to permit the collection of park impact fees from parks and recreational facilities impact construction for those parks developed and maintained by the county. 
(19)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the development of land within the village by requiring payment of road impact fees by road impact construction and park impact fees by parks and recreational facilities impact construction and to provide for the cost of capital improvements to the village street system and the village park system which are required to accommodate such growth. This chapter shall not be construed to permit the collection of road impact fees or park impact fees in excess of the amount reasonably anticipated to offset the demand on the village street system or the village park system generated by such road impact construction or such parks and recreational facilities impact construction, respectively. 
(20)  On or about November 10, 1998, the village council of the Village of Wellington, Florida adopted village Ordinance No. 98-31, known as the "Village of Wellington, Florida Road Impact Fee and Parks and Recreational Facilities Impact Fee Ordinance," which imposed road impact fees and park impact fees on road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction within the corporate limits of the village. 
(21)  Pursuant to section 33-208, the impact fee ordinance and the associated impact fee study are to be reviewed at least every five years by the village council to evaluate and revise, if necessary, the road impact fee to ensure that it does not exceed the reasonably anticipated costs associated with the improvements and additions necessary to offset the demand generated by road impact construction on the village street system and the park impact fee to ensure that it does not exceed the reasonably anticipated costs associated with the improvements and additions necessary to offset the demand generated by park impact construction on the village park system. 
(22)  The review required by section 33-208 must consider new estimates of population and other socioeconomic data, changes in construction, land acquisition and related costs, adjustments to the assumptions, conclusions, or findings set forth in the impact fee study, changes in right-of-way acquisition and related costs, and changes in trip generation rates, external trip lengths, and traffic volume counts. 
(23)  In the event the review required by section 33-208 alters or changes the assumptions, conclusions, and findings of the impact fee study, revises or changes the designated village roads or the village park system or alters or changes the amount or classification of the road impact fee or the park impact fee, the impact fee study shall be amended and updated to reflect the assumptions, conclusions, and findings of such reviews, and section 33-54 shall be amended to adopt by reference such updated studies. 
(24)  In accordance with this review requirement, the village has undertaken a review of the road impact fee and park impact fee and considered all factors identified in section 33-208. The village now desires to amend this chapter, to reflect the updated assumptions, conclusions, and findings from such review, including an updated list of designated village roads and an updated schedule of road impact fees and park impact fees. 
(25)  The council hereby acknowledges and confirms the legislative findings contained in subsections (1) through (21) herein and expressly reaffirms such findings as applicable to the updated road impact fees, the updated park impact fees, the updated impact fee study and the updated list of designated village roads to be adopted herein. Moreover, the council expressly finds that the schedule of improvements and additions to the updated list of designated village roads, as contained in the updated impact fee study, which is attached hereto as Appendix B and incorporated herein by reference and as further updated by the Village of Wellington Road Impact Fee Study Update, dated August 24, 2004, which is attached hereto as Appendix E and incorporated herein by reference, provides a benefit to all road impact construction within the village in excess of the updated road impact fee. Additionally, the council expressly finds that the schedule of improvements and additions to the list of parks improvements as contained in the updated park impact fee study, which is attached hereto as Appendix C and incorporated herein by reference, and the update of the parks and recreation facilities impact fee study dated November 21, 2003, which is attached hereto as Appendix D and incorporated herein by reference provides a benefit to all parks impact construction within the village in excess of the updated parks impact fee. 
(26)  The projected capital improvements and additions to the updated list of designated village roads and park improvements and the allocation of projected costs between those improvements and additions necessary to serve existing development and those improvements and additions required to accommodate the growth represented by road impact construction as presented in the updated impact fee study attached hereto as Appendix B and the updated park impact fee study attached hereto as Appendix C and the update of the parks and recreation facilities impact fee study dated November 21, 2003, which is attached hereto as Appendix D are hereby approved and adopted by the village and such projections are found to be in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 1.03, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 3, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 1, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2004-41, § 1, 10-12-04)  
Sec 33-54. - Adoption of impact fee study. 
The council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study: Roads 2002, Village of Wellington, Florida" as updated by the "Village of Wellington Road Impact Fee Study Update" dated August 24, 2004, and the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study: Parks & Recreational Facilities 2003" and the "Update of the Parks and Recreational Facilities Impact Fee Study" dated November 21, 2003 to supplement and update the 1998 study entitled "Impact Fee Study for Roads and Parks and Recreational Facilities, Village of Wellington, Florida" and the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study: Parks & Recreational Facilities 2003". The Council particularly adopts and incorporates the updated assumptions, conclusions and findings in such updated study as to the allocation of anticipated costs of capital improvements and additions to the village street system between those costs required to accommodate existing traffic and those costs required to accommodate traffic generated by growth, the allocation of anticipated costs of capital improvements and additions to the village park system between those costs required to accommodate existing demand and those costs required to accommodate demand generated by growth, and the council adopts the updated list of designated village roads included in the study entitled "Impact Fee Rate Study: Parks & Recreational Facilities 2003". The 1998 impact fee study is attached hereto as Appendix A and incorporated herein by reference the "Impact Fee Rate Study: Roads 2002, Village of Wellington, Florida" is attached hereto as Appendix B and incorporated herein by reference, and the "Impact Fee Rate Study: Parks and Recreation 2003, Village of Wellington, Florida" is attached hereto as Appendix C and incorporated by reference, and the "Update of the Parks and Recreational Faculties Impact Fee Study dated November 21, 2003" is attached hereto as Appendix D and incorporated by reference and all shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 1.04, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 4, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 2, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2004-41, § 2, 10-12-04)  
Secs. 33-55—33-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ROAD IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 33-101. - Imposition. 
(a)  All road impact construction occurring within the incorporated area of the village shall pay the road impact fee established in this chapter. 
(b)  The council hereby adopts road impact fees, which are hereby imposed upon all road impact construction occurring within the village at a rate established in accordance with the following road impact fee calculation formula: 
Vehicle Miles Traveled × Net Cost per Vehicle Miles Traveled 
The Vehicles Miles Traveled (VMT) represents the road impact of new development on the Village's roadway system. Calculation of the VMT is based on the following formula: 
VMT = (Daily Trip Rate/2) × (Percent New Trips) × (Village Portion of Trip Length) 
The factors influencing the VMT are based on the trip characteristics by land use category that are provided in the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) "Trip Generation" Manual (Seventh Edition) and that were derived for the average trip length. The net cost per VMT for the purpose of the road impact fee schedule calculation is $166.38. The following schedule is illustrative of the results of the calculation. Road impact fees based on the formula shall apply to all road impact construction that receive a building permit on or after (the effective date of this section October 12, 2004). 
Schedule of Road Impact Fees 1 
ITE 2 
Code 
# 	ITE Land Use 
Category 	Impact Fee 
RESIDENTIAL: Permanent 
210 	Single Family House 	$1,329.53 per dwelling unit 
220 	Apartment 	$915.53 per dwelling unit 
230 	Condominium 	$814.11 per dwelling unit 
240 	Mobile Home 	$693.25 per dwelling unit 
N/A 3 	Grooms Quarters 	$277.85 per dwelling unit 
N/A 	Guest Cottage 	$305.64 per dwelling unit 
N/A 	Care Takers Quarters 	$486.25 per dwelling unit 
N/A 	Barn (w/o residence) 	$80.58 per stall 
RESIDENTIAL: Transient 
310 	Hotel 	$734.04 per room 
320 	Motel 	$506.83 per room 
• 4 253 	Congregate Living Facility 	$280.63 per dwelling unit 
620 	Nursing Home 	$177.44 per bed 
INSTITUTIONAL 
•520 	Elementary School 	$916.12 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•522 	Middle School 	$871.23 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
530 	High School 	$814.96 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
560 	Religious Institution 	$575.97 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
610 	Hospital 	$1,315.48 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
RECREATIONAL 
420 	Marina 	$221.62 per berth 
430 	Golf Course 	$377.35 per acre 
•492 	Racquet Club 	$1,208.10 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•492 	Health/Fitness club 	$2,465.50 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•437 	Bowling Alley 	$1,222.77 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•443 	Movie Theater 	$5,844.43 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
COMMERCIAL/OFFICE/RETAIL 
565 	Day Care 	$1,661.60 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•630 	Clinic 	$2,354.69 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
710 	Office 10,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,526.92 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
710 	Office 50,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,054.56 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
710 	Office 100,000 Sq. Ft. 	$898.90 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
720 	Medical Office 	$2,705.09 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 10,000 Sq. Ft. 	$3,594.38 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 50,000 Sq. Ft. 	$2,004.74 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 100,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,998.77 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 200,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,902.37 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 300,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,806.79 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 400,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,633.66 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail 1,000,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,185.38 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
820 	Retail > 1,000,000 Sq. Ft. 	$1,146.69 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•841 	Auto Sales (New & Used) 	$1,608.66 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•848 	Auto Tire Store 	$1,199.98 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
850 	Supermarket 	$3,157.18 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
851 	Convenience Store 	$9,970.29 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•880 	Drug Store 	$2,172.71 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
911 	Bank/Savings (walk in only) 	$4,001.60 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
912 	Bank/Savings (drive-thru) 	$6,303.39 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
932 	Restaurant: Sit-Down 	$5,426.31 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
934 	Restaurant: Drive-Through 	$9,286.25 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•941 	Quick Lube Center 	$984.30 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•942 	Auto Care Center 	$390.28 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
944 	Service Station 	$2,277.26 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
•947 	Car Wash (self serve) 	$5,211.02 per 1,000 Sq. Ft. 
INDUSTRIAL/WAREHOUSE/WHOLESALE/UTILITIES 
110 	Light Industrial 	$440.67 per Service Position 
140 	Manufacturing 	$241.52 per 1,000 Service Position 
150 	Warehousing 	$313.59 per Fueling Position 
151 	Mini-Warehouse 	$158.06 per Wash Stall 
•170 	Utilities 	$438.15 per acre 
•818 	Wholesale Nursery 	$1,232.88 per acre 
Notes. 
1 Calculated upon a net cost per vehicle mile of $166.38. 
2 ITE means Institute of Traffic Engineers. 
3 N/A means no specific category number assigned by ITE. 
4 •Indicates new category of use. 
 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, §§ 5, 6, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2004-41, § 3, 10-12-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-33, §§ 5, 6, adopted Jan. 28, 2003, repealed the former § 33-101, and enacted a new § 33-101 as set out herein. The former § 33-101 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-31, § 2.01, adopted Nov. 10, 1998.  
Sec. 33-102. - Alternative road impact fee calculation. 
(a)  In the event an applicant believes that the impact to the village street system necessitated by its road impact construction is less than the new net trips that are assumed under the applicable impact fee land use category specified in section 33-101, such applicant may, prior to issuance of a building permit for such road impact construction, file with the impact fee coordinator a notice of intent to submit alternative road impact fee. The impact fee coordinator shall review the calculations and make a determination within ten days of submittal as to whether such calculation complies with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  For purposes of any alternative road impact fee calculation, the road impact construction shall be presumed to have the maximum impact on the village street system for the trip generation land use category contemplated under the road impact fee rate. 
(c)  The alternative road impact fee calculation shall be based on data, information or assumptions contained in this chapter and the impact fee study or an independent source, provided that: 
(1)  The independent source is a generally accepted standard source of transportation engineering or planning information; or 
(2)  The independent source is a local study supported by a data base adequate for the conclusions contained in such study performed by a professional engineer pursuant to a generally accepted methodology of transportation planning or engineering. 
(3)  If a previously approved road impact construction project submitted, during its approval process, a traffic impact study substantially consistent with the criteria required by this section, and if such study is determined by the impact fee coordinator to be current, the traffic impacts of such previously approved road impact construction shall be presumed to be as described in the prior study. In such circumstances, an alternative road impact fee shall be established reflecting the traffic impact described in the prior study. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a traffic impact study conducted more than two years earlier is invalid. 
(4)  It is acknowledged that the road impact fee rates are based upon the applicable trip generator rates for the trip generation land use categories corresponding to the impact fee land use categories set forth in section 33-101. In recognition of such acknowledgment, the trip generator rates for the trip generation land use categories shall be considered an independent source for the purpose of an alternative road impact fee calculation without the necessity of a study as required by subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(d)  If the impact fee coordinator determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant comply with the requirements of this section and that the calculation of the alternative road impact fee was by a generally accepted methodology, then the alternative road impact fee shall be paid in lieu of the fee set forth in section 33-101. 
(e)  If the impact fee coordinator determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant do not comply with the requirements of this section or that the calculation of the alternative road impact fee was not by a generally accepted methodology, then the impact fee coordinator shall provide to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the rejection of the alternative road impact fee and the reasons therefore. The applicant shall have 30 days from the receipt of the written notification of rejection to request a hearing pursuant to section 33-207. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 2.02, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-103. - Use of road impact fee proceeds. 
(a)  The council hereby establishes a separate trust account for the road impact fee, to be designated as the "Road Impact Fee Trust Account," which shall be maintained separate and apart from all other accounts of the village. All road impact fees shall be deposited into such trust account immediately upon receipt. 
(b)  The monies deposited into the road impact fee trust account shall be used solely for the purpose of constructing or improving designated village roads, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Design and construction plan preparation; 
(2)  Permitting; 
(3)  Right-of-way acquisition, including any costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
(4)  Construction of new through lanes; 
(5)  Construction of new turn lanes; 
(6)  Construction of new bridges; 
(7)  Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new roadway construction; 
(8)  Purchase and installation of traffic signals; 
(9)  Construction of new curbs, medians and shoulders; 
(10)  Relocating utilities to accommodate new roadway construction; 
(11)  Construction management and inspection; 
(12)  Surveying and soils and material testing; 
(13)  Repayment of monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village which were used to fund any growth impacted construction or improvements as herein defined; and 
(14)  Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other indebtedness issued by the village to provide funds to construct or acquire growth impacted capital transportation improvements on designated village roads. 
Funds on deposit in the road impact fee trust account shall not be used for any expenditure that would be classified as a maintenance or repair expense. 
(c)  The monies deposited into the road impact fee trust account shall be used solely to provide improvements and additions to the designated village roads required to accommodate traffic generated by growth as projected in the impact fee study. 
(d)  Any monies on deposit which are not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested by the village. All income derived from such investments shall be deposited in the road impact fee trust account and used as provided herein. 
(e)  The road impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter may be returned to the then current owner of the property on behalf of which such fee was paid if such fees have not been expended or encumbered prior to the end of the fiscal year immediately following the sixth anniversary of the date upon which such fees were paid. Refunds shall be made only in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The then current owner shall petition the impact fee coordinator for the refund within 90 days following the end of the fiscal year immediately following the sixth anniversary date on which the road impact fee was paid. 
(2)  The petition for refund shall be submitted to the impact fee coordinator and shall contain: 
a.  A notarized sworn statement that the petitioner is the then current owner of the property on behalf of which the road impact fee was paid; 
b.  A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of such fee or such other record as would indicate payment of such fee; 
c.  A certified copy of the latest recorded deed; and 
d.  A copy of the most recent ad valorem tax bill. 
(3)  Within three months from the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the impact fee coordinator will advise the owner of the status of the road impact fee requested for refund, and if such road impact fee has not been spent or encumbered within the applicable time period, then it shall be returned to the petitioner with interest paid at the rate of six percent per annum or the average net interest rate earned by the village in the road impact fee trust account during the time such refunded road impact fee was on deposit, whichever is less. The village shall retain two percent of the road impact fee to offset the costs of administering the refund. For the purposes of this section, fees collected shall be deemed to be spent or encumbered on the basis of the first fee in shall be the first fee out. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 2.03, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 7, 1-28-03)  
Secs. 33-104—33-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES IMPACT FEE 
 
Sec. 33-151. - Imposition. 
(a)  All parks and recreational facilities impact construction within the incorporated area of the village shall pay the park impact fee established in this chapter. 
(b)  The council hereby adopts the following schedule of park impact fees, which are hereby imposed upon all parks and recreational facilities impact construction occurring within the village. 
Parks and Recreational Facilities Impact Fee Rate 
Type of Development 	Current Cost per Capita 	Average Persons per Dwelling Unit 	Impact Fee per Dwelling Unit 
Dwelling Unit 	$1,330.54 	2.95 	$3,925.00 
 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the park impact fee shall be paid directly to the village prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 3.01, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 3, 6-22-04)  
Sec. 33-152. - Alternative park impact fee calculation. 
(a)  In the event an applicant believes that the impact to the village park system necessitated by its parks and recreational facilities impact construction is less than the fee established in section 33-151, such applicant may, prior to issuance of a building permit for such parks and recreational facilities impact construction, submit a calculation of an alternative park impact fee to the impact fee coordinator pursuant to the provisions of this section. The impact fee coordinator shall review the calculations and make a determination within ten days of submittal as to whether such calculation complies with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The alternative park impact fee calculations shall be based on data, information or assumptions contained in this chapter and the impact fee study or an independent source, provided that: 
(1)  The independent source is a generally accepted standard source of planning information, or 
(2)  The independent source is a local study supported by a data base adequate for the conclusions contained in such study performed by a professional engineer pursuant to a generally accepted methodology of planning or engineering. 
(3)  If a previously approved parks and recreational facilities impact construction project submitted, during its approval process, an alternative parks and recreational impact fee study substantially consistent with the criteria required by this section, and if such study is determined by the impact fee coordinator to be current, the parks and recreational impacts of such previously approved parks and recreational facilities impact construction shall be presumed to be as described in the prior study. In such circumstances, an alternative park impact fee shall be established reflecting the impact described in the prior study. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that an alternative parks and recreational facility impact fee study conducted more than two years earlier is invalid. 
(c)  If the impact fee coordinator determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant to calculate the alternative park impact fee comply with the requirements of this section and that the calculation of the alternative park impact fee was by a generally accepted methodology, then the alternative park impact fee shall be paid in lieu of the fee set forth in section 33-151. 
(d)  If the impact fee coordinator determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant do not comply with the requirements of this section or that the calculation of the alternative park impact fee was not by a generally accepted methodology, then the impact fee coordinator shall provide to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the rejection of the alternative park impact fee and the reason therefore. The applicant shall have 30 days from the receipt of the written notification of rejection to request a hearing pursuant to section 33-207. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 3.02, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-153. - Use of park impact fee proceeds. 
(a)  The council hereby establishes a separate trust account for the park impact fee, to be designated as the "Parks and Recreational Facilities Impact Fee Trust Account," which shall be maintained separate and apart from all other accounts of the village. All park impact fees shall be deposited into such trust fund immediately upon receipt. 
(b)  The monies deposited into the parks and recreational facilities impact fee trust account shall be used solely for the purpose of constructing or improving the village park system, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Design and construction plan preparation; 
(2)  Permitting and fees; 
(3)  Land and materials acquisition including any costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
(4)  Construction and design of recreational facilities; 
(5)  Design and construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with parks and recreational facilities; 
(6)  Landscaping; 
(7)  Construction management and inspection; 
(8)  Surveying, soils and material testing; 
(9)  Acquisition of capital equipment for parks; 
(10)  Repayment of monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the village which were used to fund any of the construction or improvements herein defined; 
(11)  Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other indebtedness issued by the village to provide funds to construct or acquire contemplated capital parks and recreational facilities improvements; and 
(12)  Relocating utilities to accommodate new park construction. 
Funds on deposit in the parks and recreational facilities impact fee trust account shall not be used for any expenditure that would be classified as a maintenance or repair expense. 
(c)  The monies deposited into the parks and recreational facilities impact fee trust account shall be used solely to provide improvements and additions to the village park system required to accommodate growth as projected in the impact fee study. 
(d)  Any funds on deposit which are not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested by the village. All income derived from such investments shall be deposited in the parks and recreational facilities impact fee trust account and used as provided herein. 
(e)  The park impact fee collected pursuant to this chapter may be returned to the then current owner of the property on behalf of which such fee was paid if such fees have not been expended or encumbered prior to the end of the fiscal year immediately following the sixth anniversary of the date upon which such fees were paid. Refunds shall be made only in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The then current owner shall petition the impact fee coordinator for the refund within 90 days following the end of the fiscal year immediately following the sixth anniversary date on which the park impact fee was paid. 
(2)  The petition for refund must be submitted to the impact fee coordinator and shall contain: 
a.  A notarized sworn statement that the petitioner is the then current owner of the property on behalf of which the park impact fee was paid; 
b.  A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of such fee or such other record as would indicate payment of such fee; 
c.  A certified copy of the latest recorded deed; and 
d.  A copy of the most recent ad valorem tax bill. 
(3)  Within three months from the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the impact fee coordinator will advise the owner of the status of the park impact fee requested for refund, and if such park impact fee has not been spent or encumbered within its applicable time period, then it shall be returned to the petitioner with interest paid at the rate of six percent per annum or the average net interest rate earned by the village in the parks and recreational facilities impact fee trust account during the time such refunded park impact fee was on deposit, whichever is less. The village shall retain two percent of the park impact fee to offset the costs of administering the refund. For the purposes of this section, fees collected shall be deemed to be spent or encumbered on the basis of the first fee in shall be the first fee out. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 3.03, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 8, 1-28-03)  
Secs. 33-154—33-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 33-201. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempted from payment of the road impact fee: 
(1)  Alterations, expansion or replacement of an existing dwelling unit which does not increase the number of families for which such dwelling unit is arranged, designed or intended to accommodate for the purpose of providing living quarters. 
(2)  The alteration or expansion of a building if the building use upon completion does not generate greater external trips under the applicable road impact fee rate. 
(3)  The replacement of a building or the construction of an accessory building or structure if the replacement building or accessory building or structure does not result in a land use generating greater external trips under the applicable road impact fee rate. 
(4)  The issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable road impact fees have previously been paid. 
(5)  The construction of governmental buildings or facilities. 
(b)  The following shall be exempted from payment of the park impact fee: 
(1)  Any development that results in no new impact on a capital facility for which the park impact fee is assessed by the village. 
(2)  The construction of an accessory building or structure where the use is not changed such that an additional impact does not result from the construction and where no additional dwelling units or square footage are added. 
(3)  The construction of governmental buildings or facilities. 
(4)  The issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable park impact fees have previously been paid. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.01, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-202. - Changes of size and use. 
(a)  A road impact fee shall be imposed and calculated for the alteration, expansion or replacement of a building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building or structure if the alteration, expansion or replacement of the building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building or structure results in a land use determined to generate greater external trips than the present use under the applicable road impact fee rate. The road impact fee imposed under the applicable road impact fee rate shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  If the road impact fee is calculated on land use and not square footage, the road impact fee imposed shall be the road impact fee due under the applicable road impact fee rate for the impact fee land use category resulting from the alteration, expansion or replacement, less the road impact fee that would be imposed under the applicable road impact fee rate for the impact fee land use category prior to the alteration, expansion or replacement. 
(2)  In the event the square footage of a building is increased, the road impact fee rate for the increased square footage represented by the road impact construction shall be at the road impact fee rate applicable to road impact construction with square footage resulting from the alteration, expansion or replacement, less the road impact fee that would be imposed under the applicable square footage prior to the alteration, expansion or replacement. 
(3)  The road impact fee imposed for any accessory building or structure shall be that applicable under the road impact fee rate for the land use for the primary building. 
(b)  A park impact fee shall be imposed and calculated for the alteration, expansion or replacement of a building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building or structure if the alteration, expansion or replacement of the building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building or structure results in a land use determined to increase the number of dwelling units. The park impact fee imposed shall be upon each additional dwelling unit created by the alteration, expansion or replacement of the building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.02, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-203. - Payment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, prior to the issuance of a building permit for a road impact construction and a parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, an applicant shall pay the road impact fee as set forth in section 33-101 and the park impact fee as set forth in section 33-151, as applicable. The applicable road impact fee and the park impact fee shall be paid directly to the village. 
(b)  The obligation for payment of the road impact fee and the park impact fee shall run with the land. 
(c)  In the event that a building permit issued for a road impact construction and a parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, expires prior to completion of the road impact construction and the parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, for which it was issued, the applicant may within 90 days of the expiration of the building permit apply for a refund of the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable. Failure to timely apply for a refund of the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, shall waive any right to a refund. 
(1)  The application for refund shall be filed with the impact fee coordinator and contain the following: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The location of the property which was the subject of the building permit; 
c.  The date the road impact fee was paid and the date the park impact fee was paid, as applicable; 
d.  A copy of the receipt of payment for the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable; and 
e.  The date the building permit was issued and the date of expiration. 
(2)  After verifying that the building permit has expired and that the road impact construction and the parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, has not been completed, the impact fee coordinator shall refund the road impact fee paid for such road impact construction and the park impact fee paid for such parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable. The village shall retain two percent of the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, to offset the costs of administering the refund. 
(3)  A building permit which is subsequently issued for a road impact construction and a parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, on the same property which was the subject of a refund shall pay the road impact fee as required by section 33-101 and the park impact fee as required by section 33-151, as applicable. 
(d)  The payment of the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, shall be in addition to any other fees, charges or assessments of the village due for the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.03, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-204. - Applicability. 
This chapter and the obligations herein for the payment of the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, shall apply to all road impact construction and all parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, that receive a building permit on or after the effective date of this chapter. Conversely, any road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, that possesses a valid, unexpired building permit before the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to this chapter, provided however, that if such valid, unexpired building permit shall expire prior to the completion of the road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, for which it was issued, then the road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction shall pay the road impact fee and park impact fee, as applicable, with the subsequent issuance of any building permit on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.04, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-205. - Alternative collection method. 
In the event the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, is not paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for the affected road impact construction and parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, the village may elect to collect the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, by any other method which is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.05, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-206. - Developer contribution credit. 
(a)  A credit shall be granted against the road impact fee imposed pursuant to section 33-101 for the contribution of land or for the construction of any off-site improvements to designated village roads required pursuant to a development order by the village or voluntarily made in connection with road impact construction. Such land contribution and construction and improvement shall be subject to the approval of the impact fee coordinator and the following standards: 
(1)  The contributed land shall be an integral part of and a necessary accommodation of the contemplated off-site improvements to designated village roads. 
(2)  The off-site improvements to be constructed shall be an integral part of and a necessary accommodation of the contemplated off-site improvements to designated village roads and shall exclude access improvements. 
(b)  The following credits shall be granted against the park impact fee imposed pursuant to section 33-151: 
(1)  A credit shall be granted against the park impact fee for the contribution of land or for the construction of any park or recreational facilities or improvements and additions thereto made to the village park system required pursuant to a development order of the village or made voluntarily in connection with parks and recreational facilities impact construction. Such land contribution and construction and improvement shall be subject to the approval of the impact fee coordinator and shall be an integral part of, and a necessary accommodation to, an existing or contemplated park in the village park system. 
(2)  A credit shall be granted against the park impact fee for any dedications of land for parks and recreational facilities or any fee paid in lieu of a land dedication made under any village ordinance which provides for a mandatory land dedication for parks and recreational facilities. 
(c)  The amount of developer contribution credit to be applied to the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, shall be determined according to the following standards of valuation: 
(1)  The value of donated land shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value as of the date of the development order by a qualified and professional appraiser and based upon comparable sales of similar property between unrelated parties in a bargaining transaction, if available. 
(2)  The cost of anticipated construction of off-site improvements to a designated village road or parks and recreational facilities improvements to the village park system, as applicable, shall be based upon cost estimates certified by a professional architect or engineer. 
(3)  The land and construction contributions shall only provide additions or improvements to a designated village road or the village park system, as applicable, required to accommodate growth as projected in the impact fee study. 
(d)  Prior to issuance of a development order, the applicant shall submit to the impact fee coordinator a proposed plan for the construction or contribution of off-site improvements to a designated village road or a plan for contributions to the village park system. The proposed plan shall include: 
(1)  A designation of the road impact construction for which the plan is being submitted or a designation of the parks and recreational facilities impact construction for which the proposed plan is being submitted, whichever is applicable. 
(2)  A list of the contemplated off-site improvements to a designated village road, if applicable. 
(3)  A legal description of any land proposed to be contributed and a written appraisal prepared in conformity with subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(4)  An estimate of proposed construction costs certified by a professional engineer. 
(5)  A proposed time schedule for completion of the proposed plan. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the proposed plan, the impact fee coordinator shall determine: 
(1)  If such proposed plan of construction or contribution is in conformity with contemplated off-site improvements to a designated village road, if applicable. 
(2)  If such proposed plan of construction or contribution is in conformity with contemplated parks and recreational facilities additions to the village park system, if applicable. 
(3)  If the proposed contribution is consistent with the public interest. 
(4)  If the proposed construction and contribution time schedule is consistent with the village transportation work schedule or the village's capital improvement program for the village park system, whichever is applicable. 
(5)  The amount of the developer contribution credit based upon the above standards of valuation, if any. 
The decision of the impact fee coordinator as to whether to accept or reject the proposed plan of contribution or construction and the amount of the developer contribution credit, if any, shall be in writing and issued within 30 days of the review. The written decision shall include an implementation schedule and bonding requirements as provided herein. A copy shall be provided to the applicant and owner. If the impact fee coordinator rejects the proposed plan of contribution or construction, or if the applicant disputes the amount of developer contribution credit granted, the applicant shall have 30 days from the receipt of written notification to request a hearing pursuant to section [33-207]. 
(f)  All construction cost estimates shall be based upon, and all construction plans and specifications shall be in conformity with, the road construction standards of the village and the parks and recreational facilities construction standards of the village, whichever is applicable. All plans and specifications shall be approved by the village engineer prior to commencement of construction. 
(g)  In the event the amount of developer contribution credit determined to be applicable by the impact fee coordinator pursuant to an approved plan of construction or contribution exceeds the total amount of road impact fee or the park impact fee, as applicable, due by the applicant for the identified road impact construction or parks and recreational facilities impact construction, as applicable, the village shall execute with the applicant an agreement for future reimbursement of the excess of such contribution credit from future receipts by the village of the road impact fee or the park impact fee, as applicable. Such agreement for reimbursement shall not be for a period in excess of five years from the date of completion of the approved plan of construction and shall provide for a forfeiture of any remaining reimbursement balance at the end of such five-year period. 
(h)  Any claim for credit as established in this section must be made no later than at the time of development order approval. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(i)  Any applicant who submits a proposed plan pursuant to this section and desires the immediate issuance of a building permit shall pay the applicable road impact fee and park impact fee, as applicable, prior to or at the time the request for hearing is filed. Said payment shall be deemed paid "under protest" and shall not be construed as a waiver of any review rights. Any difference shall be refunded to the applicant or owner. 
(j)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to qualify the contribution of land which is required as right-of-way for a developer contribution credit. 
(k)  No impact fee credits shall be granted until the land is conveyed to the village, or facilities have been constructed and accepted, or alternatively, until a bond has been posted to ensure the conveyance or construction. 
(l)  A development order is defined as a site plan or master plan which has been approved by village council. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.06, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 9, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 3, 3-25-03)  
Sec. 33-207. - Review hearings. 
(a)  An applicant or owner who is required to pay a road impact fee pursuant to section 33-101 and a park impact fee pursuant to section 33-151, as applicable, shall have the right to request a review hearing. 
(b)  Such hearing shall be limited to the review of the following: 
(1)  The application or calculation of the road impact fee pursuant to section 33-101, and the park impact fee pursuant to section 33-151 as applicable. 
(2)  The rejection of the alternative road impact fee calculation pursuant to section 33-102 and the rejection of the alternative park impact fee calculation pursuant to section 33-152, as applicable. 
(3)  The rejection of a proposed plan of construction or contribution submitted for purposes of determining a developer contribution credit pursuant to section 33-206 or the amount of such credit. 
(c)  Such hearing shall be requested by the applicant or owner within 30 days of the date of first receipt of the following: 
(1)  Notice that the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, are due. 
(2)  Determination on a proposed alternative road impact fee and proposed alternative park impact fee, as applicable. 
(3)  Determination on a proposed plan of construction or contribution submitted for purposes of determining a developer contribution credit pursuant to section 33-206 or the amount of such credit. 
Failure to request a hearing within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of such right. 
(d)  The request for hearing shall be filed with the impact fee coordinator and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or owner. 
(2)  The legal description of the property in question. 
(3)  If issued, the date the building permit was issued. 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the construction being undertaken pursuant to the building permit. 
(5)  If paid, the date the road impact fee was paid and the date the park impact fee was paid, as applicable. 
(6)  A statement of the reasons why the applicant or owner is requesting the hearing. 
(e)  Upon receipt of such request, the impact fee coordinator shall schedule a hearing before a special master and shall provide the applicant and owner written notice of the time and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 45 days of the date the request for hearing was filed, unless a continuance is requested by the applicant. 
(f)  Such hearing shall be before a special master and shall be conducted in a manner designed to obtain all information and evidence relevant to the requested hearing. Formal rules of civil procedure and evidence shall not be applicable; however, the hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with each party having an opportunity to be heard and to present information and evidence. 
(g)  Any applicant or owner who requests a hearing pursuant to this section and desires the immediate issuance of a building permit, or if a building permit has been issued without the payment of the road impact fee and the park impact fee, as applicable, shall pay prior to or at the time the request for hearing is filed, the applicable road impact fee pursuant to section 33-101 and the applicable park impact fee pursuant to section 33-151, as applicable. Said payment shall be deemed paid "under protest" and shall not be construed as a waiver of any review rights. 
(h)  An applicant or owner may request a hearing under this section without paying the applicable road impact fee and park impact fee, as applicable, but no building permit shall be issued until such road impact fee and park impact fee, as applicable, are paid in the amount initially calculated or the amount approved upon completion of the review provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.07, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 10, 1-28-03)  
Sec. 33-208. - Review requirement. 
This chapter and the impact fee study shall be reviewed by the council at least every five years. The initial and each review every five years thereafter shall consider new estimates of population and other socioeconomic data, changes in construction, land acquisition and related costs, and adjustments to the assumptions, conclusions or findings set forth in the study adopted by section 33-54. For the road impact fee, each review shall additionally consider changes in right-of-way acquisition and related costs and changes in trip generation rates, external trip lengths and traffic volume counts. The purpose of this review is to evaluate and revise, if necessary, the road impact fee and park impact fee to ensure that they do not exceed the reasonably anticipated costs associated with the improvements and additions necessary to offset the demand generated by the road impact construction on the village street system and parks and recreational facilities impact construction on the village park system. In the event the review of the ordinance required by this section alters or changes the assumptions, conclusions and findings of the studies adopted by reference in section 33-54, revises or changes the designated village roads or the village park system, or alters or changes the amount or classification of the road impact fee or the park impact fee, the study adopted by reference in section 33-54 shall be amended and updated to reflect the assumptions, conclusions and findings of such reviews and section 33-54 shall be amended to adopt by reference such updated studies. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.08, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-209. - Declaration of exclusion from administrative procedures act. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to include the village in the definition of agency as contained in section 120.52, Florida Statutes, or to otherwise subject the village to the application of the administrative procedure act, Chapter 120, Florida Statutes. This declaration of intent and exclusion shall apply to all proceedings taken as a result of or pursuant to this chapter, including specifically, but not limited to, determination of alternative fee calculation pursuant to section 33-102 or 33-152, and review hearings under section 33-207. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.09, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-210. - Individual calculation of road impact fees. 
(a)  In the event a road impact construction involves a land use not contemplated under the impact fee land use categories set forth in section 33-101, the village engineer shall determine the number of new net trips to be generated by the proposed road impact construction and shall calculate the appropriate road impact fee, utilizing the methodology contained in the impact fee study adopted by section 33-54. The village engineer shall utilize as a standard in this determination the trip generation rates in the most similar trip generation land use category or any other generally accepted standard source of transportation engineering or planning. 
(b)  In the event a road impact construction involves a mixed use road impact construction, the village engineer shall calculate the road impact fee based upon the number of new net trips to be generated by each separate impact fee land use category included in the proposed mixed use road impact construction. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.10, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 33-211. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and it is the intention to confer the whole or any part of the powers provided for herein. If any clause, section or provision of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of said chapter shall be in full force and effect and be valid as if such invalid portion thereof had not been incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional provision not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 4.11, 11-10-98)  
Secs. 33-212—33-250. - Reserved.  
Chapter 34 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Mobile home setup operations, local license prohibited, exception, F.S. § 205.193; license tax imposed on mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers, etc., F.S. § 320.081; mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, F.S. ch. 513; Florida Manufactured Building Act of 1979, F.S. § 553.35 et seq.; mobile home park lot tenancies, F.S. ch. 723. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSPECTIONS; TIEDOWNS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This article is based on Palm Beach County Ordinance No. 81-10, adopted by the board of county commissioners on May 19, 1981, except that "mobile home" has been defined as instructed by the village. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home is defined as provided in F.S. § 320.01(2)(a). 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the village to make an on-site inspection of each new mobile home located within the village to ensure compliance with all state and local mobile home codes, ordinances and regulations. Mobile home owners subject to the provisions of this article shall apply to the village planning, zoning and building department for a mobile home installation permit. 
(b)  Mobile home inspection by the village shall include a determination as to whether or not the unit has maintained sufficient mobility to comply with the village zoning code.  
Sec. 34-33. - List of recently installed mobile homes to be provided by park owner; penalty for violation of section. 
In any mobile home park of 25 units or larger, the owner or manager of such park must make available, upon request by the village, or its duly authorized representative, a current record or list indicating all mobile homes entering that park during the current and immediately preceding year. A mobile home park owner or manager failing to comply with this section, or fraudulently responding to a request by the village, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 for each refusal or fraudulent response.  
Sec. 34-34. - Inspection and reinspection fees. 
There shall be a fee charged for the inspection of mobile homes as required by this article. The inspection fee shall be $25.00 for each mobile home unit inspected. A reinspection fee of $5.00 may be charged for each inspection made due to a rejection of work, or due to the fact that work was not ready at the time specified in the request for inspection, or failure to call for inspection. Payment of such fee must be made prior to the reinspection. If any person commences any work on an installation or occupies a mobile home before obtaining the necessary permits from the building official, the permit fee shall be doubled. Increases or decreases in this fee schedule may be adopted by the village council at a public hearing after due notice published not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the village once a week for two weeks prior to the week of the date of the hearing.  
Sec. 34-35. - Minimum blocking and tiedown standards—Residential. 
(a)  Foundation. Foundation blocking standards for residences are as follows: 
(1)  Pier foundations shall be directly under the main frame of the mobile home. The piers shall be placed as marked on the main frame by the manufacturer or shall not be spaced further than eight-foot maximum on centers, and the main frame, front and back, shall not extend further than two feet beyond the centerline of the end piers. 
(2)  All grass and organic material shall be removed, and the pier foundation shall be placed on stable soil. The pier foundation shall be a 16-inch by 16-inch by four-inch solid concrete pad, precast or poured in place, or the equivalent. 
(3)  Piers must be constructed of regular eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch concrete blocks, open cells, solid or equivalent (with open cells vertical), placed above the foundation. A two-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch pressure treated wood plate or equivalent shall be placed on top of the piers with shims fitted and driven tight from both sides of the I beam, between the wood place and the main frame. Single tiered block piers shall be installed perpendicular to the main I beam. Adjustable steel piers may be used on 16-inch by 16-inch by four-inch pier foundations in lieu of block piers. All mobile homes must have a minimum of 12 inches from the earth or slab to the under edge of the I beam for maintenance or repair services. 
(4)  All piers over 40 inches in height shall be double tiered with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by 16-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block, or equivalent, cushioned with wood shims. 
(5)  All corner piers over three blocks high shall be double tiered, with blocks interlocked and capped with four-inch by 16-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block and cushioned with wood shims or pressure treated plate. 
(b)  Anchoring. Only approved anchors shall be used. Model numbers shall be permanently marked on the head or top of each anchor so that it is readily visible after installation of the anchor. All components must be clearly marked. Single or double headed anchors may be used in the village. Only one steel strap shall be allowed per lock bolt. On double headed anchors, the frame ties must be tied to bottom lock both, and the overhead ties to the top lock bolt. Every mobile home must be anchored at the point provided on the mobile home. All anchoring equipment shall be capable of resisting an allowable working load of 3,150 pounds (Federal Register, Volume 40,244 TP 280.306) and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload. 
_____
(c)  Tiedown specifications. Residential tiedown specifications are as follows: 
	Up To 	40 feet 	41 feet— 
60 feet 	61 feet 
and up 
Singlewide mobile home 	Frame ties per side 	3 	5 	7 
Singlewide mobile home 	Over the roof ties per side 	3 	3 	3 
Doublewide mobile home 	Frame ties per side outside beam 	3 	5 	7 
 
_____
All tiedown straps shall be 1¼ inches by 0.035 (0.30 ounce per square feet) steel strap conforming to federal specifications QQ-S-781H, Type 1, Class B, Grade 1 or 5/16 aircraft cable and three-eighths-inch turnbuckles. Only one steel strap is allowed per lock bolt. Any other method must be approved by the building official before installation. All anchoring equipment shall be capable of resisting an allowable working load of 3,150 pounds, (Federal Register, Volume 40, 244 TP 280.306) and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload. Frame ties must be installed within 24 inches of each end and at intervals as described on the preceding chart. All over the roof ties installed on singlewide or doublewide mobile homes must be anchored as per subsection (b) of this section. Overroof ties must be installed within 24 inches of each end. All other ties shall be equally spaced as is feasible. On doublewide mobile homes, the two inside I beams must be bolted together at a minimum of three points; one at either end of the frame within 24 inches of the end of the I beam and one in the center. 
(d)  Existing permitted exceptions. Mobile homes having a permanent type structure adequate to provide structural rigidity and stability, meeting the design loads of hurricane zones as specified in the ANSI A119.1 standards, of 25 pounds horizontal and 15 pounds uplift, or meets local building codes, and extending a minimum of two-thirds of the length of the mobile home to which it is attached, shall be deemed to have complied with the tiedown standards. Mobile home model years prior to 1971 having a concrete slab, the top of which is vertically within 12 inches or less of the bottom of the floor of the mobile home, and where the bottom of the floor is within 16 inches or less off the ground, shall be required to have frame and ties; provided, however, that those mobile homes which are as of the effective date of this code tied down in compliance with the requirements of the insurance company insuring the same, or the village or county wherein such mobile homes are located, and have been approved by the insurer, shall be deemed to have complied with the tiedown standards of the village as set forth in this article. Upon relocation of such mobile homes, however, the village tiedown requirements shall apply.  
Sec. 34-36. - Same—Nonresidential. 
Blocking shall be as necessary to stabilize the trailer depending on soil conditions. Overhead tiedown must be installed at each corner with approved anchors.  
Sec. 34-37. - Electric equipment and connections. 
All electrical equipment and connections on each lot shall be constructed according to articles 550 and 551 of the National Electrical Code, 1993 edition, as modified by the village.  
Sec. 34-38. - Plumbing. 
Plumbing on each lot shall be installed according to the Standard Plumbing Code, 1991 edition, as modified by the village.  
Sec. 34-39. - Building permit required for structures and additions. 
A building permit must be obtained for any structure or additions on mobile home lots. These structures must be constructed according to the village building code.  
Sec. 34-40. - Certificate of occupancy requirements. 
The trailer skirting must not be installed until after all necessary inspections have been made. Electric service to trailer, water connections, sewer connection and tiedowns must be complete before obtaining a final inspection and a certificate of occupancy.  
Secs. 34-41—34-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RIGID AWNINGS; CANOPY-SHUTTERS; CANOPIES; CABANAS 
 
Sec. 34-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cabana rooms means rigid porches, metal Florida rooms, enclosed canopies, rigid, attached nondemountable canopies, screen rooms and other similar permanent units installed or constructed as mobile home adjuncts, totally or partially enclosed with sidewalls made of metal or other approved rigid material and as such, are classified as structures under this division. These porches may be lightly attached to the mobile home for weatherproofing purposes but shall be considered as freestanding structures under this division and shall be required to meet the design load requirements of chapter XII of the Palm Beach County Code. 
Demountable screen enclosures means screen rooms and screen porches with screen roofs or metal roofs meeting the requirements as set forth in this division and designated as an adjunct or a mobile home. They must be readily demountable and have no solid panels or windows. 
Rigid awning means a unit designed to protect a window or door against sun or weather. It may not exceed the length specified in this definition and in no case shall exceed the length of the mobile home to which it is attached. It shall be capable of being lowered readily and easily within a few minutes time to function as a shutter, to close the protected opening, and it shall be capable of being securely anchored in that position. It must be supported entirely from the walls of the mobile home to which it is attached. It may be constructed of metal, wood or other approved, rigid material. 
Rigid canopies and canopy-shutters mean a unit designed to protect a window or door or a group of windows or doors against sun or weather. It may extend over a group of windows or doors. It shall not exceed the length specified in this definition but in any case, may not exceed the length of the mobile home to which it is attached. It may be supported entirely by the mobile home or in part by the mobile home and in part by separate metal or other rigid columns supported by the ground below. Such columns shall be spaced at intervals not to exceed ten feet and shall have no sidewalls or curtains other than a valance not exceeding 12 inches in depth. It shall be capable of being lowered readily and easily in a matter of minutes to a position flat against the side of the mobile home to which it is attached and fastened securely in this position. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-62. - Division provisions permitted, subject to review and permitting. 
The provisions of this division are permitted but are subject to a review by and permission from the village planning, zoning and building department.  
Sec. 34-63. - Permit requirements. 
A permit must be obtained for all rigid awnings, of 50 square feet or more, canopy-shutters, canopies, cabana rooms and attached and detached rigid canopies used as adjuncts to mobile homes prior to their installations. Plans and drawings as may be deemed necessary to advise and acquaint the issuing department with the location, method of attachment and materials of construction shall accompany each application for rigid awnings of 50 square feet or more, canopy-shutters and canopies. In addition to the drawings, the issuing department shall be provided with demonstrations of foldability as may be required in this division for the installation of rigid awning, canopy-shutter or canopy. Plans and drawings for cabana rooms and attached and detached rigid canopies shall be prepared by a registered engineer authorized to practice in the state whose principal occupation is structural engineering, and the plans provided must bear his seal and signature.  
Sec. 34-64. - Inspections. 
All installations shall be subject to inspection, and the permittee shall notify the issuing department for the need of such inspection after the installation has been completed, and prior to occupancy.  
Sec. 34-65. - Rigid awnings, canopy-shutters and canopies; specifications. 
The unit length of rigid awnings, canopy-shutters and canopies shall not exceed 24 feet; where separate units are desired, as an adjunct to any mobile home, more than one unit may be allowed. However, these units may not extend fore or aft beyond the limits of the mobile home to which they are attached. The width of such installation shall not exceed the mounting light of the pivot point about the surrounding ground, if pivoted, and in no case, shall exceed a width of 11 feet. If the rigid awning, canopy-shutter or canopy requires support from the ground below, such support shall be anchored with a concrete or other approved anchor capable of withstanding 100 pounds uplift per column.  
Sec. 34-66. - Demountable screen enclosures. 
(a)  Requirements. Demountable screen enclosures may be installed under rigid awnings, rigid canopies, rigid canopy-shutters, cloth awnings and cloth canopies, provided that they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They shall be constructed in sections not more than six feet in width and fastened in such a manner that they are readily demountable without the use of tools. These sections shall be covered with screen only. No solid panels or windows shall be allowed. Provisions shall be made to stack the screen panels on the patio slabs and cable them thereto. 
(2)  The awnings, canopies and canopy-shutters under which such screen enclosure is proposed, shall be of a type approved by the planning, zoning and building department, for which a permit was obtained, and erected in accordance with the approved plans, or for which a permit is currently being applied for. 
(3)  Proof of demountability shall be by demonstration and plans of sufficient detail to ascertain such demountability. If the planning, zoning and building department shall determine the plans sufficient proof, demonstration may be waived. 
(4)  The combined average time for the demounting and storing of the screen room, and the folding flat and locking of the awning to the mobile home to which it is attached, shall not exceed the 45-minute period allowed for such awning and screen rooms. 
(5)  Permits shall be required prior to each installation, and all installations shall be subject to inspection. The permittee shall notify the issuing department of the need for such inspection after installation has been completed and prior to occupancy. 
(6)  All applications for permits within rental parks shall be cosigned by the park owner, or his agent having power of attorney, and the mobile home owner and each shall be jointly responsible for the removal of screen enclosures and awnings under the conditions as set forth in this division. 
(7)  Demountable screen enclosures shall be required to meet the previously established setbacks for construction on such mobile home parking sites. 
(b)  Demonstration. The issuing department may, at its option, require demonstration of foldability of each type, brand or style. A successful demonstration of foldability shall consist of folding and anchoring within a 45-minute period.  
Sec. 34-67. - Failure to fold and lock rigid adjuncts under certain conditions; misdemeanor. 
Rigid awnings, canopy-shutters and canopies shall be folded against the side of the mobile home or trailer immediately after the posting of an official National Weather Service Hurricane warning for the village, or if the mobile home is left unattended, the mobile home owner is responsible for securing the mobile home and adjuncts. Failure to fold and lock the rigid adjuncts under either of the two conditions set forth in this section, shall constitute a violation of this division and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor under state law.  
Chapter 35 - NEWSRACKS 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the village through the regulation of the placement, type, appearance, servicing, and insuring of newsracks on public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 1, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Abandoned pocket or newsrack means any pocket in a modular newsrack or any stand-alone newsrack that does not contain the most current publication specified therefor for more than four consecutive days for a daily publication, eight consecutive days for a weekly publication, 16 consecutive days for a biweekly publication, and 32 consecutive days for a monthly publication. 
Advertising circular means any publication that only contains advertising and no news reports. 
Modular newsrack means a connected grouping of no less than two pockets within a single publication distribution system that is bolted directly to the paved surface, installed or used for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers, other periodicals and owned by the Village of Wellington. 
Modular newsrack pocket means a single opening in a modular newsrack. 
Newspaper means any publication that contains news reporting. 
Newsrack means any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display, sale, or distribution of newspapers. 
Newsrack enclosure means any enclosure constructed to screen newsracks and modular newsracks from view, including walls, fences, hedges, or other screens. 
Private newsrack site means any location within the Village of Wellington not on public property on which two or more newsracks or one modular newsrack is located. 
Public newsrack site means a location approved by the Village of Wellington on public property where newsracks and modular newsracks may be located. 
Responsible person means the person designated by the publisher of the newspaper or advertising circular as the person responsible for receiving notices of violation from the village. Where no such person is designated, the publisher shall be considered the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 2, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-3. - Public property. 
(a)  Location and placement of newsracks and modular newsracks on public property. Newsracks or modular newsracks may be installed on public property only in the areas designated as approved public newsrack sites listed below, and in such additional sites as may be designated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter: 
Site 1—South Shore Boulevard, east of Forest Hill Boulevard 
Site 2—Forest Hill Boulevard, west of Highway 441 
Site 3—Wellington Trace, in front of the water plant 
Site 4—South Shore Boulevard, south of Greenview Shores Boulevard 
Site 5—Big Blue Trace, north of Paddock Drive 
Site 6—Fairlane Farms Road, south of Forest Hill Boulevard 
Site 7—Lake Worth Road and South Shore Boulevard 
A map of approved newsrack sites shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk. 
(b)  Additional locations for newsracks or modular newsracks on public property may be approved by the village. Requests for additional sites not initiated by village staff shall demonstrate that there is a significant changed condition that necessitates the village to consider permitting additional newsrack sites. Such changed conditions may include, but not be limited to, annexation of additional land area, opening of a new public right-of-way, or development of previously undeveloped property. Additional public newsrack sites may be designated if the proposed site meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Does not result in any sidewalk with less than five feet of clear area; 
(2)  Does not project onto, into, or over any part of the vehicular travel way; 
(3)  Is not within ten feet of any pedestrian crossing; 
(4)  Is not within ten feet of any fire hydrant; 
(5)  Is not within ten feet of a driveway or within any safe-sight distance or triangle; 
(6)  Is not within 250 feet of an intersection; 
(7)  Is not within 100 feet of any property designated for residential, school, or house of worship purposes; 
(8)  Is not at any location that the village determines that such placement is likely to cause unsafe parking or traffic circulation patterns; 
(9)  Is not within 1,250 feet of any other approved newsrack site. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 3, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-4. - Use of modular newsracks and newsrack enclosures. 
(a)  At newsrack sites where modular newsracks are provided, advertising circulars shall be required to utilize these facilities subject to the following: 
(1)  The village shall assign advertising circular pockets based on demonstration of need. 
(2)  Pockets shall be assigned by lottery conducted no less frequently than once per year or as space becomes available in the modular newsrack. 
(3)  Pockets that are abandoned shall be offered through a lottery system, as they become available. 
(b)  At newsrack sites where newsrack enclosures are provided, all newsracks and modular newsracks shall be required to utilize these facilities subject to the following: 
(1)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall not be located outside the newsrack enclosure. 
(2)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall not block access aisles. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 4, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-5. - Standards for maintenance, appearance, and installation. 
(a)  Newsracks shall not exceed 48 inches in height. 
(b)  Newsracks shall be designed and installed to withstand a 110 mile per hour wind load or in the alternative, publishers shall post with the village a surety bond in a form acceptable to the village in the amount of $500.00 per publication to ensure removal of such newsracks when determined necessary by the village. 
(c)  Each newsrack and modular newsrack shall be maintained in a neat, clean condition and in good repair. This shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Free of graffiti; 
(2)  Reasonably free of dirt, grease, and rust; 
(3)  Free of chipped, faded, cracked, or peeling paint; 
(4)  Display windows shall be unbroken; 
(5)  All mechanical mechanisms shall be maintained in sound working order. 
(d)  The exterior of newsracks and modular newsracks shall be maintained free of advertisements except for the name of the publication. 
(e)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for receiving all notifications pertaining to the use of a newsrack site or modular newsrack shall be permanently displayed on a label on the exterior of each newsrack or modular newsrack pocket. Failure to post this information shall be deemed abandonment of the newsrack or modular newsrack pocket. 
(f)  Coin-operated newsracks and modular newsracks shall be equipped with a coin return, which shall be maintained in good working order. 
(g)  All coin-operated newsracks and modular newsracks shall also post the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for reimbursement in the event of failure of the coin mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 5, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, 8-10-99)  
Sec. 35-6. - Permits. 
(a)  The village shall require a permit to place any newsrack or use any modular newsrack on public property. 
(b)  Owners of newsracks and modular newsracks shall be required to obtain a permit from the village within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter to install or maintain newsracks on public property within the village. Thereafter, permits will be required to be renewed on October 1 of each year. 
(c)  The village may adopt by resolution a fee for these permits. 
(d)  Newsracks or modular newsracks placed on public property without permits shall be removed by the village following proper notice to the publisher or responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 6, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-7. - Insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  Every publisher who places a newsrack or uses a modular newsrack on public property shall provide the village with a current certificate of insurance naming the village as an additional named insured within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter or for new publishers concurrent with the issuance of the village permit. Such insurance shall be comprehensive general liability or commercial general liability coverage. 
(b)  Minimum limits of coverage shall be $300,000.00 per occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury liability and property damage liability. 
(c)  Proof of insurance shall be required annually at the time of permit renewal. 
(d)  The village shall be notified, in writing, 30 days prior to any termination or lapse of insurance. This requirement shall be acknowledged by the insurance company on the certificate of insurance. 
(e)  Termination or lapse of insurance shall be a violation of this chapter and shall result in the removal of any affected newsracks. 
(f)  Every publisher who places a newsrack or uses a modular newsrack on public property shall agree to execute and deliver as part of the village permit a written agreement under which it agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the village, its officers, agents, and employees from any loss, liability, or damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, or maintenance of a newsrack or modular newsrack within the village. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 7, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-8. - Newsracks and modular news- racks on private property. 
Newsracks and modular newsracks located on private property shall conform to the following criteria: 
(1)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall only be allowed on properties designated for commercial, industrial, or multiple family uses. 
(2)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall not be located along or adjacent to any entrance or exit drive within 100 feet of a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall be not be located within any required landscape buffer strip or required parking stall. 
(4)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and rights-of-way by a visual barrier such as a building, wall, fence, hedge, berm, or some combination thereof. 
(5)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall be located in a manner so that safe-sight distances are maintained and traffic circulation is not unduly impacted. 
(6)  Private newsracks sites shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner free of debris, inoperable, or abandoned newsracks or modular newsracks. 
(7)  Newsracks and modular newsracks shall be maintained according to the standards contained in section 35-5 above (standards for maintenance, appearance, and installation). 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 8, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Public property. 
(1)  Upon determination by the village that a newsrack or a modular newsrack on public property has been installed or used in violation of this chapter, a written notice to correct the violation shall be issued to the responsible person. 
(2)  Failure to correct a violation not related to the use of a village-owned modular newsrack within seven days of the receipt of the notice shall result in the removal of the offending newsrack or modular newsrack by the village. 
(3)  Failure to correct a violation related to the improper use of a village-owned modular newsrack within seven days of the receipt of the notice shall result in the revocation of the permit for the offending newsrack or modular newsrack. 
(4)  The village shall store newsracks that are removed for a period of 30 days. Thereafter, the village may dispose of the newsrack. The village may adopt by resolution a fee for the removal and storage of newsracks. 
(b)  Private property. 
(1)  Upon determination by the village that a newsrack or a modular newsrack on private property has been installed or used in violation of this chapter a written notice to correct the violation shall be issued to the responsible person and to the property owner. 
(2)  Failure to correct a violation within the time specified in the notice shall result in enforcement proceedings pursuant to section 2-196. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 9, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 35-10. - Appeal of permit revocation. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the revocation of a permit under the provisions of this chapter may file an appeal with the village. 
(b)  A hearing before the code enforcement board shall be scheduled no later than 60 days following receipt of the written appeal, unless the parties mutually agree to an extension of this time period. Appellants shall be given seven days written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(c)  The code enforcement board shall give the appellants and other interested parties a reasonable opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing, the code enforcement board shall render its determination. The determination shall be issued in written form with a copy sent to appellants. 
(Ord. No. 98-20, § 10, 2-9-99)  
Chapter 36 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36-1—36-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 98-15, adopted July 28, 1998, repealed §§ 36-21—36-23, 36-31 and 36-32 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to property maintenance standards and derived from Arts. I and II of Ord. No. 98-03, adopted Feb. 24, 1998. Section 2 of Ord. No. 98-15 added new provisions as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 36-21. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the meanings specified herein: 
Accumulation means any one or more articles of litter. 
Developed property means any real property upon which a structure, paving or other improvement has been erected or installed. Overhead, underground and other public or franchised utility installations shall not be considered improvements for the purposes of this definition. 
Landscaped areas means outdoor area, required to consist of or consisting of any of the following or combination thereof, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms; and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences but excluding paving. 
Litter means rubbish and all other solid waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Natural area means an area of native vegetative cover. 
Native vegetation means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the village. 
Non-native vegetation shall mean any plant not native to the State of Florida allowed to grow in an uncontrolled manner. 
Rubbish means solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard and tin cans. 
Solid waste as defined in section 46-23, Code of Ordinances of the Village of Wellington. 
Undeveloped property means any real property, which is not developed property. 
Yard means a space open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except by permitted encroachments on the same lot with a structure or use. 
Yard, front means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest line of any building on the lot. 
Yard, rear means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and nearest line of the main building. 
Yard, side means an area extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line, between the side lot line and the nearest line of any building on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 4-25-17)  
Sec. 36-22. - Property maintenance standards—General. 
(a)  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all property within the village and, unless otherwise stated, the property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance required by this section. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  All principal and accessory buildings and structures and their appurtenances shall be maintained free of debris, stains, mold, discoloration, or deterioration. 
(2)  All driveways, sidewalks, and parking areas shall be maintained free of debris, stains, mold, discoloration, or deterioration. 
(3)  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained free of debris, stains, mold, discoloration, or deterioration. 
(4)  All dumpsters shall be screened and located in a manner approved by the village, and the dumpster and the area surrounding them shall be maintained free of debris, stains, mold, discoloration, or deterioration. 
(c)  Fence and wall maintenance. 
(1)  Fences and walls shall be maintained in good order and repair and shall be subject to the standards enumerated within this section. 
(2)  Painted surfaces shall not be faded and shall be free of discoloration, staining, or peeling. Other surfaces shall not be faded, discolored, stained, peeling, chipped, or broken. 
(3)  Surfaces shall be cleaned or repainted when any surface is more than ten percent stained or discolored or if the paint is peeling over more than five percent of any surface. 
(4)  Broken or missing boards, posts, slats, or fittings shall be replaced immediately. 
(5)  Fences shall be maintained in a vertical configuration and shall not be allowed to lean. 
(6)  Rails and posts shall be structurally sound and not bent. 
(7)  Fabric, rails, posts, fitting, and gates that become more than ten percent discolored shall be cleaned or replaced. 
(8)  Chipped or broken walls shall be repaired immediately. 
(9)  Landscaping and barrier hedges shall be trimmed and maintained in a healthy and neat condition and shall not extend onto or over public properties, rights-of-way, or easements. 
(d)  Maintenance of construction sites. All construction sites are to be maintained in a clean and orderly condition throughout the construction process. In order to maintain this appearance, a dumpster or enclosure shall be located on site through the construction process. The dumpster or enclosure shall be emptied when it becomes full. All construction debris, material, trailers, and the like shall be contained within the boundaries of the construction site. Dumpsters/enclosures will not be required for additions or remodeling of single-family dwellings so long as debris does not become a nuisance. 
(e)  Landscaping. 
(1)  The owner or tenant shall maintain all landscaped areas, trees, and shrubs in a neat and healthy condition free of weeds, litter, diseased, dead, or bare areas. 
(2)  The owner or tenant shall maintain all landscaped areas in a manner consistent with the site plan or landscape plan approved for the property and consistent with the requirements of the ULDC. 
(3)  The owner shall maintain all public easements, swales and sodded portions of rights-of-way on or adjacent to their developed property in a clean, orderly and healthy condition including but not limited to, replacing and mowing sod when necessary, repairing bare areas, clearing weeds and removing litter. On double frontage lots, property owners are only required to maintain to their property line on the rear lot line. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 3, 3-19-02; Ord. No. 2003-11, § 1, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2, 4-25-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-04, § 1, adopted Mar. 19, 2002 repealed § 36-22 and enacted a new § 36-22 as set out herein. The former § 36-22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, adopted July 28, 1998.  
Sec. 36-23. - Additional property maintenance standards for properties within the urban service area. 
(a)  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all property within the urban service boundary of the village. 
(b)  Solid waste. 
(1)  All solid waste shall be stored in garbage cans or dumpsters which shall be maintained in a sanitary manner. Except as provided below, all garbage cans and recycling containers shall be kept indoors or in a portion of the rear or side yard that is screened from view by walls, fences, or hedges. All dumpsters shall be screened and located in a manner approved by the village. 
(2)  Garbage cans and other trash or recycling containers may be placed at the curb no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to scheduled pick up and removed from the curb no later than 11:00 p.m. on the day of pick up. 
(3)  No owner or tenant shall permit the accumulation of litter, yard debris, or trash on any real property or the adjoining public right-of-way. 
(4)  Vegetative waste may be placed at the curb no earlier than 24 hours prior to scheduled pick up. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  Outdoor drying of clothes and outdoor clotheslines shall be prohibited in any yard or any portion of a yard that is visible from the street or from neighboring properties. Any rear or side yard utilized for this purpose must be screened by buildings, walls, fences, or hedges. 
(2)  Household items, maintenance equipment or supplies, or other articles not designed and intended as outdoor amenities shall be prohibited in any yard or any portion of a yard that is visible from the street. 
(3)  Portable basketball backboards and hoops are permitted in front yards provided that they are located no closer than 15 feet to the front property line and three feet from the side property line and provided they shall not exceed 14 feet in height measured from the grade level at the point on the front property line nearest to the pole, or provided they are removed and stored indoors when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 3, 3-19-02; Ord. No. 2002-24, § 1, 10-8-02)  
Sec. 36-24. - Additional property maintenance standards for commercial property. 
(a)  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all commercial property within the village. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  Signs which no longer advertise a business located on the premises shall be removed within ten days. 
(2)  Signs and their structures shall be required to be maintained free of stains, mold, fading, peeling paint, discoloration, or deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, § 5, 3-19-02)  
Secs. 36-25—36-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-18, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2003, repealed § 36-25, which pertained to vehicle and parking regulations and derived from Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, adopted July 28, 1998; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 2, Mar. 19, 2002.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 36-30. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to eliminate and regulate sources and occurrences of noise, that interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of land or which are contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or constitute a nuisance to the public at-large. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 2, 8-10-99)  
Sec. 36-31. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all property within the Village of Wellington unless specifically exempted pursuant to section 36-32. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 2, 8-10-99)  
Sec. 36-32. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempted from the standards of this section: 
(1)  Sound emitted from the operation of motor vehicles legally operating on any public right-of-way, which are regulated by F.S. Ch. 316, the Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
(2)  Any noise generated by activities to the extent such activities are preempted by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(3)  Any noise generated as a result of emergency work, as a danger-warning device, or for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of any emergency. 
(4)  Any noise generated by any government sanctioned activity conducted on public land. 
(5)  Any noise generated within any public right-of-way, including parades, when appropriately sanctioned by the governing body. 
(6)  Non-amplified crowd noises at sporting events. 
(7)  Sound emitted from the operation of equipment associated with maintenance of public or private golf courses when the equipment is utilized in the normal operation and operating hours of a golf course, provided the equipment is used only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily. All construction activities, including machinery and equipment such as chain saws, are not included within the exemption provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 2, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 6-23-2009)  
Sec. 36-33. - Specific prohibitions. 
The following activities shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or audible signal device of any motor vehicle, boat, train, engine, machine or stationary boiler of any kind except as required by law or as a warning. The sounding of any warning device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time is also prohibited. 
(2)  Public streets and parks. The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device on the public rights-of-way or in public parks in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the sound source at any time. 
(3)  Loud speakers and sound amplifiers. The using or operating of any loud speaker, loud speaker system, sound amplifier, radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or other similar device within or adjacent to inhabited residential land such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible across the property line of the inhabited residential land at any time. This section shall not apply to any special events, such as parades, festivals or sporting events, but shall apply to lounges, restaurants, or nightclubs. 
(4)  Street sales advertising. The use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or musical instrument which produces or reproduces sound which is cast or emitted upon the public streets and sidewalks for the purpose of commercial advertising or for attracting the attention of the public to any particular building, structure or place when such sound that is emitted is plainly audible across the land line of any inhabited residential land. 
(5)  Machinery and construction work. The operation of any machinery, demolition equipment, construction equipment, excavating equipment, power tools, equipment of semi-mechanical devices or undertaking construction work which emits sound across the land line of an inhabited residential land between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. All major construction work, including grading and site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or demolition of a building or structure is prohibited anytime on Sunday. This shall not prohibit individuals from performing home repair or maintenance, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday nor shall it prohibit the use of pumps or machinery which, because of its very nature and purpose, is required to be operated 24 hours a day. 
(6)  Lawn equipment. The operation of lawn and garden equipment that emits sound across a property line to inhabited residential land except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 2, 8-10-99)  
Sec. 36-34. - General prohibitions. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table A for inhabited residential and commercial land more than ten percent of any measurement period, which period shall not be less than ten minutes when measured at or within the boundary of the complaining landowner. For the purpose of this section, inhabited shall mean regularly occupied by the complainant and occupied at the time of complaint. Sound level measurement shall be made with a Type 2 or equivalent sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). All measurements shall be made with a sound meter at or within the boundary of the complaining landowner. 
Table A 
Prohibited Sound Levels 
Receiving 
Land 	Noise 
Source 	Time of 
Day 	Sound 
Level 
Limit 
Residential 	Fixed mechanical equipment 	Any time 
7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 	60 dBA 
60 dBA 
Residential 	All other sources 	8:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	55 dBA 
50 dBA 
Commercial 	All sources 	Any time 	70 dBA 
 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 2, 8-10-99)  
Secs. 36-35—36-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS 
 
Sec. 36-40. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Convicted" is defined as determination of guilt which is the result of a trial or the entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. A conviction for a similar offense includes, but is not limited to, a conviction by a federal or military tribunal, including courts-martial conducted by the Armed Forces of the United States, and includes a conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere resulting in a sanction in any state of the United States or other jurisdiction. A sanction includes, but is not limited to, a fine, probation, community control, parole, conditional release, control release, or incarceration in a state prison, federal prison, private correctional facility, or local detention facility. 
(b)  "Educational institution" is defined as premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes or courses of study required for accreditation by or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. The term "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which there is a daycare center, nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school; professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college, junior college, or four-year college or university; libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public; or any special institution of learning. However, the term "educational institution" does not include a premises or site upon which there is a vocational institution operated for commercial gain. 
(c)  "Park" is defined as those areas designed for diversified recreational and passive use by large numbers of people throughout the village; and any public park, recreation or playground area, or building or facility thereon, within the Village of Wellington owned and maintained as a public park, whether or not such areas have been formally dedicated to such purpose and any private recreation or playground area within a development that is designated in whole or in part for use by the children residing within that development. 
(d)  "Permanent residence" is defined as a place where the person abides lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
(e)  "Sexual offender" is defined herein by the criteria/designation/registration set forth in F.S. § 943.0435. 
(f)  "Sexual predator" is defined herein by the criteria/designation/registration set forth in F.S. § 775.21. 
(g)  "Temporary shelter" is defined as any public or private building or facility which is offered to individuals and families who are homeless or evacuate their homes or a hotel, motel, or other place of temporary residence as a result of any storm, flood, hurricane, tornado, explosion, fire, or other incident of any nature as a place to reside, rest, sleep, or eat. 
(h)  "Temporary residence" is defined as a place where the person abides lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person routinely abides lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(i)  "Within 2,500 feet" means a distance that shall be measured in a straight line from the outer boundary of the real property upon which the residential dwelling unit of the restricted sex offender is located. The distance may not be measured by a pedestrian route or automobile route, but instead shall be measured as the shortest straight line between the two points without regard to any intervening structures or objects. Without otherwise limiting the foregoing measurement instructions, under those circumstances in which the residential dwelling unit of the restricted sex offender is within a cooperative, condominium, or apartment building, the parcel of real property described in this paragraph shall consist of the parcel or parcels of real property upon which the cooperative, condominium, or apartment building that contains the residential dwelling unit of the restricted sex offender is located. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 36-41. - Temporary emergency shelter; sexual predators and offenders notification requirements. 
(a)  Any person who is required by Florida law to register with law enforcement as a sexual predator or sexual offender and who utilizes or intends to utilize a temporary shelter provided by any public or private entity and established as a result of any emergency or incident or threatened emergency or incident shall, immediately upon entering the shelter, notify the individual or individuals operating the shelter that he or she is a registered sexual predator or sexual offender. The sexual predator or sexual offender shall be assigned to a temporary shelter specifically designated for use by sexual predators and sexual offenders. 
(b)  The sheriff may designate a public building or a jail or other correctional facility, within his or her authority, as a temporary shelter to be utilized by sexual predators and sexual offenders. 
(c)  Penalties. The village may pursue any enforcement action or legal remedy available under controlling state law and any legal remedy available to the village to include, but not be limited to, a fine not exceeding $500.00 unless otherwise authorized by state law or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days unless otherwise authorized by state law, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 36-42. - Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person who is required by Florida law to register as a sexual predator or sexual offender, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any educational institution, designated public school bus stop, private school bus stop designated by a private school servicing Wellington residents or park. This prohibition shall apply to individuals who are required by law within any state of the United States or any foreign nation to register as a sexual predator or sexual offender or has been convicted of an equivalent offense to F.S. §§ 794.011, 800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145. 
(b)  Penalties. The village may pursue any enforcement action or legal remedy available under controlling state law and any legal remedy available to the village to include, but not be limited to, a fine not exceeding $500.00 unless otherwise authorized by state law or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days unless otherwise authorized by state law, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Exceptions. A sexual offender or sexual predator residing within 2,500 feet of any educational institution, designated public school bus stop, or park does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(i)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Florida Law, prior to the effective date of this article. 
(ii)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not adjudicated as an adult. 
(iii)  The person is a minor, unless the minor was adjudicated as an adult. 
(iv)  The educational institution, designated public school bus stop, or park within 2,500 feet of the person's permanent residence was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Florida Law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 36-43. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of the Village Code for a landlord or owner of residential property in the village to let or rent a residence to any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence of temporary residence pursuant to section 36-41 above, if such residence is located within 2,500 feet of any educational institution, designated public school bus stop, or park. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in chapter 2, article IV of this Code. 
(c)  Defenses. A landlord shall not be liable under the provisions of this section if they can demonstrate they made a good faith effort to ascertain whether the proposed tenant or any persons who will reside with the tenant are prohibited from establishing residence pursuant to section 36-41. If the landlord receives an affidavit from the tenant, that the people who reside with them are not on the list and the landlord checks the registration list based on the identifications of tenants and residents proposed to be living in the rental unit, to conform, the persons are not on the list. Receipt of such affidavit and efforts of confirmation shall demonstrate that a landlord has exercised good faith in ascertaining whether they were renting to a sexual predator or sexual offender, even if it is ultimately determined that a sexual predator or sexual offender did reside in their rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 36-44. - Application of ordinance/existing contracts. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applied to persons residing at a prohibited location on the effective date of this article such that it is not the intent of this article to impair valid, existing and bona fide contract rights; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall apply upon termination of any leasehold relationship arising from a landlord tenant relationship or the expiration of a lease. When a person who is the subject of this article changes residences, this article shall fully apply to such persons. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 2-14-06)  
ARTICLE V. - PROHIBITION OF CONVERSION THERAPY ON MINORS 
 
Sec. 36-45. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to protect the physical and psychological well-being of minors, including but not limited to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and/or questioning youth, from exposure to the serious harms and risks caused by conversion therapy or reparative therapy by licensed providers, including but not limited to licensed therapists. These provisions are exercises of police power of the village for the public safety, health, and welfare; and its provisions shall be liberally construed to accomplish that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-27-17)  
Sec. 36-46. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Conversion therapy" or "reparative therapy" is defined, interchangeably, as any counseling, practice or treatment performed with the goal of changing an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity, including, but not limited to, efforts to change behaviors, gender identity, or gender expression, or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the same gender or sex. Conversion therapy does not include counseling that provides support and assistance to a person undergoing gender transition or counseling that provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to change sexual orientation or gender identity. 
(b)  "Minor" is defined as any person less than 18 years of age. 
(c)  "Provider" means any person who is licensed by the State of Florida to provide professional counseling, or who performs counseling as part of his or her professional training under Chapters 456, 458, 459, 490, or 491 of the Florida Statutes, as such chapters may be amended, including but limited to, medical practitioners, osteopathic practitioners, psychologists, psychotherapists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, and licensed counselors. A provider does not include members of clergy who are acting in their roles as clergy or pastoral counselors and providing religious counseling to congregants, as long as they do not hold themselves as operating pursuant to any of the aforementioned Florida statutory licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-27-17)  
Sec. 36-47. - Conversion therapy prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any provider to practice conversion therapy efforts on any individual who is a minor, regardless of whether the provider receives monetary compensation in exchange for services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-27-17)  
Sec. 36-48. - Enforcement and civil penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be done pursuant to Article IV, Division 1 of Wellington's Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00 for the first violation and $500.00 for each repeat violation. Each day any violation of section 36-47 occurs shall constitute a separate offense. These penalties shall not preclude any other remedies available at law or in equity, including, injunctive relief, in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 6-27-17)  
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 3 of Ord. No. 99-03, adopted May 11, 1999, amended ch. 38 in its entirety, in effect repealing § 38-1 and adding new provisions in lieu thereof as herein set out. Formerly, such provisions of § 38-1 derived from § 1 of Ord. No. 98-12, adopted June 23, 1998. Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-03 renumbered art. II, §§ 38-1—38-36 and 38-56—38-60 as art. IV, §§ 38-146—38-151 and 38-161—38-165. 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation advisory board, § 2-306 et seq.; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 6-5; environment, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Recreational trails system, F.S. ch. 260; recreation, F.S. ch. 418. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's note following ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the Village of Wellington Parks and Recreation Department. 
Director means the parks and recreation director. 
Law enforcement officer means any member of the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office. 
Neighborhood park means the smallest class park that is less than ten acres in size and usually less than five acres. Recreational facilities are generally few in number due to size restraints and developed according to the demands and character of the neighborhood that they serve. 
Park means any public park, recreation or playground area, or building or facility thereon, within the Village of Wellington owned and maintained as a public park, whether or not such areas have been formally dedicated to such purpose. 
Permit means the written permission that must be obtained from the director or his/her designated agent to carry out a given activity in a park. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, club, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Vehicle means any wheeled device of conveyance, whether propelled by motor, animal, or human power. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any kind, size, or description. 
Exception is made for baby carriages, wheelchairs, and vehicles in the service of the Village of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations governing the operation and use of municipal park and recreation facilities, and the parking areas provided in connection therewith, for the purpose that the public may obtain the maximum enjoyment and utilization thereof in accordance with the purposes intended and that the facilities may be conserved and protected for the public good. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-3. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the department employees to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter or for any person to fail to comply with any lawful or any reasonable order given by village employees. 
(c)  The council may adopt reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary to manage, use, preserve, and govern park property and activities. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-4. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 but not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. 
(b)  Any person found violating any provision of this section shall either be ejected and/or arrested by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-5. - Hours. 
Parks with sports lighting shall be open to the public every day of the year between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. All other parks shall be open from dawn to dusk. However, the director may extend or contract these hours for any park or portion of any park. No person shall enter, be, or remain in any park after park closing hours unless a permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-6. - Closed areas. 
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-7. - Fees. 
The village council shall by resolution adopt a schedule of fees for the use of parks and recreation facilities. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 38-8—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Permits required. 
(a)  Any person or group of persons, association, or corporation wishing to sponsor, organize, promote, conduct or advertise any concert, performance, or public exhibition or entertainment of any kind in any of the village's parks shall first obtain a permit and permission as set forth below. 
(b)  The sale or distribution of printed material is permitted within the village's parks provided a permit to do so has been issued by the director as set forth in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Permits and applicable fees are required. In addition to any other provision of this section that requires the obtaining of a permit prior to engaging in a given activity, no person in a park shall conduct, operate, present, manage, or take part in any of the following activities unless a permit is obtained prior to the start of the activity: 
(1)  Any picnic, outing, or gathering sponsored by any person or composed of ten or more persons. 
(2)  Any contest, exhibit, dramatic performance, play, motion picture, radio or television broadcast, fair, circus, musical event, or any similar event. 
(3)  Any public meeting, assembly, or parade, including, but not limited to, drills, maneuvers, ceremonies, addresses, speeches, sports contests, practices, or political meetings. 
(4)  Any use of any park facility by a certain person or group of persons to the exclusion of others. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-32. - Application. 
(a)  A person seeking the issuance of a permit to carry on an activity in a park shall file an application on the appropriate form supplied by the department with the designated representative of the director and provide such information as shall be required by the director. 
(b)  Applications shall be submitted to the director no later than 30 days before the planned event. The application shall set forth the name of the organization, if any, the date, time, duration, and location of the proposed event, and the number of participants. The director shall, without unreasonable delay, issue a permit on proper application pursuant to the following conditions. 
(c)  All requests for permits required hereunder shall be made in writing upon an application form, to be furnished by the director, which shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant proposing or sponsoring the activity involved; 
(2)  The type of permit requested and the purposes or activity proposed thereunder; 
(3)  The date and hours for which the permit is desired; 
(4)  The specific park area or recreational facility for which the permit is requested; 
(5)  The proposed number of persons who will attend or participate in the activity involved; 
(6)  A statement of any special circumstances which are material to the permit requested; 
(7)  Such other relevant information as the director may reasonably require in regard to the application. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-33. - Standards for issuance. 
The director shall issue a permit unless it is determined: 
(1)  The proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public use and enjoyment of the park; or, 
(2)  The proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the public health, safety, or welfare; or, 
(3)  The conduct of the proposed activity or use is reasonably likely to result in violence to persons or property resulting in serious harm to the public; or, 
(4)  The proposed activity or use will entail an extraordinary expense or operation by the village; or, 
(5)  The facilities desired have been reserved for another activity or use at the day and hour requested in the application. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-34. - Decision on application; appeals from denial. 
The director shall issue the permit within five working days of receiving the application. Applications for permits shall be considered in the order in which they are received by the director. In the event that a request for a permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the village manager. The applicant must notify the village manager, in writing, of the director's decision, and the reason why the applicant disputes the decision, within ten days of receiving notice of the director's decision. The village manager may uphold the director's decision, may grant the permit or may grant the permit with modifications. The decision of the village manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-35. - Conditions of permit. 
The director may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions on the granting of a permit, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Restrictions on fires, fireworks, amplified sound, use of alcoholic beverages, dancing, sports, use of animals, equipment, or vehicles, the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand or stage, or any other use which appears likely to create a risk of unreasonable harm to the use and enjoyment of the park by others, or of damage to park property. 
(2)  A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable deposit of security for the repair of any damage to park property or the cost of cleanup, or both. 
(3)  A requirement that the applicant pay in advance a reasonable fee to defray the cost of furnishing adequate security forces by the department at the proposed use or activity. 
(4)  A requirement that the permittee furnish additional sanitary and refuse facilities that might be reasonably necessary based on the use or activity for which the permit is being sought. 
(5)  A requirement that the applicant furnish a certificate of insurance in amounts prescribed to provide adequate coverage for the protection of the village and park property. 
No person in a park shall refuse or fail to produce and exhibit any permit he claims to have upon the request of any law enforcement officer, park security guard, or other authorized park employee who wishes to inspect the permit for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this subsection have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 38-36—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages whatsoever shall be permitted to be brought into any park area, except as specifically authorized herein. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages whatsoever shall be drunk or consumed in any park area of this village, except as specifically authorized herein. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverages may be consumed at family or group picnics or functions provided a permit for such consumption is obtained. The village council shall by resolution adopt standards for issuance of such permits. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-62. - Drunkenness and disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No intoxicated person will be permitted entry to parks or recreational areas, and if discovered therein will be ejected forthwith. 
(b)  No person shall use obscene language or engage in disorderly conduct in village park. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-63. - Proper use of dressing facilities, restrooms. 
(a)  No person will loiter in or around any restroom, dressing room, or bathhouse. 
(b)  No person shall dress or undress, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided or maintained by the department for that purpose, and dressing and undressing in any vehicle, toilet, restroom or on the beach, or in any park area, except as provided above, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-64. - Defacing park property. 
(a)  No person shall pluck any flower or fruit, either wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, tramp upon, remove, or in any manner deface, mar, damage, injure, or mutilate any tree, shrub, flower bed, fallen timber, turf, fence, bridge, bench, table, statue, ornament, gate, building, structure, tool implement, vehicle, boat, car, light standard, sign, or any other property located within a village park. 
(b)  No person shall climb any tree or walk, stand, or sit upon any property within a village park unless designated or customarily used for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-65. - Vending or selling in park areas. 
No person, other than the department, its licensed concessionaires acting by and under the authority of the village, or those holding a valid special event permit will expose or offer for sale, rent, or trade any article or thing, or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transport, sale, or display of any food, drink, article, or merchandise, or engage in any commercial activity for compensation, or solicit any business within the limits of any park or recreational area. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-66. - Animals. 
(a)  No person shall molest, harm, frighten, kill, net, trap, snare, hunt, chase, shoot or throw or propel, by any means, missiles at any wildlife creature, be it animal, bird or reptile roaming free about a park or in captivity in a zoo cage, nor shall any person remove or possess the young of any wild animal, or the nest or eggs of any reptile or bird, or collect, remove, possess, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift any specimen, dead or alive, of any of the group of tree snails. 
(b)  No person shall place, dump, abandon, or leave any animal, reptile or bird, either wild or domestic, on the grounds of any park. 
(c)  No person shall bring or allow any animal or pet in any village park, except that leashed pets are permitted in the neighborhood parks provided the owner ensures proper disposal of pet waste. 
(d)  The prohibitions of this subsection shall not apply to: 
(1)  Horses or dogs used by a law enforcement officer or park security guard in the performance of his/her duties. 
(2)  Seeing eye dogs used by a visually handicapped person, provided that the dog is at all times kept under control. 
(3)  Animals or fowl kept by the department or under its direction. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99) 
Cross reference— County animal ordinance adopted, ch. 14.  
Secs. 38-67—38-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECREATION 
 
Sec. 38-81. - Bathing, swimming, fishing. 
(a)  Swimming. No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waterway in or adjacent to any park, except in such water or waterway as the director may designate, and in accordance with the rules of this section and any other regulations that the director may promulgate. 
(2)  Frequent any water or places where swimming, bathing, or wading is permitted, except during those hours that the director has established for such activities. 
(3)  Change into bathing clothes from street clothes, or from bathing clothes into street clothes, except in a bath house or other structure designated for such use. 
(4)  The director shall not designate any water or waterway for swimming, bathing, or wading where such use of the water would be dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(b)  Fishing. 
(1)  No person shall engage in fishing for profit in park waters, or shall buy or sell fish caught in park waters or park property. 
(2)  No person shall fish in any park waters where swimming, bathing, or wading is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99) 
Cross reference— Swimming, etc., in public waters, § 70-1.  
Sec. 38-82. - Dangerous instruments. 
(a)  No person, except an authorized Village of Wellington employee, security guard, or law enforcement officer shall bring onto park property or have in his/her possession on park property any explosive, dynamite cap, fireworks, airgun, pellet gun, non-explosive spring gun, slingshot, cross bow, bow and arrow, any device by means of which a projectile can be propelled, any trapping device, any incendiary bomb or material, any smoke or stink bomb, any tear gas or other disabling chemical or agent, any acid or caustic substance, or any inflammable liquid except fuel contained in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, vessel, lantern, camp stove or camp heater and not more than one gallon of liquid fuel in a closed metal container. 
(b)  No person shall discharge any of the instruments listed above into any park from outside a park. 
(c)  The director may designate areas within a park where bows and arrows can be used. In such cases, the director shall promulgate regulations for the safe use of such devices, and no person shall fail to abide by such regulations. 
(d)  The director shall designate times and places where fireworks can be used within a park. The director shall promulgate regulations to assure that in such cases the fireworks are used in a safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 38-83. - Game and sport activity. 
(a)  No person in a park shall take part in the playing of any games involving thrown or any otherwise propelled objects such as stones, arrows, golf balls, javelins, rockets, or radio controlled airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing or practicing by organized sponsored athletic teams of such games as football, baseball, and the like, is prohibited except on fields, courts, or areas designated for such use, or as directed by the director or his/her authorized representative. 
(b)  Roller skating, roller blading, bicycling, skateboarding and any other similar activity is prohibited on turf, basketball courts, tennis courts, and parking lots and shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such activity. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 38-84—38-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PICNIC AREAS 
 
Sec. 38-101. - Picnics. 
(a)  The director shall designate those areas of a park where picnicking is permitted. No person shall picnic in any area other than in a designated area. 
(b)  Individual grills and tables in picnic areas shall be available on a "first-come, first-served" basis, except that a group of ten or more persons must obtain a permit in advance for the use of picnic pavilions. 
(c)  It is prohibited to build or use open fires, except in areas specified by the director. Barbecue grills or like devices are exempt from this provision; however, the parks department may prohibit the use of such devices which is deemed to be unsafe or hazardous. 
(d)  Picnickers shall not leave a picnic area before all trash, in the nature of boxes, paper, cans, bottles, garbage, and other refuse is placed in a disposal receptacle, where provided. If no trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash must be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 38-102—38-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTROL OF VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— County traffic and motor vehicle ordinance adopted, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 38-121. - Vehicles and traffic laws. 
All applicable state and local vehicle and traffic laws and ordinances shall continue in full force and effect in any park. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-122. - Obedience to traffic signs. 
All persons shall observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking and all other signs posted for proper control of traffic and for the safety of persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-123. - Enforcement of traffic regulations. 
All persons shall obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks, highways, streets, or roads immediately adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-124. - Use of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in a park except upon designated paved or improved park roads or driveways, or in and upon designated areas or trails set aside for use by such vehicles, unless directed by a law enforcement officer or parks employee to do so, or by official signs or markings. 
(b)  No person, except in emergencies, shall change any parts, repair, wash, wax, or polish, grease, or perform other maintenance on a vehicle on any park roadway, driveway, parking lot, or other park property. 
(c)  No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle, camper, bus, or trailer within a village park or parking lot except in those areas specifically designated by signs to be used for such driving or parking unless authorized by the director or the sheriff's department. Any agents or employees of federal, state, county, or municipal governmental bodies operating motor vehicles on official business shall be exempt from the provisions hereof. 
(d)  No person shall bed down, sleep, or camp overnight in a village park, including any parking area, nor shall camper trucks, buses, trailers, or other vehicles be permitted to remain in a village park unless authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-125. - Speed of vehicles. 
No person shall operate or drive a vehicle in any park area at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour, except upon such road as the director may designate by posted signs. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-126. - Parking regulations. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in any area of a village park in excess of 18 consecutive hours or continuously from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section, unless authorized by the director or the sheriff's department, may be removed from the parking area to a garage designated or maintained by the village or the sheriff's department, or to another place of safety, at the owner's expense. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle on park property other than in areas designated for parking that type of vehicle, unless there is an emergency or unless directed to do otherwise by a law enforcement officer or a park security guard. Parking shall conform to officially posted signs or markings unless other instructions are given by a law enforcement officer or a park employee. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 3, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 38-127—38-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LITTLE BLUE PARK[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 99-03, adopted May 11, 1999, renumbered art. II, §§ 38-31—38-36 and 38-56—38-60 as art. IV, §§ 38-146—38-151 and 38-161—38-165 as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-146. - Alcohol and drugs. 
(a)  No alcohol or drugs shall be permitted while using or attending Little Blue Park. 
(b)  No intoxicated person will be permitted entry to Little Blue Park, and if discovered therein, will be ejected forthwith. 
(c)  Little Blue Park is declared a drug free park pursuant to F.S. § 893.13(1) and shall be posted accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 3, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 2, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 6.  
Sec. 38-147. - Graffiti. 
Graffiti is prohibited at Little Blue Park. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 4, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-148. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of operation of Little Blue Park shall generally be five days per week from 4:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. The village has the sole and exclusive discretion to close the park at any time. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 7, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 3, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-149. - Posting of park rules and regulations. 
The village shall conspicuously post applicable rules and regulations at the park. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 8, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-150. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Failure to comply with any provision of this article is punishable by eviction from the park, a fine not exceeding $25.00 for a first offense, $100.00 for a second offense, and $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, pursuant to ordinance of the village, for any subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 9, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 4, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-151. - Proper use of facilities. 
(a)  No person will loiter in or around any restroom, or parking lot. 
(b)  No person shall use profanity while on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, § 5, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Secs. 38-152—38-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SKATEBOARDS; ROLLERBLADES; ROLLER SKATES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 38-161. - Permit required; user fee. 
No person shall ride a skateboard, rollerblade or roller skate within the skateboard park located within Little Blue Park, without obtaining a permit from the village, and paying the required user fee, as adopted by resolution of the village council. Nonresidents of the village may be charged a higher fee than village residents. In order to obtain a permit, a liability waiver shall be signed by the participant, and a parent or guardian if the participant is a minor, and shall be notarized. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 1, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 6, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-162. - Equipment required. 
No person shall ride a skateboard, rollerblade or roller skate within Little Blue Park, unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, knee pads, and wrist guards at all times, except that wristguards are not required when playing roller hockey. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 2, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 7, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-163. - Restricted to certain areas. 
Skateboarding, rollerblading or roller skating in Little Blue Park shall only be allowed within the facilities constructed, designed, and maintained for the primary purpose of recreational skateboarding, rollerblading or roller skating use. No skateboarding, or rollerblading, shall be permitted on sidewalks, curbs, parking lots or basketball courts. No skateboarding shall be permitted within the roller hockey rink. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 5, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 8, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-164. - Skateboard park and roller hockey rink use restrictions. 
(a)  No person attending or using the skateboard park shall exhibit reckless behavior or place or throw any foreign object on, in, or at the skateboard park or roller hockey rink so as to interfere with, obstruct, or endanger the safety of a skating participant. The use of portable ramps or other equipment brought in or placed by a skating participant to allow higher jumps or faster speeds shall be prohibited. 
(b)  No smoking is permitted inside the roller hockey rink or skate park. 
(c)  No food or beverages are permitted inside the roller hockey rink or skate park. 
(d)  No backpacks, coolers, boom boxes, or other personal items are allowed inside the skate park. 
(Ord. No. 96-28, § 6, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-12, § 9, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Sec. 38-165. - Vending or selling in Little Blue Park. 
No person, other than the parks and recreation department or its licensed concessionaires acting by and under the authority of the village, will offer for sale, rent or trade any article or thing, or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transport, sale or display of any food, drink, article or merchandise, or engage in any commercial activity for compensation, or solicit any business within the limits of the park. 
(Ord. No. 98-12, § 10, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 2, 5-11-99)  
Chapter 42 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zone saved from repeal, § 1-8(8); any land use, land development, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-8(9); any comprehensive plan ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(10); any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village saved from repeal, § 1-8(11); administration, ch. 2; planning, zoning, and adjustment board, § 2-321 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 34; special districts, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Intergovernmental programs, F.S. ch. 163; Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174; land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3202; state and regional planning, F.S. ch. 186; developments of regional impact, F.S. § 380.06. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Adoption of interim future land use map by reference. 
The interim future land use map of the village, together with all accompanying notes, charts and text, copies of which are on file with the village clerk and incorporated in this section by reference, is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 97-02, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Secs. 42-2—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 99-09, adopted May 11, 1999, repealed §§ 42-31—42-33 in its entirety. Formerly, §§ 42-31—42-33 pertained to the planning and zoning commission and derived from §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 97-04, March 11, 1997. 
 
Secs. 42-31—42-33. - Reserved.  
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413; resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.702 et seq.; Statewide Multipurpose Hazardous Waste Facility Siting Act, F.S. § 403.78 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Depositing or dumping of solid waste or other deleterious materials. 
No person shall deposit, release, throw or dump into or on any public property, lakes, canals, water bodies or any adjacent, attendant or contiguous right-of-way thereto, or any other public property located within the village, any filth, dirt, garbage, trash, refuse or other deleterious material. 
(Ord. No. 96-11, § 1, 5-14-96) 
State Law reference— Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413.  
Secs. 46-2—46-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—22 of Ord. No. 98-17, adopted July 14, 1998, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect repealing §§ 46-21—46-33 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 46-21—46-43. Formerly, such provisions derived from §§ 1—13 Ord. No. 97-27, adopted Jan. 27, 1998. 
 
Sec. 46-21. - Purpose and provision for mandatory solid waste collection. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the village, by providing for a solid waste management program and a mandatory solid waste collection program through the levy of special assessments and other fees and by providing an adequate solid waste collection program through the regulated services of a contractor, or otherwise, as determined by the village. 
(b)  All solid waste generated or accumulated by assessed units and non-assessed units shall be collected, conveyed and transported by the designated contractor within the service area in which the assessed units and non-assessed units are located, and the owners of said assessed units and non-assessed units on the established route of the designated contractor for such service area in which the said units are located shall be subject to mandatory collection as provided for in this article. 
(c)  Roll-off collection service for sites under construction during the period prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be included within the requirements of the mandatory solid waste collection program but shall be regulated by the village's solid waste management program as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-22. - Legislative findings and declaration of benefit. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined and declared that: 
(1)  The fact that all improved properties located within the village that are designed for human occupancy, are capable of human occupancy or human activity, or are used for commercial use, shall be prima facie evidence that solid waste is being produced by or accumulated upon such property. 
(2)  All improved properties located within the village receive a direct and substantial benefit by the provision of solid waste management and mandatory solid waste collection program, including but not limited to the services described herein, in an amount equal to or in excess of the cost of providing such solid waste management program and solid waste collection program. 
(3)  The management of solid waste through regulation, penalties and enforcement is a proper and necessary function of local government. 
(4)  Properties that are under construction or demolition shall be prima facie evidence that solid waste is being produced by or accumulated upon such property. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 2, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-23. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Assessed unit means any collection unit which is subject to the solid waste collection special assessment. 
Authority shall mean the solid waste authority of Palm Beach County. 
Biohazardous or biomedical wastes shall mean those wastes which may cause disease or reasonably be suspected or harboring pathogenic organisms; included, but not limited to, waste resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals, and other facilities producing wastes which may consist, but are not limited to, diseased human and animal parts, contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles, contaminated clothing and surgical gloves. 
Bulk trash shall mean any non-vegetative item which cannot be containerized, bagged or bundled; including, but not limited to, inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, toilets, pool heaters, water softeners, pianos, washers, dryers, bath tubs, water heaters, sinks, bicycles, and other similar domestic appliances, household goods and furniture and shall not be commingled with vegetative waste. There shall be no weight limit for any item of bulk trash. 
Collection unit means any parcel of improved real property located within the village that generates or is capable of generating solid waste and that contains buildings, structures or other improvements designed or constructed for and capable of use by or used for human habitation, human activity or commercial enterprises. 
Collection shall mean the process whereby solid waste, garbage, trash, bulk trash, vegetative waste, recyclable materials, construction and demolition debris is removed and transported to a designated facility. 
Commercial recycling collection service shall mean the collection of recyclable materials by a contractor for entities within the service area that are not serviced by residential recycling collection service. 
Commercial solid waste shall include any garbage, bulk trash, trash or vegetative waste that is not residential solid waste. Substantial effort shall be made not to commingle garbage, trash or bulk trash with vegetative waste. 
Commercial solid waste collection service shall mean the collection of the commercial solid waste within the service area. Such service includes both containers and compactors, but does not include roll-off collection services. 
Compactor shall mean any container which has compaction mechanism(s), whether stationary or mobile, all inclusive. 
Construction and demolition debris (C&D) shall mean materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project. Mixing of a de minimis amount of waste other than C&D from the construction site will not automatically cause it to be classified as other than C&D. 
Container shall mean and include any container designed or intended to be mechanically dumped into a loader packer type truck or recycling vehicle. All containers must be of the specifications as designated by the contract administrator, in writing. 
Containerized residential recycling collection services shall mean the collection of recyclable materials by the contractor from dwelling units in the service area that requires the use of containers for the collection of recyclable materials and which also receive residential collection services for solid waste, and the delivery of those recyclable materials to a materials recycling facility. 
Containerized residential solid waste collection service shall mean solid waste collection service of all dwelling units whose garbage, trash, bulk trash or vegetative waste is collected by means of a central or shared container and not by means of a garbage can. Vegetative waste shall not be commingled with garbage, trash, or bulk trash. 
Contract shall mean an agreement, executed between the village and the contractor for the performance of the specified solid waste and recycling collection agreement, as amended from time to time. 
Contractor means the person, firm, corporation or entity designated by the village to perform the specified services in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
Contract administrator shall mean the person(s) designated by the village who shall act as the village's representative in the administration and supervision of the contract and any other contractual agreement(s) relating to solid waste management and solid waste collection program. 
Curbside residential recycling collection service shall mean the collection of recyclable materials by a contractor from all dwelling units in the service area that also receive curbside residential solid waste collection service for solid waste and other dwelling units as are designated by the village, and the delivery of those recyclable materials to the solid waste authority's materials recycling facility or designated solid waste authority transfer station. 
Curbside residential solid waste collection service shall mean residential solid waste and vegetative waste collection service for all dwelling units whose garbage is collected by means of a garbage can at curbside or roadway. 
Department shall mean the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Disposal costs shall mean the "tipping fees" or landfill costs charged by others for disposal of the waste collected. 
Designated facility shall mean a solid waste authority or Palm Beach County owned disposal, processing, recovery, recycling or transfer facility, or a processing facility permitted by the solid waste authority of Palm Beach County. 
Dwelling unit shall mean type of structure or building unit intended for or capable of being utilized for residential living other than a licensed hotel or motel unit. 
Fiscal year means the period between October 1 of a given year and September 30 of the following year. 
Garbage shall mean all putrescible waste which generally includes, but is not limited to, kitchen and table food waste, animal, vegetative, food or any organic waste that is attendant with or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food materials whether attributed to residential or commercial activities. Vegetative waste shall not be commingled with garbage in the same collection. Garbage shall not include any material that falls within the definition of special waste. 
Garbage receptacle or can shall mean any commonly available light gauge steel, plastic, or galvanized receptacle of a nonabsorbent material, closed at one end and open at the other, furnished with a closely fitted top or lid and handle(s). A garbage can is also defined as a heavy duty, securely tied, plastic bag designed for use as a garbage receptacle. Such container, including materials, shall not exceed 50 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in weight, unless a contractor implements (with written authorization from the contract administrator or his designee) an automated or semi-automated collection system requiring the use of some other standard receptacle compatible with the contractor's equipment supplied by the contractor and approved by the village. A cardboard box may also be used as a garbage can, provided the contents do not contain a level of moisture as to saturate the box and weaken its walls. 
Governmental agencies means all state, federal, and local units of government, or any agency or department thereof, which is the owner of any collection unit within the village. 
Hazardous waste shall mean solid waste as defined by the State of Florida Department of Environmental Protection as a hazardous waste in the State of Florida Administrative Code, or by any future legislative action or by federal, state or local law. 
Hotel or motel shall mean a structure or building unit(s) capable of being utilized for residential living where such unit or a group of such units is regularly rented to transients or held out or advertised to the public as a place regularly rented to transients for periods of seven days or less. To meet this definition, the hotel or motel must be licensed to operate as such. "Transient" has the meaning as defined in F.S. ch. 509, or its successor law. 
Illegal dumping shall mean the act of depositing solid waste, bulk trash, vegetative waste or C&D on property which has not been permitted as a designated facility by the solid waste authority. 
Litter shall mean solid waste or any other waste material which is thrown, cast, scattered, dropped, spilled or deposited on public or private property, including rights-of-way and parking lots, through intent or negligence which tends to create a danger to public, health, safety and welfare. 
Materials recycling facility (MRF) shall mean any facilities operated or managed by, for, or on behalf of the village for the purpose of receiving, sorting, processing, storing, and/or preparing recyclable materials for sale, as specifically designated by the contract administrator, in writing. 
Mixed paper shall be defined as a mixture of paper products including magazines, catalogues, phone books, cereal boxes, soda and beer can boxes, chipboard, file folders, envelopes, letter paper, junk mail, notebook paper and any other clean paper products. 
Nonassessed unit means any collection unit or portion thereof that is not an assessed unit. 
Owner means the person or persons owning an interest in a collection unit, assessed unit or nonassessed unit. 
Peak times shall mean the period between November 1 of a given year and April 30 of the following year, unless otherwise specified by the village. 
Person means any natural person, or partnership, firm, corporation or other legal entity. 
Property appraiser means the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser. 
Public awareness program shall mean that program developed by the village to inform and encourage residential and commercial solid waste collection customers to use all solid waste and recycling collection services offered by or through the village. It shall also mean information concerning level of service and changes in scope of service. 
Rate resolution means resolution(s) of the village described in this article relating to rates and fees charged for the operation, maintenance and administration of the solid waste program and mandatory solid waste collection program. 
Recyclable materials shall mean newspapers (including inserts), aluminum, plastic containers, glass bottles and jars, milk and juice cartons, aseptic containers, corrugated cardboard, brown paper bags, mixed paper, tin and ferrous cans, household dry-cell batteries (no wet-cell batteries), and other solid waste materials added upon agreement between the village and its contractor, when such materials have been either diverted from the remaining solid waste stream or removed prior to their entry into the remaining solid waste stream. 
Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or materials which would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Recycling container shall mean a rigid container made of plastic or other suitable substance that is used for the storage of recyclable materials. 
Residential recycling collection service shall mean curbside residential recycling collection services and containerized residential recycling collection service. 
Residential solid waste shall mean garbage, trash and bulk trash resulting from the normal housekeeping activities of a dwelling unit, but shall not include vegetative waste. Residential solid waste shall also mean construction and demolition debris (C&D) resulting from minor home repair from the dwelling unit. 
Residential solid waste collection service shall mean curbside residential solid waste collection service and/or containerized residential solid waste collection service. 
Roll-off collection service shall mean the collection of C&D only roll-off containers, or the collection of C&D by other mechanical means, within temporary locations in the service area, limited to new construction sites and remodeling or refurbishment sites. Roll-off collection service shall also mean the collection of horticultural or agricultural wastes at horticultural or agricultural nurseries, but only when the customer chooses to use roll-off containers for horticultural or agricultural waste, and horticultural and agricultural waste shall not include any other type of waste, including, but not limited to, special waste, garbage or recyclable material. 
Roll-off collection service provider shall mean the person(s), firm(s), corporation(s), or other legal entity(ies) permitted by the village to provide temporary roll off or similar C&D collection services within the service area in accordance with terms and conditions established by the village. The village may determine that the contractor may provide this service as an exclusive part of the contract to provide mandatory solid waste collection service within the service area. 
Service area shall mean the area within the incorporated boundaries of the Village of Wellington, Florida, for which the solid waste management and mandatory solid waste collection program is administered as provided in the contract as it may be amended from time to time. 
Sludge shall mean a solid or semi-solid, or liquid generated from any waste water treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, air pollution control facility, septic tank, grease trap, portable toilets and related operations, or any other such waste having similar characteristics or effects. 
Solid waste shall mean garbage, bulk trash, C&D debris, litter, trash, vegetative waste or other discarded material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, agriculture or governmental operations excluding special waste as defined herein. 
Solid waste and recycling collection agreement means the agreement entered into by and between the village and a contractor who is awarded, through the bidding process, the exclusive right to provide residential solid waste collection services, residential recycling collection services, and commercial solid waste collection services throughout the collection service area. 
Solid waste authority disposal facility shall mean place or places specifically managed or operated by the solid waste authority of Palm Beach County. 
Solid waste collection program means the services and means of collecting solid waste from a collection unit through the use of equipment, trucks, containers, personnel, contracted or permitted services, and all real or personal property owned, leased, operated or used by the village for the purpose of providing the solid waste collection services generally described in this article. 
Solid waste collection special assessment means the special assessment imposed by the village upon an assessed unit for the collection of solid waste for the applicable fiscal year based upon the classification of the use of such assessed unit as set forth in the rate resolution. The solid waste collection special assessment shall not include the cost of disposal of such collected solid waste since the cost of disposal of such solid waste has been separately imposed upon such assessed unit by the authority. 
Solid waste collection special assessment roll means the list prepared by and adopted by the village each fiscal year containing a summary description of each assessed unit, the name and address of the owner of each such assessed unit as indicated on the records maintained by the property appraiser and the amount of the solid waste collection special assessment applicable to each assessed unit. 
Solid waste management program means the program of managing the generation, storage, collection, transporting, processing and disposal of solid waste within the village. The program provides for the regulation, permitting, contracting and enforcement of all aspects of this program. 
Special services shall mean any services requested or required by the customer which are in addition to, or a change in, residential solid waste collection service, residential recycling collection service, commercial recycling collection service and commercial solid waste collection service as set out or similar to those provided for in the contract. 
Special waste shall include automobiles, boats, internal combustion engines, non-automobile tires, sludge, dead animals, septic tank waste, biohazardous or biomedical waste, liquid waste, and hazardous waste. Special waste may also include items determined by the contract administrator to be reasonably unmanageable. 
Tax collector means the Palm Beach County Tax Collector. 
Trash shall mean all refuse, accumulation of paper, rags, wooden or paper boxes and containers, sweepings, broken toys, tools, utensils, and all other accumulations of a similar nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, but shall not include vegetative waste. 
Uncontrollable forces shall mean any event which results in the prevention or delay of performance by a party of its obligations under the contract and which is beyond the reasonable control of the nonperforming party. It includes, but is not limited to fires, flood, hurricanes, earthquakes, storms, lightening, epidemic, war, riot, civil disturbances, sabotage, and governmental actions. 
Uniform method means the "Uniform Method for the Levy, Collection and Enforcement of Non-Ad Valorem Assessments" prescribed by F.S. ch. 197, as amended and supplemented. 
Vegetative waste shall mean any vegetative matter resulting from yard and landscaping maintenance by any party and shall include materials such as tree and shrub materials, grass clippings, palm fronds, tree branches and similar other matter usually produced as refuse in the care of lawns, landscaping and yards. All grass clippings, leaves, pine needles, and similar loose items must be bagged or containerized. Vegetative waste, except palm fronds, must be no more than six feet in length and no single item shall weigh more than 50 pounds, and shall be placed neatly at the curb. Natural Christmas trees will be collected as vegetative waste and any section must not be more than eight feet in length and must be under 50 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 3, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-24. - Utilization of uniform method for the levy, collection and enforcement of solid waste collection special assessments. 
The village shall utilize the procedures set forth in F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, ("uniform method"), as may be amended and supplemented from time to time, for the levy, collection and enforcement of the solid waste collection special assessments provided by this article. All provisions set forth in the uniform method shall be applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of the solid waste collection special assessments, as if fully set forth herein, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 4, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-25. - Public hearing for adoption of budget; determination of service area, collection units and assessed units; adoption of non-ad valorem special assessment rate resolution. 
In addition to the provisions set forth in the uniform method, the village shall hold a public hearing on or before September 15 of each fiscal year for the following purposes: 
(1)  Budget. To adopt a budget for the operation, maintenance and administration of the solid waste collection program for the ensuing fiscal year, including monies for the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds and other outstanding or anticipated indebtedness, including all reserves necessary for the payment of capital expenditures, the renovation, improvements and replacements of existing facilities or equipment, and expenditures for daily operations for the solid waste collection program, for the enforcement and administration of the billing and collection of the solid waste collection special assessment provided for hereunder, including necessary reserves for anticipated delinquent or uncollectible solid waste collection special assessment and for the payment of the current operation and maintenance and administration of the solid waste collection program. 
(2)  Service area, collection units and assessed units. To define the service area and determine the collection units and assessed units based upon circumstances effecting the collection of solid waste and the operation of the solid waste collection program including, but not limited to, the cost of operating, maintaining and administering the solid waste collection program and the benefit to all assessed units in the village. 
(3)  Rate resolution. 
a.  To adopt a rate resolution incorporating a schedule of solid waste collection special assessment to be imposed upon the owners of all assessed units in the service area and to establish the classification of the use of each assessed unit in order to provide revenues which, together with other monies of the village lawfully available therefor, shall be sufficient to fund the budget referred to in the aforementioned subsection (1). The rate resolution shall also include the disposal costs of the solid waste collected from the assessed units unless the disposal costs of such solid waste, or any portion thereof, has been separately imposed upon such assessed unit of real property. 
b.  The rates established by the village in each year under the provisions of the rate resolution shall be sufficient to provide monies for the purposes described in subsection (1) and the village shall not establish rates over and above the rates that are necessary to comply with the provisions of subsection (1) and the budgetary requirements of any proceedings of the village heretofore or hereafter adopted in connection with the issuance of any of its bonds, notes or other evidences of indebtedness. 
c.  The solid waste collection special assessment incorporated in the rate resolution applicable to each assessed unit shall be the solid waste collection special assessment for each such assessed unit for the collection, and disposal, unless otherwise assessed pursuant to this article, of all solid waste generated or capable of being generated as determined by the village on each such assessed unit during the ensuing fiscal year. 
d.  The solid waste collection special assessment shall be imposed against the owners of all assessed units in the village if such real property is an assessed unit on or before the first day of January prior to the fiscal year in which the solid waste collection special assessment are imposed. The owner and description of each assessed unit at the time of preparing such assessments shall be that designated on the real property records maintained by the property appraiser. 
e.  To the extent a budget has not been adopted by the village council for the operation, maintenance and administration of the solid waste collection program for the ensuing fiscal year by September 30, then the budget and rate resolution from the preceding fiscal year will constitute the budget and rate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 5, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-26. - Adoption and certification of the solid waste collection special assessment roll. 
In accordance with the procedures set forth in the uniform method, the council will adopt and certify the solid waste collection special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 6, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-27. - Solid waste collection special assessments shall constitute a lien on improved real property. 
All solid waste collection special assessments imposed against the owners of assessed units pursuant to this article shall constitute, and are hereby imposed as, liens against such real property as of January I of each year or as soon thereafter as the certified roll is received by the tax collector. Until fully paid and discharged or barred by law, the solid waste collection special assessments shall remain liens equal in rank and dignity with the lien of county ad valorem taxes and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. If any solid waste collection special assessment liens become delinquent by not being fully paid by April 1 following the year in which they are assessed, or immediately after 60 days have expired from the mailing of the original notice set forth by the uniform method, whichever is later, and remain delinquent, such liens shall be enforced by the tax collector in the same manner as any other special assessment lien of the village. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 7, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-28. - Applicability of solid waste collection special assessments to assessed units owned by governmental agencies. 
(a)  Any governmental agency owning any assessed unit within the village shall pay the solid waste collection special assessment imposed under the applicable classification specified in the rate resolution. 
(b)  The discounts for early payment shall not be applicable to the solid waste collection special assessments imposed against governmental agencies. Such governmental agencies shall pay the full solid waste collection special assessment imposed. 
(c)  The solid waste collection special assessments imposed against governmental agencies shall become delinquent if not fully paid within 60 days from the date the notice of such solid waste collection special assessments are mailed. All delinquent solid waste collection special assessments shall bear an initial penalty of four percent of the full amount of the solid waste collection special assessment if not paid by the expiration of such 60-day period and an additional penalty of one percent per month on the delinquent amount plus the initial penalty on the first day of the first month following the expiration of such 60-day period and on the first day of each month thereafter until said solid waste collection special assessments are paid in full. 
(d)  The provisions of this article regarding liens and enforcement shall not be applicable to the solid waste collection special assessments imposed against assessed units owned by governmental agencies. However, the village shall have the authority to enforce the collection of any delinquent solid waste collection special assessment by the institution of an appropriate action against the governmental agency in a court of competent jurisdiction for a judgment for the amount due for such solid waste collection special assessment, including all penalties, plus costs and a reasonable attorney's fee. 
(e)  The village shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 8, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-29. - Applicability of solid waste collection special assessments to tax exempt assessed units. 
The exemption of property from taxation under F.S. ch. 196, or any other law or constitutional provision shall not relieve the owner of any assessed unit in the village from the provisions hereof or from the imposition by the village of the solid waste collection special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 9, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-30. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity with the proceedings in connection with the levy of the solid waste collection special assessment under the provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any solid waste collection special assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such solid waste collection special assessment was duly made and adopted and that all other proceedings adequate to such solid waste collection special assessment were duly had, taken and performed as required by this article and the uniform method. No variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it is clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any party objecting to a solid waste collection special assessment imposed pursuant to this article must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 10, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-31. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, clerk, council or their agents or employees shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for the payment of any solid waste collection special assessment imposed by the council under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  After the solid waste collection special assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the uniform method, any changes, modifications or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to errors and insolvencies for ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 11, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-32. - Residential collection service. 
(a)  The accessibility of all residential solid waste and the level of service regarding the frequency of pickup will be defined in the contract. 
(b)  The village may impose, change, modify or delete the requirements setting forth the responsibilities of the owner or owners of an assessed unit and the contractor providing collection for such assessed unit regarding the method, scope and extent of collection, including, but not limited to, frequency of pickups, classes of solid waste pickup, shape, size and quantity per pickup, types of containers and placement or location of solid waste for pick up, by setting them out in a separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 12, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-33. - Responsibilities of the solid waste and recycling collection contractor and roll-off collection service provider. 
The contractor and roll-off collection service provider shall comply with all provisions of the contract and the agreements entered into with the village and the provisions of this article which by reference incorporates all federal, state, county, and local units of government, with jurisdiction in the village, laws, regulations and ordinances, applying to the storage, collection, transport, processing or disposal of solid waste, garbage, trash, bulk trash, vegetative waste, C&D and recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 13, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-34. - Nonassessed residential units. 
(a)  All solid waste generated or accumulated by a nonassessed residential unit shall be collected, conveyed and transported by the designated contractor within the service area in which the nonassessed unit is located, except for solid waste requiring roll-off collection service. The owners of all nonassessed units on the established route of the designated contractor for such service area in which the nonassessed unit is located shall use the mandatory solid waste collection program. 
(b)  The village shall establish a fee for mandatory solid waste and recycling collection service for nonassessed residential units which have been issued a certificate of occupancy, either permanent or temporary for full or fractional use of the premises. 
(c)  The fee for the mandatory solid waste and recycling collection program for nonassessed residential units shall be established annually by the village by resolution. 
(d)  Roll-off collection service for residential sites under construction during the period prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be included within the requirements of the mandatory collection program but shall be regulated as provided in section 26-40 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 14, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-35. - Nonassessed nonresidential units. 
(a)  All solid waste generated or accumulated by a nonassessed nonresidential unit shall be collected, conveyed and transported by the designated contractor within the service area in which the nonassessed unit is located, except for solid waste requiring roll-off collection service. The owners of all nonassessed units on the established route of the designated contractor for such service area in which the nonassessed unit is located shall use the mandatory solid waste collection program. 
(b)  Nonassessed nonresidential units shall comply with the provisions of this article and the contract pertaining to the frequency, conditions and manner of the collection of solid waste. 
(c)  The fee for the mandatory solid waste and recycling collection program for nonassessed nonresidential units shall be established by the village by resolution. 
(d)  Roll-off collection service for sites, other than residential, under construction during the period prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be included within the requirements of the mandatory collection program but shall be regulated as provided in section 46-40 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 16, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-36. - Roll-off collection service provider. 
(a)  Any person wishing to provide roll-off collection service within the village shall be required to have a valid permit issued by the village to provide said services as set forth herein. 
(b)  The village shall provide a process for issuing permits for roll-off collection service. Said process shall include, but not be limited to, an application requiring specific information and containing terms and conditions for administering the permit, establishment of permit fees, and penalties for violation, including loss of permit. 
(c)  Permit fees for the right to provide roll-off collection service within the village shall be adopted by village resolution and shall be used for any lawful purpose within the village's solid waste management program. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, roll-off collection service shall include solid waste specifically excluded from the contract. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 16, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-37. - Ownership of solid waste and recyclable material. 
Ownership of solid waste and recyclable materials collected pursuant to the contract shall be vested with the village. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 17, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-38. - Frequency of collection. 
All solid waste and recyclable materials shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of the contract except as may be changed by the village due to uncontrollable forces or changes in technology. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 18, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-39. - Equipment. 
Equipment used within the village for the storage and collection of solid waste, recyclables and construction and demolition debris shall, at all times, be in safe operating condition, clean, in good repair, and display the company name and local telephone number in letters and numbers at least five inches high. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 19, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-40. - Control and management of solid waste at construction sites. 
(a)  All construction sites, which includes demolition for purposes of this article, shall be required to have sufficient number and capacity of open top roll-off containers to adequately handle all waste generated at the site in a manner whereby no container is overfilled. 
(b)  All contractors are required to secure construction roll-off container service from firms permitted by the village to offer said services. 
(c)  General contractors shall be required to control all litter and waste generated at construction sites including waste generated by all subcontractors and construction workers. General contractors shall be subject to payment of fines and penalties established by the village for failing to control litter and waste associated with their construction projects on the project property. 
(d)  Exceptions to these requirements include the provisions of the contract and those that may be provided by the village through the contract administrator. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 20, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-41. - Unauthorized accumulations prohibited. 
(a)  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste, trash, bulk trash, vegetative waste and construction and demolition debris on any premises is prohibited and may be subject to penalties as established by the village. 
(b)  Back yard composting of household material described by the authority is excluded from (a) above as is stable waste and vegetative waste provided that the activity does not generate obnoxious odors, attract vermin and is screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 21, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-42. - Littering. 
No person shall deposit waste material within the village on public or private property except in a receptacle intended for said waste. Littering shall include, but not be limited to, thrown, dropped, cast, spilled or blown waste. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 22, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 46-43. - Enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with and abide by each provision of this article. The performance on each day of any prohibited act or practice or the failure to perform on each day of any required act or practice shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 23, 7-14-98)  
Chapter 50 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance, charter or special act provision regulating the special assessment procedures for local improvements saved from repeal, § 1-8(15); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-261 et seq.; planning, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; authorized to utilize provisions contained in div. 2, art. II of ch. 54, § 54-64; utilities, ch. 66. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ACME IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Special legislative acts of district to become village ordinances; amendment. 
(a)  All the special legislative acts of Acme Improvement District, specifically Laws of Fla. ch. 28557 (1953), and all subsequent amending special acts, shall become ordinances of the village; provided, however, that Laws of Fla. ch. 28557 (1953), § 5, by Laws of Fla. ch. 82-349, § 2, is hereby amended to read as follows: The supervisors of Acme Improvement District shall serve without compensation, per diem or otherwise, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses as provided by law. 
(b)  All other provisions of the special legislative acts of Acme Improvement District, not otherwise amended by this article, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, 4-30-96; Ord. No. 96-20, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-96)  
Sec. 50-32. - Adoption by reference of policies and procedures of district. 
The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference in this section all the policies and procedures, adopted by Acme Improvement District. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 50-33. - Authority of village manager. 
The village manager shall have all the same authorities as those of the chief administrator of Acme Improvement District as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of the village. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, § 2, 4-30-96)  
Sec. 50-34. - District authority to establish rates and charges on utility services for consumers outside of village. 
The village, which controls and operates Acme Improvement District, a dependent district of village, hereby reauthorizes Acme Improvement District to establish rates, fees, charges and surcharges on water and sewer utility services to consumers located outside the boundaries of the village and the district pursuant to the criteria set forth in F.S. § 180.191, and ratifies the prior imposition of such rates, fees, charges and surcharges. 
(Ord. No. 97-03, § 1, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 98-35, § 1, 12-8-98)  
Sec. 50-35. - Unpaid utility charges; lien. 
(a)  The village hereby provides that all unpaid water and sewer utility charges shall constitute a lien on the real property affected 90 days following the date on which the water and sewer utility charges are due and payable. All unpaid water and sewer utility charges shall bear interest at the prevailing market rate of interest but no less than a rate of five percent per annum from the date when the same became due and payable. 
(b)  If any water and sewer utility charges become delinquent by not being fully paid within 90 days following the date on which the water and sewer utility charges are due and payable, and remain delinquent, the district shall cause to be prepared a notice of lien containing the amount of the delinquent charges including the amount of the first penalty, a legal description of the unit of real property against which the lien is imposed and the name of the owner of such real property as indicated on the real property records maintained by the property appraiser of the county. Said notice of lien shall be recorded in the public records of the county prior to the completion of the fiscal year for which the charges are levied, or as soon thereafter as the district shall determine. A copy of the notice of lien shall be served on the owner of record as provided in F.S. § 713.18, within ten days after the notice of lien is recorded. 
(c)  Until fully paid and discharged or barred by law, such liens shall be prior to all other liens except that such liens shall be on parity with a lien of state, county and municipal taxes, and any lien for charges for services created pursuant to F.S. § 159.17. 
(d)  All costs of enforcement of such liens, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, shall become a lien upon the real property affected and shall bear interest at the prevailing market rate of interest but not less than a rate of five percent per annum from the date when the same became due and payable. 
(e)  Upon full payment of the delinquent water and sewer utility charges, including the costs of enforcement of any lien, Acme shall promptly discharge its recorded lien by recording a release of lien in the public records of Palm Beach County. 
(f)  Foreclosure of all liens imposed under this section shall be in the manner prescribed by F.S. ch. 173. 
(g)  This section shall operate retroactively to apply to liens previously filed by the district for failure to pay delinquent water and sewer utility charges and to all other delinquent utility charges, whether or not a notice of lien has been filed by the district. 
(h)  Any unpaid water and sewer utility charges incurred by a former tenant of rental property shall not be the basis for any lien against the rental property or action against the present tenant or owner to recover such charges except to the extent that the present tenant or owner has benefitted directly from the service provided to the former occupant. 
(Ord. No. 97-22, §§ 1—8, 12-16-97)  
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village saved from repeal, § 1-8(5); any ordinance, charter or special act provision regulating the special assessment procedures for local improvements saved from repeal, § 1-8(15); public possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, § 6-3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 46; special districts, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 70; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Supplemental and alternative method of making local municipal improvements, F.S. ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; injurious substances, obstruction of streets, etc., F.S. § 316.2035 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Scope, intent and authority of article. 
(a)  All provisions of this article shall be effective within the boundaries of the village and shall set restrictions, constraints and prohibitions to enhance the village's road rights-of-way and provide a measure of uniformity for them. 
(b)  This article is adopted under the authority of article VIII, section 2 of the state constitution, F.S. ch. 166, and all other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 1, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 54-32. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a regulatory framework and guidance document which will help ensure consistent work in the village's rights-of-way and easements. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 2, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 54-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Jack and bore means piping under the surface for the purpose of installing pipe, culverts, conduits and/or other material. 
Landscape means to change the natural features of a plot of ground so as to make it more attractive as by adding grass, lawn, trees, shrubs, hedges, flowers, plants or like material. 
Open cut means physically cutting and removing existing road surface for the purpose of installing pipe, culverts, conduits and/or other material. 
Right-of-way means that property, typically 60 feet, 80 feet, 100 feet or 120 feet in width, that is deeded to the village per plats and/or other dedicatory language. 
Sidewalk means a path for pedestrians or other foot travelers, which is usually paved concrete or asphalt along the side of a street generally located on the outside of the right-of-way with the edge on the property line. 
Swales means those areas lying between the road surface and the sidewalk or between the road surface and the right-of-way boundary line adjacent to the road surface, over which the village holds an easement or which the village has exclusive control as part of its road drainage right-of-way, or which are owned or maintained by the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-34. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute a violation and shall be punishable as provided by law. If a violation should occur, the property owner and all persons responsible or liable will be given notice to remove and/or repair work or construction performed or located in the right-of-way. If the violation is not timely remedied, appropriate steps to remedy the violation will be taken by village employees, and the responsible party will be responsible and liable for all associated costs and fines. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of this article may also be punishable by a fine not to exceed four times the cost of the permit to be determined by the village staff. 
(c)  Violators of this article are punishable by civil fine pursuant to F.S. ch. 162 and shall be referred to the code enforcement board. 
(d)  All monies collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 6, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 54-35. - Work, activities and construction; requirements and permitted activities. 
(a)  Review and permit required. All work, activities or construction proposed to be performed in a village right-of-way or easement and all structures proposed to be erected, located or maintained in a village right-of-way or easement must be reviewed and permitted by the public works department of the village. 
(b)  Display of permit. A lawfully obtained permit must be displayed at all work sites during all phases of work from start to finish. 
(c)  Planting of trees. Certain trees which meet the approval of the public works department may be planted in the right-of-way or easement; however, single trunk palms are preferred. 
(d)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be limited to sod and trees, subject to the approval of the public works department of the village. No shrubs, hedges or other material shall be planted in the right-of-way without being properly permitted. 
(e)  Open cut; jack and bore. Open cut and jack and bore are allowed, subject to the approval of the public works department of the village and the obtaining of all necessary permits. 
(f)  Walls, entrances, signing and fencing. Walls, entrance enhancements, signing and fencing in right-of-way must be reviewed and properly permitted, subject to the approval of the public works department of the village. 
(g)  Swale markers; placement and size. Swale markers may be placed at the edge of swale areas to protect the edges of lawns from being driven on by passing vehicles, with swale markers to be round button, cement markers with anchor rods attached, not to exceed 12 inches in diameter and four inches in height. 
(h)  Swale requirements. Swales must conform to their original shape and grades, with the center of the swale adjacent to local streets (60 feet right-of-way) generally being eight inches below the road centerline or the back of sidewalk elevation. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 4, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 54-36. - Exemptions. 
The following exemptions from this article are provided: 
(1)  Mailboxes. Property owners may place mailboxes in the unpaved public right-of-way when such placement is a necessary prerequisite to mail delivery to their property, subject to the United States Postal Service criteria. 
(2)  Trash for pickup. Properly packaged trash, waste material, refuse and other similar articles may be placed on the unpaved public right-of-way no more than 24 hours before the next scheduled pickup. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 5, 5-27-97)  
Sec. 54-37. - Fees; determination. 
All fees collected pursuant to this article shall be determined by resolution adopted by the village, entitled the "Permit and Inspection Fee Schedule." 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 7, 5-27-97)  
Secs. 54-38—54-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VACATING AND ABANDONMENT 
 
Sec. 54-51. - Short title. 
This division shall be designated and may be cited as the Village of Wellington Right-of-Way Abandonment division. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 1, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-52. - Definitions. 
Abandon, and any variant thereof, includes the term "vacate." 
Abutting property means any parcel of real property whose boundaries, or any part thereof, also serves as the boundary, or portion thereof, of the petition site. 
Affected property means any parcel of real property, or portion thereof, which lies within 300 feet of the boundaries of the petition site. 
Department means the village department of planning, zoning and building. 
Land value means the value of land as established for the tax base by the property appraiser's office prior to any or all exemptions. 
Owner means that person, governmental entity or business entity which is the fee simple title holder of real property. 
Owners association means any association or corporation created under the laws of the state, the membership of which is comprised of all owners of real property over which the owners association has jurisdiction by virtue of a declaration of covenants and restrictions, declaration of condominium, or similar instrument. The term shall include the terms "homeowners association," "condominium association," "cooperative association," and property owners association." 
Petitioner means the person, governmental entity or business entity submitting a petition for abandonment pursuant to this chapter. The term "petitioner" shall include "co-petitioner" where appropriate. 
Petition for abandonment or petition means the form prescribed by the department which requests the abandonment of a plat, or portion thereof, right-of-way or public easement pursuant to this article. 
Petition site means any parcel of real property subject to a petition for abandonment pursuant to this chapter. 
Plat means any drawing of real property made and recorded pursuant to chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
Private right-of-way means any right-of-way dedicated or deeded to an owners association or the owner of the abutting property or which is dedicated as a right-of-way and is the perpetual maintenance obligation of any owners association or the owner of abutting property. 
Public easement means any utility, maintenance or drainage easement which is dedicated by plat in perpetuity for utility or drainage purposes, or which is conveyed by a separate instrument which has been approved by the village. The term shall not include instruments of conveyances or dedications made to specifically named utility companies, owners associations, or other governmental entities. 
Official records means the documents recorded in the official records of the office of the clerk of court in and for Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Right-of-way means any strip of land dedicated or deeded for ingress and egress or access purposes. The term shall include the terms "road," "highway," "alley," "accessway," and any other similar term. The term shall mean both a village right-of-way and private right-of-way. 
Utility company means any public or franchised entity which provides electrical, gas or communication services. 
Village right-of-way means any right-of-way acquired by the village or the public by virtue of a dedication to the public or village on a plat, by separate instrument of conveyance, or by prescription. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 2, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-53. - Declaration of jurisdiction and control of the village; application of ordinance. 
(a)  Any dedication or conveyance of real property for the purpose of streets, rights-of-way, access, ingress, egress, utilities and drainage which is made on or by a plat, easement, deed or other instrument of any kind, which instruments are approved by the village council or board of county commissioners for recording in the official records or which instruments convey any interest in real property to the village is hereby deemed to be under the jurisdiction and control of the village council for the purposes of the vacation or abandonment of plats or portions thereof, rights-of-way and easements for utility, drainage or maintenance purposes. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall apply to all plats, rights-of-way and easements under the jurisdiction and control of the village council. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this division shall apply to all applications made pursuant to section 177.101(1) and (2), Florida Statutes, and to all applications for vacating plats, or any portion thereof, including public easements, pursuant to section 177.101(3), Florida Statutes. Any petition to vacate a plat or portion thereof, which plat or portion thereof contains a private right-of-way or a utility easement shall not require a public hearing; however, a public hearing shall be required if the petition site includes a Village right-of-way or public easement for drainage purposes which services a Village right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 3, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-54. - Petitions generally. 
(a)  Petitions for abandonment of plats. Any person desiring to abandon a plat, or any portion thereof, including public easements, shall be required to make application to the village pursuant to section 177.101, Florida Statutes, and the provisions of this division. Such application shall be on the petition form prescribed by the department, and the information contained therein shall be verified by the petitioner under oath. Unless initiated by the village, the petition shall be signed by all owners of any portion of the petition site. 
(b)  Petitions for abandonment of rights-of-way and easements for utility, drainage or maintenance purposes. Any person desiring to abandon the public's interest in and to any right-of-way and easements for utility, drainage or maintenance purposes shall be required to make application to the village pursuant to this division. Such application shall be on the petition form prescribed by the department, and the information contained therein shall be verified by the petitioner under oath. Unless initiated by the village, any petition for abandonment of rights-of-way shall be signed by all owners of abutting property. 
(c)  Signature of village manager or designee. Any petition made on behalf of the village shall be signed by the village manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 4, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-55. - Application and privilege fees. 
(a)  Petition Fee. Except as provided herein, each petition shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the village council to cover the cost of administrative review, site analysis and investigation, publications, and official recording. This fee will be credited to any privilege fee imposed. No refund shall be made. Petitions of the village or any other governmental agency shall be exempt from the application fee. 
(b)  Privilege fee. A privilege fee is hereby established, payable by any petitioner requesting the abandonment of the interest of the village and public in and to any right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of the village council. The privilege fee is to be used for the purpose of reimbursing the village's costs and expenses incurred when acquiring real property for public use. 
(c)  [Final determination.] The village council shall make the final determination of the application of the privilege fee based upon recommendations submitted by village staff at the scheduled public hearing for abandonment of the petition site. 
(d)  [Calculation of privilege fee.] The privilege fee shall be determined by computing 80 percent of the total land value of the petition site. 
(e)  [Total land value.] The total land value of the petition site, per square foot, shall be equal to the averaged square foot land value of the abutting property, as established by the most current county property appraiser records. This calculation shall be based upon the cumulative land value of the abutting properties (cumulative value), determining the average value of the properties on a square footage basis (square footage value), and multiplying the square footage value by the number of square feet of the petition site to ascertain the total land value of the petition site. 
(f)  [Exemptions.] Such privilege fee shall not apply to petitions submitted by the following: 
(1)  The fee simple owner of the property subject to an easement; 
(2)  The original gratuitous conveyor of all the public rights-of-way to be abandoned; 
(3)  Rights-of-way contained in plats which were approved by the village when no conveyance of lots by reference to the plat appear of record; or 
(4)  When the petitioner is a duly organized governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 5, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-56. - Access to water. 
No right-of-way, road, street or public accessway giving access to any publicly accessible waters in the village shall be closed, vacated or abandoned except in those instances where the petitioner offers to trade or give to the village comparable land or lands for a right-of-way, road, street or public accessway to give access to the same body of water. Such access is to be of such condition so as to not work a hardship to the users thereof, the reasonableness of the distance and comparable land being left to the discretion of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 6, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-57. - Notice of intent. 
Immediately prior to filing the petition for abandonment with the department, the village will publish a "notice of intent" in a newspaper of general circulation in the county twice, with the first publication being approximately two weeks prior to the date for such hearing. Such notice of intent shall state the intent of the petitioner to file a petition pursuant to this division and, in the case of plat abandonment or any portion thereof, chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 7, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-58. - Petition application procedures. 
In addition to any other information required by the department, the petition shall contain the following: 
(1)  Legal description of petition site. A complete and accurate legal description of the petition site. 
(2)  Type of petition. A statement identifying the type of petition as being for abandonment of: 
a.  A plat; 
b.  A portion of a plat; 
c.  A Village right-of-way; 
d.  The public's interest in a private right-of-way; or 
e.  A public easement. 
The statement shall identify the source(s) of the village's or public's interest, together with a reference to the recording information for same, in and to the petition site. A complete and accurate copy of the source(s) of the village's or public's interest shall be attached as an exhibit to the petition. If the source is a recorded instrument, the copy of the source shall be certified by the clerk of the court of the county. 
(3)  Survey. A certified land survey measuring no less than eight and one-half inches by 14 inches and not larger than 11 inches by 17 inches shall be prepared by a state registered land surveyor in accordance with the minimum technical standards of section 472.027, Florida Statutes, and Chapter 21HH-6, Florida Administrative Code and attached as an exhibit to the petition. The survey shall also contain or depict the following information: 
a.  An accurate drawing of the petition site; 
b.  The boundaries of abutting properties; 
c.  The square footage of the petition site; and 
d.  Existing structures, utilities, easements, encroachments and other improvements, including but not limited to the location of overhead, underground or surface utility lines and equipment, ditches, fences, buildings, pathways and drainage structures contained on the petition site. 
(4)  Location map. A drawing measuring not less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches which clearly and legibly identifies the location of the petition site in relation to the nearest public right-of-way, excluding the petition site, and all affected properties. The location map may be located on the survey in a separate block. 
(5)  List of owners of abutting property and affected property. A complete list of all owners of abutting property and affected property within 300 feet (this 300 foot mailing procedure is required if the petition is subject to a public hearing, section 54-60(a)), their mailing addresses and legal description of the property owned. For private right-of-way abandonment requests, a complete list of abutting property owners only, their mailing addresses and legal description of the property owned shall be required. The petition shall state the source of the information used to compile the list and shall contain an affidavit of the preparer that to the best of his knowledge the list is complete and accurate. If the abutting property or affected property is under the jurisdiction of an owners association, this requirement of notice may be fulfilled by mailing such notice to the owners association; however, all abutting property owners must also be separately notified. The list shall be accompanied by a number ten white envelope for each abutting property and affected property owner and each petitioner as follows: 
a.  The following return address shall be printed or typed thereon: 
Village of Wellington 
Planning, Zoning and Building Department 
14000 Greenbriar Boulevard 
Wellington, FL 33414 
b.  It shall be pre-stamped with sufficient postage for certified, return receipt postage for addresses in the United States and registered mail postage for addresses in foreign countries. 
c.  A properly completed certified mail receipt or registered mail receipt, as applicable, shall be clipped to each envelope. 
(6)  Utility approvals. The written approval or consent of the utility providing the service to or within the petition site shall be attached to the petition. 
(7)  Access to abutting property and affected property. The petition shall contain a statement that to the best of the petitioner's knowledge, the granting of the petition would not affect the ownership or right of convenient access of persons owning abutting property, affected property or other property in the subdivision. 
(8)  Federal, state or county right-of-way statement. The petitioner shall certify that the petition site or any portion thereof, is not a part of any federal, state or county right-of-way and was not acquired or dedicated for federal, state or county right-of-way purposes. 
(9)  Notice of Intent. Proof of publication of the notice of intent shall be attached to the petition. 
(10)  Evidence of title. The petition shall state the source of the petitioner's ownership or interest in and to the petition site, and a reference to the recording information for same. A copy of the source instrument shall be certified by the clerk of court of the county and attached as an exhibit to the petition. 
(11)  Evidence of taxes and special assessments paid. The petition shall state that all state, municipal, county and other taxes and special assessments on the petition site have been paid. The certificate of the county tax collector's office showing payment of same, as payment is defined in section 177.101(4), Florida Statutes, shall be attached as an exhibit to the petition. If the petition site or any portion thereof is tax-exempt, the petition shall so state and a copy of the tax roll from the tax collector's office which shows such exemption shall be attached as an exhibit to the petition. 
(12)  Fees. The petition shall state whether the petition site is subject to the privilege fee, the amount of the fee, and that the application fee is submitted therewith. The petition shall include the appropriate documentation supporting the petition's calculation of the privilege fee. 
(13)  Justification. The petition shall detail the relevant reasons in support of the request and granting of the petition. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 8, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-59. - Review of petition. 
(a)  Each petition shall be reviewed by the department, the village utilities and public works departments, and any governmental agency deemed affected by the department. Upon receipt, the department shall distribute the petition to the reviewing departments and agencies. Within 20 days of receipt of the petition, the reviewing departments and agencies shall submit a written report containing their findings and recommendations to the designated staff of the department. Upon receipt of all written reports, the department shall review the petition and reports and shall notify the petitioner in writing of any reasonable conditions to be performed prior to forwarding the petition and reports pursuant to subsection (b). 
(b)  After expiration of the 20-day period above or sooner, if conditions are not imposed, or if imposed are responded to by the petitioner in the manner set forth above, the department shall forward the petition together with its findings and recommendations of same to the village council for their review in accordance with this division. 
(c)  The department shall not be charged with the duty of: 
(1)  Searching the official records or any other records in and for the county; or 
(2)  Any other investigation to determine the truth or accuracy of the statements and information contained in the petition and any attachments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 9, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-60. - Public hearing of petitions for abandonment of village rights-of-way and public easements for drainage of village rights-of-way. 
(a)  Required if village rights-of-way or public easement affected. A public hearing shall be held for any petition for abandonment which affects a village right-of-way or public easement for drainage which services a village right-of-way. If a petition does not affect a village right-of-way or public easement for drainage which services a village right-of-way, a public hearing is not required, and upon its review and sole discretion, the village council shall adopt a resolution either approving or denying the petition. 
(b)  Time and place of hearing. The village council hereby exercises their authority as set forth in F.S. § 336.09, by authorizing and directing the village manager or his/her designee to establish a definite time and place to hold the public hearing required by F.S. § 336.10, and this division, and to publish the notice of said hearing. 
(c)  Publication and notice of public hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall be published two times in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, with the first publication being at least two weeks prior to the date stated therein for such hearing. 
(d)  Posting of notice of public hearing. The department shall notify the petitioner of the date and time of the public hearing and shall direct the petitioner to post the property with a notice of petition to vacate. The petitioner shall post the notice in a conspicuous and easily visible location on the subject property, abutting a public thoroughfare when possible, at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
(e)  Mailing of notice of public hearing. The department shall mail a copy of the notice of public hearing to each addressee in the envelopes provided by petitioner pursuant to section 54-58(e) herein, at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
(f)  Testimony. At the public hearing, all interested persons shall be entitled to testify under oath regarding the petition; however, the village council may refuse to hear testimony that is repetitious, irrelevant or immaterial. If the village council approves the petition, the village council may vacate all or any portion of the subject property and may require such conditions as the village council may deem to be in the public interest. 
(g)  Adoption of resolution. If the village council determines to approve the petition, it shall do so by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 10, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-61. - Effect of resolution. 
The village council's determination of whether to approve the petition, being a legislative determination, is final and binding, and is not subject to appeal or judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 11, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-62. - Publication of notice of adoption of resolution and recordation of resolution. 
Notice of adoption of such resolution shall be published one time within 30 days following the date of adoption of such resolution in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The proof of publication of the notice of public hearing, and the proof of publication of the notice of the adoption of the resolution, and a certified copy of the resolution shall be recorded in the official records. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 12, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-63. - Effect of recording resolution of abandonment. 
(a)  For village rights-of-way, upon the recordation of the proof of publication of notice of public hearing, proof of publication of notice of adoption of the resolution, and certified copy of the resolution in the public records, all interest of the village and public in the rights-of-way abandoned or vacated shall be abrogated and such interest shall be vested in the abutting landowners to the extent and in the same manner as in case of termination of an easement for road purposes. 
(b)  For plats or portions thereof, recordation in the public records of resolutions approving abandonment of a plat or a portion thereof shall have the effect of vacating all streets and alleys in accordance with F.S. § 177.101(5), and shall either return the vacated property to the status of unplatted acreage or shall vacate the first plat in accordance with F.S. § 177.101(1) or (2), as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 13, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 54-64. - Acme improvement district authorized to utilize the abandonment procedures contained herein to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law. 
Acme improvement district, a dependent district of the village is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures contained in this division to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § 14, 11-18-97) 
Cross reference— Acme Improvement District, § 50-31 et seq.  
Secs. 54-65—54-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC ART PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 54-71. - Goals. 
The mission of the public arts program is to: 
(1)  To promote the spiritual, intellectual and aesthetic enrichment of the community through public arts; 
(2)  To select a diversity of public art for the Village of Wellington; 
(3)  To select works of art which have aesthetic and technical merit and are appropriate in context to the location; 
(4)  To select artists who are professionally and technically competent; and 
(5)  To disperse public art throughout the Village of Wellington in such as a manner that it is visible and accessible to the greatest number of people. 
(Ord. No. 2044-15, § 1, 9-28-04)  
Sec. 54-72. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context otherwise clearly requires: 
Annual public art plan means an itemized and prioritized list of anticipated art projects including the objectives, design approach, budgets and scheduling for the upcoming year. The annual public art plan shall be developed by the public arts panel and shall be presented to the village council for approval. 
Capital improvement project means all construction projects included in the village's capital improvement plan involving construction of new capital facilities, major remodeling of any capital facilities, or additions to any capital facilities. Land, equipment purchases, repair, software, purchases and maintenance costs are excluded. 
Construction costs include all labor, structural materials, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, infrastructure, site work, irrigation and landscaping, but not the cost of any personal property or costs for maintenance or repair. 
Public places means all spaces, indoor or outdoor, that are accessible and visible to the general public and located where residents and visitors live or congregate. 
Site means each construction project associated with a particular site plan regardless of phasing. 
Works of art means a tangible creation by an artist exhibiting the highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles, including but not limited to, paintings, sculptures, stained glass, engravings, statutes, base-relief's, carvings, frescos, mobiles, murals, collages, mosaics, tapestries, photographs, drawings, monuments and fountains. 
(Ord. No. 2044-15, § 1, 9-28-04)  
Sec. 54-73. - Public art trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a public art trust fund which shall be a separate, interest bearing account set up by the village to receive monies for the public art program and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All funds or art donated to the village for public art. 
(2)  Art fees received from the village's capital improvement program. 
(3)  Other funds allocated by the village through the budgetary process. 
(b)  The village council shall approve the amount of monies dispersed from the fund in accordance with the annual public art plan. 
(Ord. No. 2044-15, § 1, 9-28-04)  
Sec. 54-74. - Funding. 
The village council may make the determination to set aside a public arts fee for village public buildings or outdoor site improvements to which there is or will be public access, excluding projects funded through utility proceeds, during the capital budget process; however, the budget, through normal amendatory procedures, can be amended at any time to either include or delete a project from this article. The public art fee shall exclude land, architectural design fees, construction management and engineering fees, fixtures, furnishings, streets, sewers and similar accessory construction and shall be appropriated and deposited in the public arts fund to commission or purchase artwork to be located in a public area in or at such building or project. 
(Ord. No. 2044-15, § 1, 9-28-04)  
Sec. 54-75. - Use of public arts fee proceeds. 
The public art trust fund shall be solely used for expenses associated with the selection, commissioning, acquisition, installation, maintenance, public education, administration, removal and insurance of the works of art, and such funds shall be administered by the public art advisory panel. 
(Ord. No. 2044-15, § 1, 9-28-04)  
Sec. 54-76. - Ownership and maintenance. 
(a)  Ownership of all works of art donated or acquired shall be vested in the village, which shall retain title to each work of art. 
(b)  All works of art shall be required to be accompanied by detailed instructions for maintenance and ongoing care, including annual maintenance cost projections. 
(c)  Funds for ongoing maintenance shall be designated annually by the village council in accordance with the annual public art plan. 
(d)  All artwork shall be placed or constructed in locations that are open to the public during normal business hours and visible to the public at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2044-15, § 1, 9-28-04)  
Secs. 54-77—54-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK TRAFFIC CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, adopted Apr. 12, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as Art. III, §§ 54-71—54-75. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. IV, §§ 54-91—54-95. 
 
Sec. 54-91. - Vehicles over six wheels prohibited—Generally. 
(a)  It is unlawful to operate or permit to be operated any vehicle, or combination of vehicles and trailers, driving on over six wheels upon any village road whenever said road is posted with signs prohibiting said operation, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The notice of restriction shall be posted at conspicuous places at the terminal points of the section of road to which the restriction applies, and at appropriate crossroads of and junctions with the section of road to which the restriction applies in such a way as to provide reasonable notice of the restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 54-92. - Same—General exceptions. 
(a)  The prohibition of vehicles over six wheels provided in section 54-70 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Garbage trucks engaged in collection; 
(2)  Vehicles owned by any governmental entity, volunteer fire and/or ambulance company or public utility, the unhampered operation of which is necessary to the public safety; 
(3)  Vehicles making deliveries of goods or services within the area served by the posted road; 
(4)  Recreational vehicle as defined in Article 3 of the ULDC. 
(5)  A vehicle not over six wheels when towing: 
a.  A boat trailer; 
b.  A cargo trailer with not more than four wheels having a cargo containment area of not more than 20 feet; or 
(b)  This article shall not be enforced so as to interfere with or interrupt traffic over state or county roads, including officially established detours for such roads. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 54-93. - Same—Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the Palm Beach County Sheriff. 
(b)  A violation of this article shall constitute a violation under F.S. Ch. 316, and shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 318. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 54-94. - Same—Designated restricted roads. 
The division of public works shall post signs prohibiting use of the following roads by vehicles driving on over six wheels: 
(1)  Paddock Drive 
(2)  12 th Fairway 
(3)  Birkdale Drive 
(4)  50 th Street South 
(5)  Pierson Road 
(6)  Big Blue Trace 
(7)  Forest Hill Boulevard 
(8)  Binks Forest Drive 
(9)  Flying Cow Road 
To the extent the cooperation of other governmental entities' permission is necessary to effectuate the placement of signs, staff is directed to request such permission and coordinate with them to effect the intent on this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Sec. 54-95. - State weight, height and length limitations applicable. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any vehicle or combination of vehicles on village roads in excess of the weight, height and length limitations contained in F.S. Ch. 316. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 4-12-05)  
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-8(7); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-261 et seq. 
State Constitution reference— Local taxes, art. VII, § 9. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; excise tax on property insurance premiums, F.S. § 175.101; excise tax on casualty insurance premiums, F.S. § 185.08; taxation and finance, F.S. ch. 192 et seq.; municipal assessment rolls, F.S. § 193.116; municipal excise tax on cigarettes prohibited, F.S. § 210.03. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 98-32, adopted Nov. 24, 1998, repealing §§ 58-31—58-39 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 58-31—58-38. Formerly, such provisions derived from §§ 2—10 of Ord. No. 96-15, adopted June 11, 1996. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
Terms used herein and not otherwise defined herein have the meanings ascribed thereto in F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232, 166.233 and 166.234. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 2, 11-24-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-32. - Levy; rates. 
(a)  There is hereby levied by the village, on each and every purchase within the incorporated area of the village of telecommunication services as defined by F.S. § 203.012, which originates and terminates in this state, a tax of seven percent of the total amount charged for any telecommunications service provided within the village or, if the location of the telecommunications service provided cannot be determined as part of the billing process, the total amount billed for such telecommunications service to a telephone or telephone number, a telecommunications number or device, a service address or a customer's billing address located within the village, excluding public telephone charges collected on site, charges for any foreign exchange service or any private line service except when such services are used or sold as a substitute for any telephone company switched service or dedicated facility by which a telephone company provides a communication path, access charges and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. Purchase of telecommunications services as defined in F.S. § 203.012(5)(b), shall be taxed only on the monthly recurring customer service charges excluding variable usage charges. 
(b)  There is hereby levied by the village on each and every purchase within the incorporated area of the village of electricity, a tax at a rate of ten percent of the first $4,000.00 purchased by a purchaser during a monthly period, a rate of two percent of the next $2,000.00 purchased by a purchaser during a monthly period, and a rate of one percent of any amount in excess of $6,000.00 purchased by a purchaser during a monthly period. 
(c)  There is hereby levied by the village on each and every purchase within the incorporated area of the village of metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), a tax at a rate of ten percent of the first $4,000.00 purchased by a purchaser during a monthly period, a rate of two percent of the next $2,000.00 purchased by a purchaser during a monthly period, and a rate of one percent of any amount in excess of $6,000.00 purchased by a purchaser during a monthly period. 
(d)  The monthly period referenced to in subsections (b) and (c) above is the monthly billing cycle of a seller. If a seller bills in any manner other than on a monthly basis, the tax rate for all sales shall be ten percent unless changed by amendment to this article. The tax shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. The term "fuel adjustment charge" means all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 3, 11-24-98)  
Sec. 58-33. - Collection. 
(a)  The tax levied hereby shall be collected by the seller of the taxable item from the purchaser at the time of payment for such service. 
(b)  The seller shall remit the taxes collected to the village monthly on or before the 20th day of each month, except that remittance of taxes by sellers of telecommunication services shall be as provided in F.S. § 166.231(9)(f). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any purchase of telecommunications services, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), sold within the incorporated area of the village, without at the same time collecting such tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase or purchases unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser or consumer, providing, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. 
(d)  Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any purchase and sale, as aforesaid, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax shall be liable to the village for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had actually been paid to the seller, and the village shall bring and cause to be brought all such suits and actions and take such proceedings as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. 
(e)  For the purpose of compensating the seller of telecommunications services, the seller of the telecommunications services shall be allowed one percent of the amount of the tax collected in the form of a deduction from the amount collected for remittance. The deduction shall be allowed as compensation for keeping records and for collecting and remitting the tax. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 5, 11-24-98)  
Sec. 58-34. - Recordkeeping; inspection of records. 
(a)  Each and every seller of telecommunications services, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), within the incorporated area of the village, with respect to sales and purchases, on which the tax is hereby levied, shall keep full and complete records showing all purchases and sales of such telecommunications services, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), within the incorporated area of the village, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale and purchase, the date and period of time covered thereby and the date of payment thereof. 
(b)  The records referred to in subsection (a) above shall, upon 60 days written notice, be open for inspection by duly authorized agents of the village during regular business hours of the seller at a place designated by the seller at the sole expense of the village. The agents of the village shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts or copies thereof as they may desire. Records not prepared by the seller in the ordinary course of business may be provided at the village's expense and as the village and the seller may agree in writing. Such audit shall be impartial and all audit findings, whether they decrease or increase payment to the village, shall be reported to the seller. The village's right to examine the records of the seller in accordance with this section shall not be conducted by any third party employed by the village whose fee for conducting such audit is contingent on findings of the audit. 
(c)  Within 20 days following the receipt of a written request accompanied by payment of the cost therefore, the village shall provide to any person requesting same: (1) a list containing each street name, known street name aliases, street address number ranges, applicable directionals, and zip codes associated with each street name, for all street addresses within the village; (2) a list containing each postal zip code and all the city names associated therewith for all zip codes assigned to geographic areas located entirely within the village, including zip codes assigned to post office boxes; and (3) a sequential list containing all post office box number ranges and the municipal names and zip codes associated therewith, for all post office boxes located within the village. The village shall update such lists as changes occur and shall furnish the updates information to all sellers affected by the changes. Each update shall specify an effective date which shall be the next ensuing January 1, April 1, July 1, or October 1 and shall be furnished to sellers not less than 60 days prior to the effective date. The telecommunications service provider shall be responsible for or charging the tax only to the service and billing addresses contained in this listing. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 6, 11-24-98)  
Sec. 58-35. - Sellers of services to be collection medium and agency; certification of accuracy required. 
(a)  The sellers of telecommunications services, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), within the incorporated area of the village, shall act as the collection medium and collecting agency for the collection from the purchaser of the herein levied tax for the use of the village. The village may bring such legal action as in its discretion may appear advisable under the terms of this section. 
(b)  The sellers of telecommunications services, electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), within the incorporated area of the village, shall furnish to the village a certification duly executed by one of the officials of the company certifying as to the accuracy and correctness of billings and collections required under the terms of this section; which certification shall accompany the remittance of such tax collected or paid for the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 7, 11-24-98)  
Sec. 58-36. - Failure to pay tax; interest and penalties. 
There are hereby assessed interest and penalties as provided below for failure to pay any tax when due or to file any required return, except that no penalty shall be assessed absent willful neglect, willful negligence, or fraud. Interest shall be assessed at the rate of one percent per month of the delinquent tax from the date the tax was due until paid. A penalty is assessed for the failure to file any return required to be filed in connection with the tax imposed hereby or for the failure to pay any tax required to be paid, but not both, at the rate of five percent per month of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total penalty of 25 percent except that the minimum penalty for a failure to file a required return shall be $15.00. The interest and penalty imposed hereby shall be in addition to any other penalties provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 8, 11-24-98)  
Sec. 58-37. - Additional exemptions. 
In addition to exemptions otherwise provided by law, the following purchases of otherwise taxable items are hereby exempted from the tax imposed hereby: 
(1)  The first 200 kilowatt hours of electricity purchased per month for residential use. This exemption shall apply to each separate residential unit, regardless of whether such unit is on a separate meter or a central meter, and shall be passed on to each individual tenant. 
(2)  The purchase of taxable items by any public body, as defined in F.S. § 1.01. 
(3)  The purchase of any taxable item by any recognized church in the State of Florida for exclusively church purposes. 
(4)  The purchase of telecommunications services made by a religious institution that possesses a consumer certificate of exemption issued under F.S. ch. 212. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 9, 11-24-98)  
Sec. 58-38. - Computation of tax for monthly periods. 
In all cases where the seller of the taxable commodity or service collects the price thereof in monthly periods, the tax hereby levied shall be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during each monthly period; providing that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. When a seller renders a bill to a purchaser to cover purchases made during the particular period of time to which a bill is applicable, the amount of the public service tax shall be stated separately from other governmental charges and taxes and shall not be levied on such taxes and charges. 
(Ord. No. 98-32, § 10, 11-24-98)  
Secs. 58-39—58-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT 
 
Sec. 58-61. - Tax imposed. 
A local business tax is hereby imposed by the village upon: 
(1)  Any person maintaining a permanent business location or branch office within the village for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within the village's jurisdiction. 
(2)  Any person not maintaining a permanent business location or branch office within the village who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce where such tax is not prohibited by Section 8, Article 1 of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 1, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-62. - Applicability of exemptions. 
The exemptions from municipal local business taxes provided by law shall be applicable in the village. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 2, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-63. - Places of business; vehicles. 
Vehicles used by any person licensed under this article for the sale and delivery of tangible personal property, at either wholesale or retail, from his/her place of business on which a tax is paid shall not be construed to be separate places of business. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 3, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 3, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-64. - Additional/separate fees. 
A local business tax shall grant the privilege of engaging in or managing all businesses, professions, or occupations within the village's jurisdiction. It shall not excuse or be in lieu of any fee charged for a license permit, registration, examination, or inspection, which is hereby deemed to be regulatory and in addition to and not in lieu of the local business tax imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 4, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 4, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-65. - Filing of application. 
Before the village shall be required to issue a local business tax receipt for engaging in or carrying on any of the businesses, professions, or occupations specified and set forth in this article, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file an application with the village clerk, such application to be in the form provided by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 5, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 5, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-66. - When taxes due; expiration; penalty for delinquency. 
All local business tax receipts shall be sold beginning August 1 of each year, shall be due and payable before September 30 of each year, and shall expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. Those receipts not renewed by October 1 shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid, provided that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the local business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 6, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 6, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-67. - Engaging in business, occupation, etc. without license; penalty. 
Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation, or profession without obtaining an local business tax receipt required under this article shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the license determined to be due. In addition to such penalty, any person engaging in any trade, business, profession, or occupation within the village without a local business tax receipt as required in this article, or under a local business tax receipt issued upon false statements made by such person or in their behalf, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 7, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 7, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-68. - Civil actions and penalties. 
Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article, who does not pay the required local business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required local business tax receipt, is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 8, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 8, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-69. - Issuance of receipt. 
Upon payment of the taxes required by this article, the village shall issue to the person paying the same a receipt signed by an official of the village, which receipt shall expire at the end of the period for which such receipt is issued as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 9, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 9, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-70. - Period of local business tax receipt; issuance. 
Unless otherwise provided, the amount of the local business tax specified by this article shall be on the basis of one year covering the period from October 1 to September 30 next succeeding, but receipts shall be issued in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Receipts issued between September 30 and March 30 shall pay the full amount. 
(2)  Receipts issued between April 1 and September 30 shall pay one-half of the full amount. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 10, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 10, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-71. - Expiration date. 
No receipt shall be issued for more than one year, and all receipts shall expire on September 30 of each year unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 11, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 11, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-72. - Transfer to new ownership; fee. 
All local business tax receipts may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual local business tax, but not less than $3.00 and not more than $25.00, and presentation of evidence of the sale and the original receipt. Upon written request and presentation of the original receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one location to another location within the village upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual local business tax, but not less than $3.00 and not more than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 12, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 12, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 58-73. - Issuance of local business tax receipt to licensed professionals. 
No local business tax receipt shall be issued to a licensed professional or business office unless the professional possesses certificate from the state or applicable industry licensing board. Any licensed professional, either employed by a local business or an independent contractor. shall provide satisfactory evidence that the certificate(s) or license(s) referred to in this article are still in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-014, § 1, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 58-74. - Issuance of local business tax receipt to contractor. 
No local business tax receipt shall be issued to a contractor unless the contractor possesses a certificate from the state construction industry licensing board or a license from the Construction Industry Management Council of Palm Beach County. Before the issuance of the village, the applicant must produce satisfactory evidence that the certificate or license referred to in this article is still in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 13, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 13, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2012-014, § 1, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 58-75. - Local business tax receipt required for additional trades, business, etc. 
Any persons engaged in two or more trades, vocations, businesses, or professions enumerated herein for which a local business tax receipt is required shall be required to pay a local business tax receipt for each separate line of trade, business, vocation, or profession. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 14, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 14, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2012-014, § 1, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 58-76. - Exemptions for local business tax receipts. 
Beginning October 1, 2012, any individual who engages in or manages a business, profession, or occupation as an employee of another person is not required to apply for an exemption from a local business tax, pay a local business tax, or obtain a local business tax receipt. For the purposes of this section, an individual licensed and operating as a broker associate or sales associate is considered an employee. A principal or employer who is required to obtain a local business tax receipt may be required to provide licensing information for individuals exempt under this section in order to obtain a local business tax receipt. An individual acting in the capacity of an independent contractor is not an employee and is required to obtain a local business tax receipt as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-014, § 1, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 58-77. - Display of local business receipt. 
Each person holding a local business tax receipt under this article shall keep the receipt posted in a conspicuous place, and the receipt shall be shown to any officer of the village demanding to see it. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 15, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 15, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2012-014, § 1, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 58-78. - Classification and rate schedule. 
A local business tax classification and rate schedule is hereby adopted [by reference] and attached hereto as exhibit A [of Ordinance No. 2012-014]. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 16, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 16, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 3, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2012-014, § 1, 7-10-12)  
Secs. 58-79—58-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 58-100. - Additional homestead exemption for persons 65 years and older. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide an additional homestead exemption for persons 65 years of age and older in accordance with F.S.(2007) § 196.075 and as such may be amended in the future. It is the intent of the village council that this article conforms to the requirements of F.S. § 196.075 as presently constituted and as such may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding or renting a portion of a dwelling. 
(2)  Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in Section 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of the household. 
(c)  General. 
(1)  Village of Wellington taxes only. Pursuant to and in accordance with F.S. (2007) § 196.075 the additional homestead exemption set forth in this section shall apply only to taxes levied by the Village of Wellington, including, if any, dependent special districts and municipal service taxing units. 
(2)  Amount of additional homestead exemption. Any person who meets the requirements set forth in subsection (d) herein below, shall be eligible for an additional $50,000.00 homestead exemption. 
(d)  Requirements to obtain additional homestead exemption. Any person who on January 1 has attained the age of 65 years of age will be entitled to an additional homestead exemption if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The person has legal or beneficial title in equity to real estate; and 
(2)  The person maintains thereon and in good faith makes the same his or her permanent residence or the permanent residence of another or others legally or naturally dependent upon such person; and 
(3)  The person's household income does not exceed $20,000.00 as adjusted herein below; and 
(4)  The taxpayer claiming the exemption submits annually to the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue; and 
(5)  In accordance with rules of the Florida Department of Revenue, a statement is filed which is supported by copies of any federal income tax returns for the prior year, any wage and earnings statements (W-2 forms), and any other documents which the Florida Department of Revenue deems necessary, for each member of the household. Such documentation must be submitted by June 1 and the statement shall attest to the accuracy of such copies; and 
(6)  The property appraiser approves the exemption after being provided with all required documentation. 
(e)  Household income. For purposes of subsection (d)(3) above, the $20,000.00 household income limitation shall be calculated in accordance with F.S. (2007) § 196.075(3) and shall have been adjusted annually, adjusted annually since January 2001, and continue to be adjusted annually, on January 1, by the percentage change in the average cost-of-living index in the period January 1 through December 31 of the immediate prior year compared with the same period for the year prior to that. The index is the average of the monthly consumer-price-index figures for the state 12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(f)  If title is held jointly with the right of survivorship, the person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2003-26, § 1, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 2, 5-22-07)  
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-18, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 24, 2003, repealed the former Ch. 62, § 62-1, and enacted a new Ch. 62 as set out herein. The former Ch. 62 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, adopted May 14, 1996. Section 2 designated substantive provisions as §§ 62-1—62-5, 62-8, 62-10—62-17. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 62-1—62-5, 62-8, 62-10—62-17 as §§ 62-4—62-8, 62-11, 62-13—62-20. 
Cross reference— Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-8(8); skateboards, rollerblades and roller skates in Little Blue Park, § 38-161 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. ch. 316; powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008; penalties, F.S. § 316.655. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Territorial application. 
This chapter applies throughout the jurisdictional limits of the Village of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-2. - Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law adopted. 
The Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, chapter 316, Florida Statutes, is hereby adopted as part of the Code. Violations of the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law are therefore violations of this Code. Where any conflict may exist between this Code and the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law will prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-3. - Definitions. 
The definitions in section 316.0003, Florida Statutes, apply to this chapter. In addition, the following definitions apply: 
Bus stop means a fixed area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers. 
Clerk of the court means the clerk of the court in and for Palm Beach County. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle which is not used solely for personal nonbusiness activities. The following factors will be considered when determining commercial status: (1) Outside lettering designating a business of any kind, (2) use of vehicle, (3) size of vehicle. The following types of vehicles shall be considered commercial for the purposes of this section, but shall not be the only types of vehicles considered as commercial: truck cab; semitrailer; taxi; tow truck; stepvan; construction vehicle; bus; trailer or utility trailer; a vehicle outfitted for commercial purposes or a vehicle with three or more axles. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Double parking or double standing or double stopping means the parking, standing, or stopping of a vehicle upon the roadway side of another vehicle parking, standing, or stopping, but not legally within or adjacent to an open parking space. 
Enforcement officer means the sheriff, sheriff's deputy, his agents or employees, a police officer, the code enforcement officer and assistants, or any other person designated by law, charter, ordinance, or resolution to enforce the provisions of this article of the Village Code. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
Inoperative motor vehicle means a motor-driven vehicle that cannot move under its own power due to defective or missing parts. 
Motor vehicle means every self-propelled device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including, but not limited to, an automobile, a truck, a van, a motorcycle, a motor-driven cycle, a scooter, or a moped. 
Parts means all component parts of a vehicle that are in a state of disassembly, or are assembled with other vehicle component parts, but which, in their state of assembly, do not constitute a complete vehicle. 
Passenger curb loading zone means any area adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Private property means all privately-owned property that is not classified within the definition of public property. 
Public property means any public right-of-way, any property owned by the United States or any of its federal, state, county, or municipal governments, and all streets, highways, terraces, courts, lanes, boulevards, etc., within the village, whether or not they are public highways. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicle designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which is self-powered or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
Right-of-way means land in which the state, the department of transportation, a county, or a municipality owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for the use as a public road. 
Road, street, alley, highway, or public easement means the entire width between the boundary lines of every public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, canal banks and canal easements. 
Skateboard means a single platform mounted on wheels, mechanism, or other device with which to steer or to control the movement or direction of the platform. 
Sport vehicle includes but is not limited to: dune buggy, racing vehicle, all-terrain vehicle or other type of off-road vehicle designed primarily for off-road use. 
Taxi or taxicab: a licensed public motor vehicle for hire designated and constructed to seat not more than seven persons and operating as a common carrier on call or demand. 
Taxi or taxicab stand means a fixed area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers. 
Village clerk means the village clerk in and for the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
Village road means any road owned or maintained by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2003-18, § 3, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 62-4. - Copy of vehicle registration in owner's name prima facie evidence hat vehicle was unlawfully parked by owner. 
In enforcement of parking violations as prohibited by the Code or state statute prohibiting parking violations within the village, evidence that a vehicle bearing a certain license tag was found unlawfully parked and that the records of the department of motor vehicles of the state show that the license tag was issued and the vehicle registered in the name of the owner, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked was so parked by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-5. - Authority to install traffic control devices and signals. 
The village engineer is authorized to install, remove, or modify traffic control devices and signals to regulate vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic on the streets and public ways in the village which are determined to be necessary or desirable for safe traffic control. 
All installations of traffic control devices and signals by the village, pursuant to the authority of this chapter, shall comply with the manual and specifications of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-6. - Authorization of no parking restrictions. 
The village engineer is authorized and directed to erect signs giving notice of the no parking restrictions at those places within the village limits as in his/her opinion are necessary or advisable to inform the public of this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-7. - Regulation and control of motor vehicles on certain private property. 
The village shall have the power to regulate and control the parking and operation of all motor vehicles on private property and to impose and enforce adequate penalties for violation of such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-8. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter may be by village enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-9. - Parking of vehicles and boats in residential districts. 
(a)  Applicability. Unless otherwise stated, these regulations shall apply as specified herein to all property in residential zoning districts or residential land use categories within the urban service area of the village excepting those properties located in the Type B (rural) residential land use category. 
(b)  Motor vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be prohibited to park a motor vehicle in any portion of a yard or landscaped area clearly visible from the street or adjoining properties except the paved driveway or ARB-approved alternative surface, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  In all residential land use categories inside the urban service area, including Type B (rural), it shall be prohibited to park or store on any lot or in any right-of-way a vehicle which is inoperative, unregistered or has no current license tag displayed; except that one vehicle which is unregistered or does not display a current license tag may be kept on site provided the vehicle is completely screened from view from adjacent roads and lots. 
(3)  It shall be prohibited to perform mechanical or other repair work out of doors on a motor vehicle. This prohibition does not extend to minor maintenance such as oil and tire changes or emergency repairs lasting no more than eight hours on a vehicle owned by a resident of the property where the repairs are made. 
(4)  It shall be prohibited to display a vehicle for sale on any lot or right-of-way, except that one non-commercial vehicle may be parked in a residential driveway with one "for sale" sign placed inside one of the vehicle's windows, provided that such vehicle would otherwise be permitted by this article. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles. 
(1)  General prohibition: 
i.  On-street: No person shall park, store, or keep any commercial vehicle on any public street, thoroughfare, or any right-of-way. 
ii.  Off-street: No owner or resident of property in any residential district shall park, cause to be parked, or allow to be parked on such property a commercial vehicle as follows: 
a.  For more than one hour between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, such period commencing at the time of first stopping or parking; 
b.  For any period of time between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday; 
c.  For any period of time on Sunday. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
i.  Commercial vehicle. One commercial vehicle per dwelling unit may be parked on a residential lot, providing all of the following conditions are met: The vehicle is operative, registered and displays a current license tag and provided no portion of the vehicle is visible from adjoining properties or the street. One vehicle which is deemed a commercial vehicle due to the display of outside lettering only may be parked provided the lettering is completely covered. 
ii.  Construction vehicles. The general prohibition set out above shall not apply to the temporary parking of construction vehicles on private property where construction is underway, for which a current and valid building permit has been issued by the building official, and the building permit is displayed on the premises. 
iii.  Delivery and service vehicles. The general prohibition set out above does not apply to routine deliveries by tradesmen or the use of trucks in making service calls, provided that such time in excess of one hour is actually in the course of business deliveries or servicing and the vehicle does not impede the orderly flow of traffic. 
iv.  Emergency repairs. The general prohibition set out above shall not apply to a situation where a motor vehicle becomes disabled and, as a result of such emergency, is required to be parked for more than one hour. Any motor vehicle shall be removed within 24 hours, regardless of the nature of the emergency. 
v.  Farm vehicles on properties located in the equestrian preservation area shall be allowed to have outside lettering stating only the farm name and the city and state where the farm is located. 
(d)  Recreational vehicles, boats and trailers. 
[(1)  General prohibition:] 
i.  On-street: No person shall park, store, or keep any recreational vehicle, sports vehicle, boat, or trailer on any public street or other thoroughfare or any right-of-way. 
ii.  Off-street. No owner or resident of property in any residential district shall park, cause to be parked, or allow to be parked on such property a recreational vehicle, sports vehicle, boat, or trailer for a period exceeding one hour in any 24-hour period; each such period commencing at the time of first stopping or parking. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
i.  Emergency repairs. The general prohibition set out above shall not apply to a situation where a motor vehicle becomes disabled and, as a result of such emergency, is required to be parked for more than one hour. Any motor vehicle shall be removed within 24 hours, regardless of the nature of the emergency. 
ii.  Outdoor storage. One of the following items (1) through (8) may be parked outdoors on a residential lot: (1) a boat; (2) a boat trailer, with or without a boat mounted on it; (3) a jet ski or other type of personal watercraft; (4) a jet ski or personal watercraft trailer, with up to two crafts mounted on it; (5) a recreational vehicle; (6) a sports vehicle; (7) a sports vehicle trailer, with or without a vehicle mounted on it; or (8) a horse trailer. Outdoor storage of such vehicle is permitted pursuant to this section only if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The boat, trailer, sports vehicle, recreational vehicle, or horse trailer is both owned and used by a resident of the property. 
2.  The boat or recreational vehicle is parked either on the swale and/or paved parking area only for the purpose of loading, unloading, or servicing that vehicle for a maximum period of four hours in any one day and for a maximum of eight hours in any one-week period. Any boat or recreational vehicle remaining on the premises for more than two evenings between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any twenty-day period shall be considered a violation of the prohibited parking section of this Code. 
3.  Any boat, boat trailer, sports vehicle, sports vehicle trailer, recreational vehicle, or horse trailer located in the side or rear lot is not clearly visible from the street or abutting properties and is screened by a masonry wall, ornamental fence, or landscaping at least six feet in height. 
4.  The recreational vehicle is not being used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes. 
5.  The boat, trailer, recreational vehicle, or horse trailer is operative, is currently registered and displays a current license tag as may be required under state or federal law. 
6.  Parking of horse trailers in the equestrian preservation areas shall be governed by the provisions of ULDC Section 6.10.1.6. 
iii.  Special exceptions. The village may grant a special exception for any one vehicle which does not meet the requirements of this subsection upon demonstration that the property owner, family member, or tenant has a physical disability requiring a vehicle that cannot meet this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2003-18, § 4, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 62-10. - Reserved.  
Sec. 62-11. - Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of an enforcement officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  On a horse trail; 
(3)  On a bicycle path; 
(4)  In front of a public or private driveway, or in a place that obstructs in any way a public or private driveway; 
(5)  Within an intersection; 
(6)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(7)  On a crosswalk; 
(8)  On a horse crossing area; 
(9)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(10)  Within 100 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or any traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(11)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the village engineer indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(12)  Within 50 feet of a bridge; 
(13)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a roadway opposite the entrance of any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance.; 
(14)  Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(15)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a street; 
(16)  Upon any street or roadway; 
(17)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street; 
(18)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing, or parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not owned by or in charge of such person into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  Where streets are not completely paved or where no curbs are provided, no vehicle shall be parked on the paved or commonly traveled portion of the roadway. 
(d)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose in a curb loading zone, except for the expeditious loading or unloading of materials, and in no event for a period of more than 30 minutes, unless otherwise posted. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter, or about to enter, such zone. 
(f)  No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any of the following parts of streets, sidewalks, or sidewalk area where signs are erected giving notice thereof: 
(1)  In front of a theater entrance; 
(2)  In front of an entrance or exit to a hotel or motel; 
(3)  In front of any school building for a distance of 100 feet either side of the entrance; 
(4)  In front of the entrance to any building where, in the opinion of the village engineer, parking should be prohibited for public safety; and 
(5)  In a fire lane. 
(g)  No person shall at any time park or allow to be parked a vehicle on a public or private swale or easement adjacent to a paved or unpaved road or street. This provision shall not apply during a garage sale, "open house", or other special or social event in areas where temporary parking is permitted by the host or neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-12. - Reserved.  
Sec. 62-13. - Motor vehicles for sale; exception. 
(a)  It is prohibited for any person in any zoning district in the village to park or display any motor vehicle in any public right-of-way or on any private property which is being held out and marked as being for sale. 
(b)  Exempted from the prohibition in this section are the following: 
(1)  Duly authorized and properly licensed commercial establishments that engage in the sale or lease of motor vehicles. 
(2)  Residents of private residential premises seeking to sell only one motor vehicle at any particular time, which motor vehicle is owned by a member of that household, which motor vehicle has a payload capacity of one ton or less, and which motor vehicle is parked and displayed upon a paved portion of the residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-14. - Parking prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall park a vehicle within any right-of-way for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Displaying advertising. 
(3)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of this village. 
(4)  Storage, or as junkage, or dead storage for more than 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-15. - Hitchhiking or solicitation from roadway prohibited. 
No person shall stand in or in proximity to a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from, or selling merchandise to, the driver of or a passenger in any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-16. - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice of the limitation of time for parking, no person shall stop, park, or stand a vehicle for longer than the time specified by such signs. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-17. - Taxicabs and buses to use stands and stops. 
The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand, or park upon any street at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping, standing, or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while engaged in the expeditious unloading or loading of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-18. - Unauthorized use of taxicab stands and bus stops. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and marked, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-19. - Deposit, storage prohibited on public or private property. 
No person shall deposit, store or keep, or permit to be deposited, stored, or kept in the open upon public or private property an abandoned vehicle. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park, operate, use, or maintain on any publicly-owned property or any undeveloped property within the village any motorized vehicle other than on roadways improved for vehicular traffic or in areas designated for parking. "Publicly-owned property" shall mean any real property owned or leased by the village, the county, or any other governmental authority, excluding rights-of-way. "Undeveloped property" shall mean any real property, public or private, within the village that has not been previously disturbed or improved upon by uses, structures, or landscaping. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to vehicles performing maintenance, construction, patrol activities, or other related activities. This section shall not apply to any farming operation within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-20. - Operation of off-road vehicles restricted. 
All unregistered off-road, all-terrain vehicles and motorcycles equipped with dirt tires and loud mufflers (generically known as "dirt bikes" or "all-terrain vehicles") shall be prohibited from operation in the village unless: 
(1)  The property owner where such operation is being conducted has agreed in writing to such operation, and the operator in question has such written permission in his possession during such operation; and 
(2)  Said operator is not a nuisance to adjacent property owners; and if the sound emitted from the operation of such off-road vehicle is detrimental to life or health, or is a disturbance of the public peace and welfare, the sound shall be considered as excessive, unnecessary, or offensive noise, as provided in chapter 36 of this Code and the operation of such vehicles shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section, the term "off-road, all-terrain vehicles" shall mean and include vehicles commonly known as dune buggies, ATVs, amphibious vehicles, and the like, and the term "motorcycles" shall include such motorcycle vehicles as defined in chapter 316, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-21. - Safety helmet required for riding horses and other equine animals. 
(a)  It is the intent of the village by enacting the section to promote safety, regulate traffic, and regulate lawful activities within defined public areas. 
(b)  After October 1, 2008 an equine animal rider who is under 16 years of age must wear a helmet that meets the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards which is properly fitted and fastened securely upon the rider's head by a strap, when riding in a public area. This requirement applies regardless of whether a rider is controlling the equine animal. As used within this "subsection, the term "equine animal" means a horse, pony, mule, or donkey. The term "public area" as used within this subsection means: 
(1)  All areas within the village where the village enjoys original jurisdiction to regulate traffic pursuant to the State Uniform Control Laws; 
(2)  All public parks or premises, public school sites, public equestrian trails, public recreational trails, or publicly owned or controlled property. 
(c)  After October 1, 2008, no parent of any person under the age of 16 years and no guardian of any ward under the age of 16 years may authorize or knowingly permit any such minor person or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  After October 1, 2008, no person may knowingly rent or lease any equine animal to be ridden by a person who is under the age of 16 years unless the prospective rider possesses a helmet meeting the requirements of subsection (b) above or the lessor provides a helmet meeting such requirements for the prospective rider to wear. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section may be issued a citation by a law enforcement officer for a fine of $25.00. 
(f)  This section does not apply to a person riding an equine when such rider is: 
(1)  Practicing for or competing or performing in shows or events, including, but not limited to, rodeos and parades, where helmets are not historically a part of the show or event; 
(2)  Riding on privately owned land even if the land is occasionally separated by a public road or right-of-way that must be crossed; or 
(3)  Engaged in any agricultural practice or pursuit 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 62-22. - Exceptions to prohibited parking. 
Neighborhood parking plans. In communities with private roads, homeowners associations may apply to the village council for implementation of a neighborhood parking plan that provides for parking exceptions to section 62-11. In order for a neighborhood parking plan to become effective and allow the exceptions, it shall comply with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The village council adopts the plan by resolution following its review and approval by the village engineer, director of planning and zoning and the director of public works; 
(2)  The community requesting a neighborhood parking plan has restricted or gated access that limits use of roads to residents or guests and other invited individuals; 
(3)  The homeowners' association or property owners' association of the community has requested a neighborhood parking plan be enacted; 
(4)  The homeowners' association or property owners' association of the community shall provide proof of a vote of affirmation by the majority of residents within the community or shall provide written documentation from the attorney for the home owners' association or property owners' association that such an action is legal and in accordance with community by-laws, charter and/or official documents of record. 
(5)  The homeowners' association or property owners' association of the community assumes responsibility for enforcement of neighborhood parking plan. 
(6)  The homeowners' association or property owners' association of the community is responsible for all application fees. 
(7)  The proposed neighborhood parking plan is prepared by the village in conjunction with the affected homeowners association or property owners' association of the affected community. 
(8)  Public safety shall be the paramount concern when reviewing proposed neighborhood parking plans; and 
(9)  Neighborhood parking plans may not be more restrictive than the parking regulations found in the Code of Ordinances or land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 7-8-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, adopted July 8, 2008 amended by the enactment of § 62-21. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated § 62-21 as § 62-22.  
Sec. 62-23—62-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS 
 
Sec. 62-26. - Unlawful parking in space designated for use by disabled persons; responsibilities of owner, etc., to comply with code specifications. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any marked parking space specially designated for use by disabled persons provided in accordance with state law or village municipal ordinance, unless such vehicle displays a parking permit or license plate issued pursuant to the applicable provisions of Florida Statutes, and such vehicle is transporting the person to whom the permit or plate is issued. Whenever a law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist finds a vehicle stopped, standing, or parked in violation of this subsection, that officer or specialist shall: 
(1)  Have the vehicle in violation removed to any lawful parking space or facility or require the operator or other person in charge of the vehicle immediately to remove the unauthorized vehicle from the parking space. Whenever any vehicle is removed by a law enforcement officer or parking enforcement specialist to a storage lot, garage, or other safe parking space, the cost of such removal and parking shall be a lien against the vehicle; 
(2)  Charge the operator or other person in charge of the vehicle in violation with a violation of this section, punishable with a minimum mandatory fine of $250.00; or both. 
(b)  Any person who is chauffeuring a disabled person shall be allowed, without need for an identification parking permit or special license plate, momentary parking in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading a disabled person. No penalty shall be imposed upon the driver for such momentary parking. 
(c)  The mandatory minimum penalty of $250.00 may be waived upon payment of $5.00 when a disabled person produces proof or a satisfactory explanation that he or she was the driver of the vehicle (or was being transported in such vehicle) cited and that he or she had a valid disability parking permit or plate, when the citation was issued. All persons wishing to request a waiver of the penalty shall make such requests in person at the Village of Wellington's Department of Community Services within ten calendar days of receiving the parking ticket. The following are required in order to process an appeal for fine reduction: 
(1)  Copy of valid handicapped placard. 
(2)  Copy of the parking placard registration and matching personal identification. 
(3)  The issued parking ticket. 
(4)  Required fee. 
A "Handicap Parking Penalty Waiver Affidavit" shall be completed and signed by the officer or parking specialist after it has been established that the appeal has complied with the requirements of this section and costs received. 
(d)  Marking, signage requirements; conformity to code specifications by owner, etc., required: The markings, paint color, signage, and space design requirements for disabled parking shall meet the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 3-17-05)  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 62-27. - Authority to impound vehicles. 
Any enforcement officer is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or a garage designated or maintained by the sheriff's department or by the village under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a street constitutes an obstruction to traffic or the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal. 
(3)  When a vehicle is found being operated on the streets and is not in proper condition. 
(4)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street continuously for more than 48 hours and may be presumed to be abandoned. 
(5)  When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the police department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street. 
(6)  When removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm, or other emergency reason. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-28. - Abandoned vehicle; supplemental procedure for removal and destruction. 
(a)  The rights, powers, and procedures set forth in this section shall be supplemental to and cumulative to the rights, powers, and procedures set forth elsewhere in this article and Code. 
(b)  Whenever the enforcement officer ascertains that an abandoned vehicle is present on public property or on private property contrary to section 62-27 of this Code, he may cause a notice to be placed upon such abandoned vehicle in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED VEHICLE. THIS VEHICLE, TO WIT: 
(Setting forth brief description) 
LOCATED AT 
(Setting forth a brief description) 
IS: 
UNLAWFULLY UPON PROPERTY AT 
(Setting forth brief description of location) 
MUST BE REMOVED WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE; OTHERWISE IT SHALL BE PRESUMED TO BE AN ABANDONED VEHICLE AND WILL BE REMOVED. 
You are notified that you may show cause why the above vehicle should not be removed as an abandoned vehicle by written request for a pretaking hearing to be held before the Village Manager of the Village of Wellington, or his designee, at 14000 Greenbriar Boulevard, Wellington, Florida 33414. You must make such a request for a pretaking hearing by delivering a written request for a hearing to the Clerk of the Code Enforcement Board of the Village of Wellington within five (5) days of the posting of this notice, or by 5:00 p.m. on _______ day. Failure to attend this hearing or failure to remove this vehicle as so ordered by the village manager or his designee within forty-eight (48) hours of said hearing will result in removal by the Village of Wellington. 
DATED this _______ (setting forth the date of posting of notice). 
Signed (setting forth name, title, address, and telephone number of enforcement officer). 
Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements. 
(c)  The enforcement officer shall also make a reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the abandoned vehicle, and if such address is reasonably available to the enforcement officer, he or she shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on or before the date of posting. 
(d)  If the abandoned vehicle is located on private property, the enforcement officer shall mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the abandoned vehicle is located, as shown by the real estate tax rolls of Palm Beach County, on or before the date of posting such notice. 
(e)  If at the end of five days after the posting of such notice, or 48 hours after the pretaking hearing, whichever occurs later, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned vehicle described in such notice has not removed the abandoned vehicle from public or private property, or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, then the enforcement officer may cause the abandoned vehicle to be removed and either stored, destroyed, used by the village for its own use, traded to another unit of local government or state agency, donated to a charitable organization, or sold. The salvage value, if any, of such abandoned vehicle that is destroyed shall be retained by the village to be applied against the cost of removal and destruction thereof, unless the costs of removal and destruction are paid by the owner as provided in subsection (f), in which case the salvage value may be deposited in the village's general funds. 
(f)  The owner of any abandoned vehicle, who, after notice as provided in this section, does not remove the vehicle within the specified period shall be liable to the village for all costs of removal and destruction of such vehicle, less any salvage value received by the village. Upon such removal and destruction, the village shall notify the owner of the amount owed and of the penalty provision of this subsection. Any person who neglects or refuses to pay such amount shall be subject to a fine of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-29. - Repossession by owner; procedure. 
If the enforcement officer determines that the abandoned vehicle has sufficient value to justify its storage, the owner of the vehicle so removed may regain possession thereof from the village by making application therefore within two months after its receipt by the village, upon paying to the village all costs of removal, which shall be repaid to the person who paid or incurred such charges, plus storage charges of said vehicle while in possession of the village, plus all fines imposed upon the owner for violation of this chapter. If the enforcement officer determines that the abandoned vehicle should be destroyed, used by the village for its own use, traded to another unit of local government or state agency, donated to a charitable organization, or sold, the owner will be notified by certified mail, and the vehicle may be destroyed or traded 30 days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-30. - Sale of unclaimed vehicles. 
If no claim for a stored vehicle is made within two months after receipt thereof, the village may sell said vehicle for the best price obtainable as junk or otherwise, and the proceeds thereof shall be available to pay the reasonable charges of delivering the same to the village if a claim therefore be made by the person who paid said charges, the expense of keeping and disposing of said vehicle, and any balance shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Secs. 62-31—62-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 62-37. - Penalties. 
(a)  The village adopts the provision of F.S.(2006) § 318.18 as it currently exists or may be amended or revised in the future, as related to the noncriminal disposition of offenses other than those specifically set forth below. 
(b)  The following civil penalties shall be imposed for violations of referenced sections of this chapter. 
Violation 	Civil Penalty 
 i) Violations of Article I except Section 62-9 	$25.00 for each violation 
 ii) Violations of Article II 	$250.00 for each violation 
 iii) Violations of Article I, Section 62-9 	$25.00 for each violation or such penalties as may be imposed by order of the special master pursuant to the provisions of section 2-199 Code of Ordinances 
 
(c)  Any person owning moneys for parking tickets issued within the village shall remit payment for same directly to the village at the place designated on the ticket within 30 days of the date of issuance of such ticket. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2003-18, § 5, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 2-13-07)  
Sec. 62-38. - Late fee. 
A late fee of $12.00 is established and must be paid in connection with the payment of any parking violation fine which is paid more than 30 days after the date of issuance of the citation, excluding the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-39. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  Any person wishing to contest a parking violation citation may appeal and contest such citation by making a written request for an administrative hearing to the village clerk within ten days of the date the citation was issued. Failure to contest such violation by way of the above procedure shall be deemed to have admitted the infraction and to have waived his or her right to a hearing on the issue of the commission of the infraction. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the request for an administrative hearing, the village clerk shall then notify the clerk of the court. The alleged violator and village shall be given notice of the date and time of the hearing before the traffic hearing officer. 
(c)  The person issued the citation may: 
(1)  Be represented by counsel; 
(2)  Call and examine witnesses; 
(3)  Introduce exhibits; 
(4)  Examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter; and 
(5)  Impeach any witness. 
All hearings shall be conducted insofar as practical in accordance with the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code. However, the general nature of the hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. All irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of Florida. Any part of the evidence may be received in written form and all testimony of parties and witnesses shall be made under oath. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. Any interested party or person may make application and upon good cause shown may be al 
lowed by the hearing officer, in the reasonable exercise of such officer's discretion; to intervene in a pending proceeding. 
(d)  Any person who receives a parking citation but who does not reside in Martin, Hendry, Palm Beach, Broward or Dade County, may contest the citation in writing. Such person must submit a written request to contest the citation by mail, accompanied by all evidence upon which the person relies, within ten days of the date the citation was issued. The written request to contest the citation by mail and evidence must be sent to the clerk of courts. The evidence presented must include a notarized statement by the person cited, which statement must identify the citation at issue by its number and date of issuance, must set forth the name and current address of the person cited and may contain argument in defense against the citation. The hearing officer will not consider any statement that is not notarized. The evidence submitted may include notarized statements of witnesses. Such statements must include the name and address of each witness as well as the basis of the witness' knowledge about the facts asserted in the statement. The evidence submitted may also include such documents that are relevant and material to the disposition of the citation. All evidence submitted is subject to the evidentiary rules set forth above. 
(e)  Pursuant to Florida law, any person who elects to appear before a hearing officer or to contest a citation by mail, shall be deemed to have waived the right to pay the civil penalty amount set forth on the citation. After a hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence, the hearing officer shall make a determination based on the greater weight of the evidence as to whether a parking violation has been committed and shall issue an order imposing a civil penalty of $500.00 plus court costs for any violation of a disabled parking law or ordinance or a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00 plus court costs for a violation of any other parking ordinance or violation of law, in addition to applicable late fees. The hearing officer may grant additional time to pay the civil penalty amount and late fees; otherwise such fines are due and payable within ten days from the date the order of the hearing officer was issued. All orders shall be in writing and shall be signed and dated by the hearing officer. If, at the conclusion of the hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence, the hearing officer orders a dismissal of the citation because no violation was found, the hearing officer shall so state and issue an order of dismissal in writing signed and dated by the hearing officer which shall contain findings of the facts supporting the order. A copy of such order will be forwarded to the alleged violator. An order of the hearing officer may be appealed by the filing of a Petition of a Writ of Certiorari in the Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit In and For Palm Beach County, Florida, by any part receiving adverse ruling within 30 calendar days from the date the order was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 62-40. - Supplying parking violation information to the state. 
The Village of Wellington shall supply the Florida Department of Safety and Motor Vehicles, or any successor department performing substantially the same duties, a list of persons who have three or more outstanding parking violations, or one or more outstanding parking violation(s) of F.S. § 316.1955, F.S. § 316.1957 or any village ordinances which regulate parking in spaces for person with disabilities. The information may be supplied to the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles in any communication format approved by it or state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2, 3-17-05)  
Chapter 66 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Utility fee schedule and other fees established by the village saved from repeal, § 1-8(13); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 34; planning, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 46; special districts, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; public service tax, § 58-31 et seq.; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Authority granted to municipalities to levy tax on specified public services, F.S. § 166.231; public utilities, F.S. ch. 366; water and wastewater systems, F.S. ch. 367; water resources, F.S. ch. 373; Florida Safe Drinking Water Act, F.S. § 403.850 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WASTEWATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 66-31—66-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GREASE WASTE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-30, adopted Feb. 9, 1999, repealing §§ 66-51—66-60 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 66-51—66-61. Formerly, such provisions derived from §§ I—VIII, X, and XI of Ord. No. 96-27, adopted March 11, 1997. 
 
Sec. 66-51. - Definition of grease traps. 
Approved grease traps shall be any receptacles or devices approved by the village, which are designed to prohibit the introduction of grease waste into the wastewater system and constructed based upon the standards set forth by Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-52. - Applicability. 
(a)  In order to prohibit wastewater line stoppage or hinder wastewater transmission and treatment, all restaurants, food processors, service stations, or other activities which use or produce grease waste, except as exempted herein, shall install and maintain one or more grease traps in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Utility department approved grease traps for solvents and oil waste, which prohibit the introduction of grease waste into the wastewater system, shall be provided in the following places: 
(1)  Public storage garages where floor drainage is provided; 
(2)  Any place where motor vehicles are washed; private resident garages excluded; 
(3)  Any place where motor vehicles are repaired and floor drainage is provided; 
(4)  Shops, manufacturing, and assembly plants where parts are washed to remove oil and/or greasy substances; and 
(5)  Any place where oil, gasoline, or other volatile liquids are spilled, drained, or otherwise discharged onto the floor or ground. 
(c)  Grease traps shall be required for establishments engaged in commercial food preparation activities. 
(d)  Grease traps shall not be required for any food preparation activities which do not introduce grease waste into the wastewater system, subject to approval of the utility department. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 2, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-53. - Design and construction. 
The design of grease traps shall be based on standards prescribed by Florida law. In addition, the following general requirements apply when determining the proper use and installation of a grease trap: 
(1)  The grease trap shall be of watertight concrete or other durable material as approved by the utility department, and shall be placed outside the building in an accessible location for cleaning, and shall be connected to the waste line from sink drains and kitchen fixtures leading to the wastewater collection system. 
(2)  Invert of inlet shall be a minimum of three inches above the liquid level line of the grease trap. 
(3)  Flow from the grease trap shall be baffled with a tee-vented sweep at the outlet, which shall extend within eight inches of the grease trap bottom. 
(4)  The size of the grease trap shall be based upon the anticipated flow rate, water temperature, and grease concentration. 
(5)  The minimum capacity of each grease trap shall be 750 gallons, and the maximum capacity of each grease trap shall be 1,250 gallons. 
(6)  When the required effective capacity is greater than 1,250 gallons, installation of multiple grease traps in series is required. 
(7)  An approved grease trap must be used on the outlet sewer of every restaurant or other establishments with commercial food preparation activities. 
_____ 
(8)  The sizing of the grease trap shall be based on the equation below: 
a.  Restaurants: 
(S) × (GS) × HR/12 = Effective capacity in gallons. 
S 	= 	Number of seats in dining area. 
GS 	= 	Gallons of wastewater per seat (use 25 gallons for ordinary restaurant, use ten gallons for single-service article restaurants). 
HR 	= 	Number of hours establishment is open per day. 
 
b.  Other establishments with commercial kitchens: 
(M) × (GM) × (LF) = Effective capacity in gallons. 
M 	= 	Meals prepared per day. 
GM 	= 	Gallons of wastewater per meal; use five gallons. 
LF 	= 	Loading factor; use 1.00 with dishwashing and 0.50 without dishwashing. 
 
_____ 
(9)  Adequate detention time shall be provided to allow the grease to be deposited within the grease trap to prevent its entering the wastewater system. 
(10)  The utility department shall have the authority to increase the effective capacity if deemed necessary due to the nature of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 3, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-54. - Inspection. 
The utility department shall have the authority to inspect, at reasonable times, the food service, food processing, or other establishments which produce grease waste. If, upon inspection, a grease trap is determined to be insufficient or otherwise defective to serve its designed purposes as set forth in this division, the owner of the establishment shall be given written notice to correct the insufficiency or defective condition within three working days. Failure to comply with the terms of such notice shall be a violation of this division and each day thereafter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 4, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-55. - Permits and certificates. 
(a)  Installation permit. Grease traps shall be installed and located in an area which will provide ready accessibility for purposes of inspection, service, and maintenance. The installation of all grease traps shall be in compliance with the standards set forth by Florida law. The permit for installation of grease traps shall be obtained from the utility department. 
(b)  Grease trap certificate. It is hereby declared to be unlawful to install or operate a grease trap without first obtaining an Installation permit and grease trap certificate from the utility department, as provided in this section. All existing establishments that require or utilize a grease trap must submit a maintenance or clean-out schedule and obtain a grease trap certificate. This certificate is nontransferable and shall be displayed at the establishment. Upon change of ownership of the establishment, the new owner(s) must apply for a new, nontransferable certificate. Failure to submit a maintenance schedule, obtain a grease trap certificate, and install and maintain the grease trap per approved schedule is a violation of this division, subject to penalties as provided by Florida Statutes and this division. Grease traps shall be cleaned at appropriate intervals to insure that at least 50 percent retention capacity of the tank is retained. 
(c)  Cleaning schedule. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (b) above, grease traps must be cleaned at least every three months, and owners shall be responsible for any discharge of grease into the wastewater system. 
(d)  Submission of maintenance schedule. A maintenance schedule shall be submitted to the utility department. The grease trap certificate showing maintenance dates and the name and address of the grease trap cleaner shall be properly filled out and displayed on the premises. Proper disposal practices shall be exercised with removed grease. It shall be unlawful to permit removed grease to re-enter the wastewater collection system. 
(e)  Determination by engineer of adequacy of trap. Prior to the issuance of a grease trap certificate, a written determination by an engineer registered in the State of Florida, that the size, specifications, and regular maintenance requirements of a grease trap can adequately handle the anticipated flow and the computation used in arriving at this determination. 
(f)  Certificate required. All grease traps that exist and connect to the wastewater system at the time this division becomes effective must obtain a grease trap certificate. The certificate shall be obtained within 90 days of the effective date of this division. If, upon inspection, maintenance is found to be inadequate, it shall constitute a violation of this certificate. 
(g)  Installation of trap where none exists; deadline for retrofit. Any existing businesses which require a grease trap, but do not have one, will be required to retrofit, upon confirmation by the utility department, that the business in question produces grease and creates a burden to the wastewater system. The business must undertake and complete the installation of an approved grease trap within 90 calendar days after determination that retrofitting would not result in compliance herewith. If it is determined through the application of the terms of this division that the continuation of the business without an approved grease trap would impact adversely on the wastewater system, the business shall immediately disconnect from the system until compliance is achieved; provided, however, the village manager grants an extension of up to six months to complete the retrofit upon a showing of demonstrated undue hardship which affects the viability of the business. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 5, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-56. - Prohibited chemicals. 
Inorganic chemical solvents shall not be used for degreasing or unclogging grease traps. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 6, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-57. - Fees. 
A one-time, nonrefundable application fee, as set in the utility fee schedule, shall be paid at the time of application for the grease trap certificate. The fee for reinstatement of a revoked certificate shall also be paid in accordance with the utility fee schedule. 
An inspection fee shall be paid for each inspection required to ensure compliance with the Utilities rules and regulations governing the installation, operation, and maintenance of grease traps. The inspection fee shall be paid in accordance with the utility fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 7, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-58. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any violations of the requirements of this division are punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each separate violation, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(b)  A violation each day of any provision of this division shall constitute a separate offense, and each act in violation of the provisions of this division shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the village council, abated as provided by law. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 8, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-59. - Compliance date. 
All nonexempt restaurants, food processors, service stations, and other activities governed by the terms of this division shall be in compliance no later than 90 calendar days after the effective date of this division. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 9, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-60. - Administrative policies authorized. 
Written administrative policies, in keeping with the terms and conditions of this division, are hereby authorized to be accomplished by resolution of the village council, as may be necessary from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 10, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 66-61. - Appellate rights. 
An owner shall have the right to appeal to the village council a determination by the utility department that the owner's business produces grease which intrudes into and creates a burden on the wastewater system. The owner's objection to the determination shall be submitted in writing to the utility department no later than ten days after notice of the determination has been received by the owner. After the utility department designee receives the written objections, the village council shall have 30 calendar days to review the dispute and render its final decision, and the owner shall be provided an opportunity to be heard and support his/her objections on appeal to the village council. 
(Ord. No. 98-30, § 11, 2-9-99)  
Secs. 66-62—66-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CROSS-CONNECTION BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 66-70. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Wellington Cross-Connection Backflow Prevention Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-71. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these cross-connection control regulations is to prevent waterborne diseases and contaminants from entering the water distribution system of the Village. The regulations are intended to prevent delivered water, potable water that has passed beyond the public water system and into private distribution systems of consumers, from re-entering the public distribution system and being delivered to other consumers. The regulations protect the Village and its consumers from those water-using establishments which could possibly harm the quality and safety of the Village's water supply through backflow and/or cross-connections. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-72. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Air-gap separation: A physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. An approved air-gap separation shall be a distance of at least two times the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel with a minimum distance of one inch. 
Approved: Accepted by the director of the utilities department or his designee as meeting an applicable specification of the utilities department. 
Assembly: One that is capable of being tested. 
Auxiliary water supply: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the consumer's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from a private potable or non-potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids." 
AWWA: American Water Works Association. 
Backflow: The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the Village of Wellington's potable water supply from any source other than its intended source. 
Backflow prevention assembly: An approved assembly, method, or construction used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. 
Backflow prevention device assembly approved: An assembly/device that has met the requirements of the following standards: 
USC FCCC-University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research 
Contamination: An impairment of the quality of the potable water by any solid, liquid, gaseous compounds or mixtures to a degree which would create an imminent danger to the public health, or would create an unacceptable taste, odor, or color to the potable water. 
Cross-connection: Any physical arrangement whereby the village's public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device through which backflow may occur. 
Double detector check valve assembly: An assembly of two (2) independently operating approved double detector check valve assemblies, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve and an approved water meter incorporated within the assembly for detection of leaks and unauthorized use of water. 
Dual check valve: A device containing two (2) independently acting spring-loaded check valves with a bronze body. 
Health hazard: An actual or potential threat of contamination or pollution of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system to such a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health. 
Industrial fluids system: Any system used by the consumer for transmission of or to store any fluid, solid, or gaseous substance other than an approved water supply. Such a system would include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances to produce, convey, or store substances which are or may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a hazard if introduced into the Village's water system. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of processed water and "used water" originating from the public water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids or alkalies, circulated cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, paraffin, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquids and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes. 
Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in the water system which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly: An assembly containing an independently operating loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with properly loaded test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly. 
Reduced pressure detector assembly: An assembly of two independently operating approved reduced pressure principle assemblies, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each valve, and an approved water meter incorporated within the assembly for detection of leaks and unauthorized use of water. 
Reduced pressure principle assembly: An assembly containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting approved check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressures. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The unit shall include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
Village: Village of Wellington. 
Water non-potable: Water that is not safe for human consumption. 
Water potable: Water that, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
Water service connections: The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system. Where a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the consumer's water system. Service connections shall also include water service connections from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public water system. 
Water used: Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
Water purveyor: The owner or operator of the public potable water system supplying an approved water supply to the public. As used herein, the terms water purveyor and Village Utilities Department may be used synonymously. 
Water system consumer's: Any water system located on the consumer's premises, whether supplied by a public potable water system or an auxiliary water supply. The system or systems may be either a potable water system or an industrial fluids system. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-73. - Interpretation. 
This article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out the purposes hereof in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article is not intended nor shall it be construed to supersede or conflict with any statutory provisions, rules or regulations of the state, but shall be construed as implementing and assisting the enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-74. - Backflow prevention devices required. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the Village unless the water supply is protected as required by state law and this article. Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the Village if a backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(b)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the Village to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this article, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Utilities Director may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with state law and these regulations. 
(c)  A reduced pressure principle assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served and, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line, on all service lines installed after the effective date of this ordinance, except for single family residential service. 
(d)  All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the inspection maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the utilities director is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public potable water supply system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the utilities director finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced with a reduced pressure principle assembly. 
(e)  A reduced pressure principle assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served and, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line, on any service lines installed before the effective date of this section, except for single-family residential service, when the utilities director finds that the installation is necessary to prevent a hazard to health. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-75. - Administration. 
(a)  The utilities department shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. 
(b)  If, in the judgment of the department, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the village's water service connection to any customer's premises for the safety of the water system, the utilities director shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his/her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device at his/her own expense. The failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install the device immediately shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device has been properly installed. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-76. - Fees. 
An inspection fee shall be paid for each inspection required to ensure compliance with the regulations governing the installation, operation, and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies on new or existing facilities. The inspection fee shall be paid in accordance with the utilities fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-77. - Notice of violation; failure to remedy. 
The utilities director shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this article of such violation. The director shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected 30 days maximum or as determined by degree or hazard). On failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of a specified time interval, the director may, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated and/or recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as are provided in section 66-58. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-78. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly fails or refuses to obey or comply with or willfully violates any of the provisions of this article or any lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder or any lawful order of the director issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of such offense, be subject to punishment as provided by law. Each day during which the knowing of willful failure or refusal to comply with this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the village for all costs and damages incurred by the village as a proximate result of such violation, plus a fine up to $500.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 66-79. - Village of Wellington Manual for Cross-Connection Control. 
All terms, conditions, and provisions of the village's Manual for Cross-Connection Control, as it may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1, 5-14-02)  
Chapter 70 - WATERWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; planning, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54. 
State Constitution reference— Game and fresh water fish commission, art. IV, § 9. 
State Law reference— Attachment of vessels, F.S. § 76.32; beach and shore preservation, F.S. ch. 161; local regulation of the operation and equipment of vessels, F.S. § 327.60; taking or possession of saltwater fish, local regulation preempted, F.S. § 370.102; land-based commercial and recreational fishing activities, local ordinances, F.S. § 370.1103. 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Swimming, bathing, wading or immersing in public waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, wade, or immerse in any publicly owned water body, canal, or lake located within the village boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 96-10, § 1, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 98-24, § 1, 10-27-98) 
Cross reference— Swimming in parks, § 38-83(a).  
Sec. 70-2. - Operation of personal watercraft within village boundaries prohibited; exceptions. 
The operation of any gasoline, diesel, or fuel-powered boats, vessels, jetskis, waverunners, or other personal watercraft is hereby expressly prohibited on or in any publicly owned water body, lake, or canal located within the village boundaries, except that the use of gasoline, diesel, or fuel-powered boats may be permitted as provided in section 70-3 hereof. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of self-propelled, nonmotorized personal watercraft such as canoes, paddleboats, or rowboats, nor those watercraft propelled or powered by electric motors. 
(Ord. No. 96-10, § 2, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 98-24, § 2, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 70-3. - Exceptions. 
The use of gasoline, diesel, or fuel-powered boats may be permitted by council in the following instances: 
(1)  Municipal and other government agencies in the performance of aquatic weed control and other health and safety related programs. 
(2)  Educational programs, if such programs are conducted on Lake Wellington between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. between December 15 and May 15, and are limited to no more than two 14-foot boats with a maximum nine horsepower motor. Permission may be granted by the village council after a public hearing to consider such request. 
(Ord. No. 98-24, § 3, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 70-4. - Access regulation for publicly-owned waterways. 
(a)  The definitions set forth in Chapter 327 of the Florida Statutes, entitled the "Florida Vessel Registration Law," as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated into this section by reference. 
(b)  Definitions. In addition to the definitions set forth in Chapter 327, Florida Statutes, the following term or phrase and its derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
Village waterway is any water, waterway, lake, river, tributary, canal, lagoon or connecting water within the boundaries of the village. 
(c)  License required. Vessels shall not be operated in or on the village waterways unless properly licensed as required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(d)  U.S. Coast Guard Regulations. A vessel shall not be operated in or on village waterways unless it complies with all applicable requirements of the United States Coast Guard. 
(e)  Speed limit. The speed limit on all village waterways is established as "Idle Speed, No Wake," except as provided in section 70-3. 
(f)  Maintenance of docks. Persons controlling or occupying vessels shall at all times keep the docks, seawalls and premises adjacent to such vessels in a neat and orderly manner and free from trash, rubbish, repair parts, machinery, equipment and debris of all kinds. 
(g)  Waste disposal. Dumping of waste, including without limitation solid waste, garbage, paper, bottles, cans, refuse, debris and sanitary waste on, into or adjacent to village waterways is prohibited. 
(h)  Launching of vessels. Launching of vessels from a publicly or privately-owned property without the express authorization of the property owner, whether such property is developed or undeveloped, shall be prohibited. 
(i)  Real property owners. Real property owners or owners of real property is defined as any person or family member residing with any persons who owns real property within the municipal boundaries of the Village of Wellington. Real property owners or owners of real property shall also include trustees of a trust, partners of a partnership, or the individual designated through a corporate resolution by a corporation, where a trust, partnership or corporation entity hold title to the real property lying within the municipal boundaries of the Village of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 2-28-06)  
Sec. 70-5. - Boat ramp access. 
(a)  Use and maximum hull length. Village boat ramps shall be for the exclusive use of village residents and owners of real property lying within the village's boundaries. The maximum boat length permitted to use a village boat ramp shall be 20 feet, except that by special permit the community development department may approve a longer vessel length where that vessel is owned by a resident whose property abuts Lake Wellington and the vessel is regularly docked or anchored at the residence. 
(b)  Procedures for exclusive use, generally. The village council directs the village manager to establish the necessary procedures and safeguards to ensure that the boat ramps are utilized exclusively by village residents and owners of real property lying within the village's boundaries and to ensure the safe operation and use of boats in, on and around boat ramps. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 2, 2-28-06)  
Sec. 70-6. - License required at village owned-boat ramps. 
(a)  Parking license. Only residents of the village shall be allowed to park vehicles and boat trailers in designated parking areas at village-owned boat ramps. Such vehicles shall be required to obtain a parking license from the village, pursuant to the following regulations: 
(1)  The required licenses shall be obtained from the community services department. 
(2)  The licenses shall be renewed annually. 
(3)  The annual fee for a license shall be $25.00. This fee shall pay for administrative costs and is not refundable. 
(4)  Proof of insurance and a current registration for the vessel for which the license is intended shall be provided to the village for a new license and each year to renew a license. 
(5)  The license shall be prominently displayed on the tongue of the vessel's trailer. 
(6)  Only residents of the village, as evidenced by two types of identification, shall be allowed to obtain parking license for parking at village-owned boat ramps. 
(7)  The applicant for a parking license shall be required to sign a form indicating that he or she shall abide by the village regulations restricting gas powered engines on village waterways. This form need only be signed one time. 
(8)  Village, law enforcement and other public agency vessels shall be exempt from having to display a boat ramp license when parking at such facilities. 
(9)  Real property owners applying for a parking license shall be required to present evidence that they are the current owner of the property as is listed on the property appraisers records or in the alternative, provide a copy of a deed and current title opinion of a Florida attorney or title policy evidencing their ownership of the property. Family members living with the property owners shall be required to present an affidavit confirming they live with the property owner. 
(b)  Enforcement. The enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the village's code compliance division and the district office of the Palm Beach Sheriff's Office in the same manner as parking violations are issued pursuant to Chapter 62 of the Village of Wellington Code of Ordinances and subject to the Administrative Appeal provisions of section 62-39 of the Village of Wellington Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Penalty. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $30.00 for a first offense and $250.00 for a second offense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 3, 2-28-06)  
Chapter 71 - RENTAL DWELLING UNIT LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 2014, amended Ch. 71 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 71, §§ 71-1—71-40, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2008. 
 
Secs. 71-1—71-20. - Reserved.  
Sec. 71-21. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Department means the division of Wellington's municipal government containing the Code Compliance Division, as assigned by the village manager. 
Director means the director of the planning, zoning and building department or designee. 
Dwelling unit means the definition provided in Article 3 of Wellington's Land Development Regulations. 
License means a rental dwelling unit license. 
Owner means any legal owner of record, legal owner, person, company, corporation, firm, or similar entity owning one or more rental dwelling units and includes the authorized landlord, agent or representative of an owner. 
Rental dwelling unit means any dwelling unit that is rented for residential purposes. 
Rental dwelling unit license means the license that must be obtained by an owner prior to entering into a written lease, oral agreement or other similar instrument for the purpose of leasing one or more dwelling units. 
Serious nuisance means activities which threaten the health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or welfare of a community. 
Sexual offender means the definition as provided in section 36-41, of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sexual predator means the definition as provided in section 36-41, of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-22. - Inclusion of and requirements for authorized agents or representatives or agents. 
(a)  Each owner of one or more rental dwelling units must comply with the provisions set forth in sections 71-21 through 71-39 of this Code. An owner may appoint an agent or authorized representative to act on its behalf. Any such shall comply with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The representative or agent shall be at least 18 years of age; and 
(2)  The representative or agent shall be a resident of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
(b)  If a new or additional representative is appointed by an owner, the representative's name, address, and telephone number shall be supplied to the department by the owner within 15 days after the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-148)  
Sec. 71-23. - Exemptions. 
The following types of residential or transient dwelling units shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Any rental dwelling unit, the operation of which is licensed by the state; 
(2)  Any accessory dwelling as defined in Chapter 2 of Article 3, "Definitions", of the Land Development Regulations of the Village of Wellington; 
(3)  Any room rented for transient lodging purposes when associated with a bed and breakfast, hotel, inn, lodge, motel, or similar facility; 
(4)  Any quarters or guest quarters for employees or guests of owner; and 
(5)  Any security quarters or similar type of dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-24. - Rental dwelling unit license required. 
(a)  A license required by this chapter shall be obtained by the owner of any rental dwelling unit located within the village. Following the effective date of this ordinance, any owner of one or more rental dwelling units shall obtain a license to lease such unit. The license shall be obtained a minimum of 15 calendar days prior to the rental of such dwelling. 
(b)  A rental dwelling unit shall not be leased, rented or sublet without a rental dwelling unit license. 
(c)  Failure to obtain or maintain a rental dwelling unit license shall be subject to penalties as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-25. - Application and affidavit. 
Each year, the owner of a rental dwelling unit shall complete a rental license application and affidavit acknowledging that each rental dwelling unit and each tenant living therein shall comply with all applicable codes. 
(1)  The department shall determine the form or forms of the rental license application, but at a minimum the application shall contain the information listed below. 
a.  The name, telephone number and address of the operator, representative or agent actively managing the rental dwelling unit for which the license is required. 
b.  The legal address of the rental dwelling unit for which the license is applied. 
c.  The number of units, specific types of units, and the number of bedrooms within each rental dwelling unit. 
d.  The name, telephone number and address of the owner or owners, or partners if a partnership, or corporate officers if a corporation, for each rental dwelling unit for which a license is required. 
e.  The name, telephone number, address and name of a representative for any homeowners association or property owners association in which the rental dwelling unit is located. 
f.  The signature of the owner. 
g.  A statement that the owner has received an affidavit from the prospective tenant(s) attesting that no residents of the dwelling unit are registered as a sexual offender or a sexual predator. 
h.  A statement that the landlord has reviewed the up-to-date list of sexual offenders and sexual predators and determined that the prospective tenant or tenants are not included on the list. 
i.  An acknowledgment that the requirements of sections 36-40 through 36-44 of Wellington's Code of Ordinances relating to sexual offenders or sexual predators shall apply to all leases, subleases or rentals of dwelling units within Wellington. 
(2)  The owner of a rental dwelling unit shall execute an affidavit as part of the application to obtain a rental dwelling unit license. The affidavit shall be in a form approved by the village attorney. The affidavit shall include the following: 
a.  A statement that the owner is a aware of all code requirements applicable to residential properties, including applicable requirements of the land development regulations, and including but not limited to maintenance and appearance of residential dwellings, proper disposal of garbage and trash, proper storage of garbage cans, and proper parking of personal and commercial vehicles; 
b.  A statement that the owner will comply with code requirements applicable to residential properties, including applicable requirements of the land development regulations, and including but not limited to maintenance and appearance of residential dwellings, proper disposal of garbage and trash, proper storage of garbage cans, and proper parking of personal and commercial vehicles; and 
c.  A statement that the owner will inform all tenants of code requirements applicable to residential properties, including applicable requirements of the land development regulations, and including but not limited to maintenance and appearance of residential dwellings, proper disposal of garbage and trash, proper storage of garbage cans, and proper parking of personal and commercial vehicles. 
(3)  The inspection of the premises will include an inspection of the landscaping to determine if the landscaping is being maintained in accordance with the approved plans and the village's land development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-26. - Rental dwelling unit license fee and license renewal. 
(a)  Rental dwelling unit licenses shall be renewed each year not later than October 1. An application for renewal shall be filed with the department at least 60 calendar days prior to October 1 of each year. For an existing unit for which ownership has not changed, no license renewal fee shall be charged if the renewal application is received timely. If a renewal application is not received timely a late penalty of $37.50 shall be charged if the application is received in October and an additional $7.50 per month shall be charged for every additional month or any portion thereof, beyond November 1 of each year. This late penalty shall be in addition to any fines that may be assessed as a result of code enforcement action as provided in Chapter 2, Article IV of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In the event ownership of the rental dwelling unit changes, the new owner shall submit to the village an initial application in accordance with subsection (a) above, within 30 days from the date of such ownership transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-27. - Rental dwelling unit inspection. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a properly completed license application or renewal license application and all required affidavits and fees, an inspection shall been be conducted to determine if the dwelling unit is in conformance with all applicable rules and regulations of the village and county, state or federal governments. The inspection shall include, but not be limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Exterior condition and appearance of the dwelling unit, yard, accessory buildings and any other associated structure; 
(2)  Facilities for the proper disposal of rubbish, garbage and vegetative matter; 
(3)  Review of and compliance with property maintenance standards, as established in the Code of Ordinances and the land development regulations; 
(4)  Such other items as may be appropriate to the individual rental dwelling unit, as determined by the director; and 
(5)  Compliance with applicable landscape standards or requirements. 
(b)  Thereafter, each rental dwelling unit shall be inspected annually, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-28. - Maintenance of structures and property. 
(a)  All structures and property shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable standards and requirements of the Code of Ordinances, the land development regulations and the Florida Building Code. The procedures for enforcement of all codes and regulations, as provided in section 30-55 of the Code of Ordinances, is modified as indicated below. 
(b)  Each owner of rental property shall, if required by the village, label all garbage cans and recycling bins with the address or address and unit number to which the cans and bins are assigned. Garbage cans and recycling bins shall be labeled within 30 calendar days of written notification by the village of this requirement. 
(c)  The owner shall be responsible for any violation of village requirements regarding the following: 
(1)  Times and locations when garbage cans, bulk waste, and recycling bins are to be set out for disposal and taken in following pickup; and 
(2)  The location and screening of garbage cans and recycling bins. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-29. - Consent to inspection. 
The submission of a license application shall constitute consent to and authorization by the owner of the premises to the conduction of an inspection by the village of the exterior of all buildings or structures containing the rental dwelling unit, the land upon which the rental dwelling unit is located and accessory uses or structures related to the rental dwelling. Failure to allow entry to property for a required inspection may constitute sufficient reason for the denial or revocation of the rental dwelling unit license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-30. - Reinspection fees. 
If a department inspector or representative notices a violation during the rental dwelling unit inspection, the inspector or representative shall reinspect the premises to confirm that the violations have been corrected. If the violations have not been corrected within the timeframe provided in a in a notice an additional fee in the amount of $50.00 shall be assessed for each succeeding reinspection, until compliance has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-31. - Transfer prohibited. 
A rental dwelling unit license shall not be transferred to another rental dwelling unit owner. Each owner with a rental dwelling unit shall provide written notice to the department within 24 hours after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed rental dwelling unit. Following notification, the new owner shall apply for a new license within 30 days of such transfer. An inspection of the rental dwelling unit is required following the transfer of ownership. Transfer of ownership shall not eliminate the requirement for the annual inspection of a rental dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-32. - Suspension, revocation and reinstatement of license. 
(a)  The department may suspend or revoke a rental dwelling unit license or deny an application for a license based upon any of the following: 
(1)  If the license was issued in error or if the license was issued on the basis of false, incomplete, incorrect or inaccurate information supplied in an application; 
(2)  If the license was issued for a rental dwelling unit that was sold or transferred to a new owner, and the new owner did not apply for a license within the required period of time; 
(3)  If the department determines the use of the dwelling unit constitutes a nuisance or is in violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the village, county, state or federal government; 
(4)  If the owner has failed to or refused to pay fees to the village for required applications, or inspections; 
(5)  If the owner or applicant has failed to comply with any conditions set forth in any permit or development order granted by the village; 
(6)  If the activities of person(s) residing within a rental dwelling unit create or have created a serious nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(7)  If the owner fails to comply with all applicable portions of the code relating to renting or leasing a residence to sexual offenders or sexual predators. 
(b)  The owner of record will be notified of the suspension or revocation by the department via registered mail return receipt requested. 
(c)  When requested by the department and approved by the director, upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation the property owner may be required to: 
(1)  Within 15 calendar days of the notification of suspension or revocation, submit a management plan to the department for the dwelling to achieve full compliance within the timeframe provided by Wellington's regulations, or such other time as the department finds reasonable. Upon approval by the department, the management plan shall be instituted by the owner within 30 calendar days, and; 
(2)  Maintain the rental dwelling unit so that it does not violate any additional applicable code provisions or nuisance activities during the timeframe of the management plan. The rental dwelling unit may be offered for rent during the timeframe of the management plan. 
(d)  Upon completion of the management plan and provided the rental dwelling unit is in compliance with the provisions set forth herein and all applicable code provisions, the owner may submit a written request to the department for reinstatement of the license. The request shall be accompanied by a fee of $75.00 per license. 
(e)  Failure to comply with applicable code provisions or continued nuisance activities during the timeframe of the management plan may result in revocation of the rental dwelling unit license. 
(f)  Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a rental dwelling unit license, a dwelling until shall be vacated within 30 calendar days from the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(g)  Appeals shall be submitted pursuant to section 71-38, Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-33. - Prohibited rentals. 
The rental of real property for permanent or temporary residential purposes to sexual offenders and sexual predators that does not comply with all requirements of Chapter 36, Article IV, of the Code of Ordinances is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-34. - Penalties. 
Any owner, owner's representative, person or tenant violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement as provided in Article IV, Chapter 2, of the Code of Ordinances or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-35. - Alternative to licensure and inspection. 
(a)  As an alternative to the licensure and inspection requirements of this chapter, the owner of large scale rental property may register, on an annual basis, as the provider of rental dwelling units, subject to the standards of this section. Registration is required on an annual basis, and is subject to each requirement of this section. Registration as the provider of rental dwelling units may occur if an applicant for registration complies with each of the standards listed below. 
(1)  The provider owns, manages or operates a rental dwelling complex containing at least 50 dwelling units. 
(2)  The rental dwelling unit complex is located on a compact, contiguous property, and is operated as a single entity, with common entries, management, amenities, etc. 
(3)  The provider is responsible for ongoing upkeep, maintenance and repair of all structures, dwellings, landscaping, grounds, amenities and similar common features. 
(4)  The provider provides proof of management by a bonded management company. 
(5)  The provider signs an affidavit that each unit complies with and is maintained in accordance with all applicable land development regulations and with all applicable building, landscaping, appearance, property maintenance codes and requirements adopted by the village. The affidavit shall allow the village to enter and inspect the exterior of the rental dwelling complex if the village believes the complex does not comply with applicable regulations, codes and requirements. 
(6)  The provider agrees to allow the village an inspection, as part of the initial registration process, to ensure compliance with all applicable land development regulations and with all applicable building, landscaping, appearance and property maintenance codes and requirements adopted by the village. 
(7)  The provider completes the registration form. The registration shall be established by the department, and shall include but is not limited to such information as the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, the registered agent or representative, the management company, the onsite manager and the emergency contact for the complex. 
(8)  The provider pays an annual registration fee of $1,000.00 or as otherwise established by resolution of the village council. 
(9)  The provider agrees to comply with all applicable portions of Chapter 36, Article IV, of this Code regarding permanent or temporary rental of a dwelling unit to a sexual offender or sexual predator. 
(b)  Once a rental dwelling complex is registered, then the complex is exempt from each of the following: 
(1)  Obtaining an annual license for each rental dwelling unit; 
(2)  Complying with other requirements applicable to rental dwelling complexes of less than 50 units. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-36. - Reliance upon license or inspection. 
The license and inspection required by this chapter are not a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the village with respect to the fitness of the dwelling for residential purposes or that the dwelling unit complies with all applicable village, county, state or federal codes and requirements. There shall be no reliance by any person on the rental license as to the condition of such dwelling unit. Each lease for a rental dwelling unit executed within the village shall contain a statement substantially in the form of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-37. - Access to change of occupancy records. 
The owner shall make available to the department any rental record necessary to determine when changes of occupancy have occurred. The records shall be made available within not more than two weeks after a written request by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-38. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the suspension, denial or revocation of a rental dwelling license by the department may appeal to the special magistrate, as established in section 2-203 of the Code of Ordinances. The decision of the department shall be provided in writing to the owner of the rental dwelling unit within ten calendar days after the decision has been made. An appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days following receipt of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 71-39. - Other remedies. 
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Village of Wellington from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 12-9-14)  
Chapter 72 - MORTGAGED REAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-02, § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, amended Ch. 72 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 72, §§ 72-1—72-10, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-21, § 2, adopted Jan. 8, 2013. 
 
Sec. 72-1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a process to mitigate the number of deteriorating properties located within Wellington for which a public notice of default or lis pendens has been filed, is in foreclosure, or where ownership has been transferred to a lender or mortgagee by any legal method. It is further intended to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance of properties subject to mortgages that are in default. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where the context will permit and no definitions are provided herein, the definitions provided in the Florida Building Code shall apply. 
Accessible property means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. 
Accessible structure means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
Default means that the mortgagee files a public notice of default on the mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in default at such time as the mortgagee declares said mortgage to be in default, by recording a lis pendens. 
Enforcement officer means any fulltime law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by, contracted for, or servicing Wellington. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, electricity, water or other utilities turned off, stagnant swimming pool, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence. 
Foreclosure means the judicial process by which a property, placed as security for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted. 
Local property manager means an individual property manager, property management company, property maintenance company or similar entity located within Palm Beach County, designated by the owner or mortgagee which is responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property. 
Mortgagee means any party holding a mortgage interest regardless of their priority. 
Public property means canals, all waterways, lands and improvements owned by a governmental body or any governmental agency including but not limited to easements and rights-of-way, but excluding the campus of any institution of the state university system. 
Residential building means any improved real property or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. 
Vacant means any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter relates to property subject to a mortgage that has been determined by the mortgagee to be in default. This chapter shall be considered cumulative and is not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but shall rather be an additional remedy available to Wellington above and beyond any other state, county and/or local provisions for same. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-4. - Penalties. 
Unless exempted by 12 U.S.C. § 4617(a)(7), any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of Wellington's Code of Ordinances, as applicable. In addition, any violation of this section may be enforced by Wellington's Special Master as provided in Chapter 2, Article IV, of Wellington's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-5. - Registration of real property mortgagee holding mortgages in default. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within Wellington shall within ten days of a recording of lis pendens by the mortgagee, register the property with Wellington. 
(b)  Registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail address, and telephone number and name of the local property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. The local property manager shall be responsible to inspect, secure and maintain the property. The property manager named in the registration shall be located within Palm Beach County and available to be contacted by Wellington, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours excepted. 
(c)  The village council shall establish, by resolution, fees for the registration and re-registration requirements required by this article. Except as provided by 12 U.S.C. § 4617(a)(7), said fees shall be based on the reasonable estimated cost of administering the provisions of this article and shall be due and payable at the time of registration or re-registration. The fee schedule may be based on the size and type of property being registered. The registration shall be renewed 12 months from the initial registration date annually. Wellington may assign and delegate the collection of such fee to an independent contractor, as noted on the registration form. 
(d)  Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
[(e)  Reserved.] 
(f)  Inspections and obligations of properties subject to this section shall remain in place so long as the mortgagee is involved in a foreclosure action. At such time that a foreclosure action is completed the mortgagee shall notify Wellington or its designee of the new owner's name and mailing address. 
(g)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly register or to revise from time to time the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this chapter is a violation of the Codes of Wellington and may result in a citation by the Code Compliance Division. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special master that any property is in violation of Wellington's ordinances, Wellington may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinance. Except as provided by 12 U.S.C. § 4617(a)(7), such steps may include placing a lien(s) on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and to bring it into compliance, which lien may be assigned to either the entity that performs the work or arranges to have the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-6. - Maintenance requirements. 
Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within Wellington and subject to this chapter shall take all reasonable actions including to obtain permission from the courts, if necessary, to secure and maintain properties as outlined in sections 72-6 and 72-7: 
(a)  Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or not being properly maintained. Weeds, overgrown brush or dead vegetation over the height limitations imposed by Wellington's Codes are prohibited. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in the Code. Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial or industrial installation, as applicable. Landscaping shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(c)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings and weeds. 
(d)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that pool and spa water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of Wellington's Codes and the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of Wellington and may result in the issuance of a citation by the Code Compliance Division. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special master, Wellington may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinances and place a lien(s) on the property and, except as provided in 12 U.S.C. § 4617(a)(7), may assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-7. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A " secure manner " shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child or adult to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or boarding. 
(c)  If a mortgage on the property is in default on the property and has become vacant or abandoned, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the Code of Ordinances and the local property manager must perform bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws or Codes of Wellington. 
(d)  When the property becomes vacant or abandoned, it shall be posted with the name and 24 hour contact telephone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches × 24 inches, and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet. The posting shall contain the following language: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY (Name of Local Property Manager). TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (Telephone number of Local Property Manager). 
(e)  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posing in a location that is at all times visual from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(f)  The local property manager shall inspect the property on a bi-weekly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance with this section. Upon the request of Wellington, or its authorized representative, the local property manager shall provide a copy of the inspection reports to the Code Compliance Division. 
(g)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure the property, and post and maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation of this chapter and shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation by a code compliance officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by a special master, Wellington may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section, and except as provided in 12 U.S.C. § 4617(a)(7), may place a lien(s) on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-8. - Additional authority. 
Wellington's Code Compliance Manager, designee, or Wellington's authorized representative shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all door, window or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-9. - Adoption of rules; expenditure of funds; declaration of municipal purpose. 
The manager, consistent with his/her assigned duties and authorities under the Charter, including those duties and authorities relating to emergency situations, is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations and expend Wellington funds as may be reasonably necessary and available to carry out the terms of this section, the expenditure of such funds being declared a proper municipal purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 72-10. - Supplemental provisions. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit Wellington from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by Code. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 1, 2-26-19)  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are franchise ordinances, as adopted by the village council. Amendments to the ordinances are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(4); cable communications, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Franchise for private companies, rate fixing, F.S. § 180.14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Ordinance No. 98-33 
An ordinance of the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida, granting to Florida Power & Light Company, its successors and assigns, an electric franchise within the incorporated area of the village; imposing provisions and conditions relating to such franchise; providing for acceptance by Florida Power & Light; providing for an effective date; providing for repeal of ordinances in conflict; providing for ratification of prior ordinances in the event franchise not accepted; and for other purposes. 
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida, that: 
 
Section 1. - Grant of franchise; duration; scope; purpose. 
There is hereby granted to Florida Power & Light Company, its successors and assigns (hereinafter called "Grantee") for the period of 30 years, commencing June 25, 1996, the nonexclusive right, privilege and franchise (hereinafter called "franchise") to construct, operate and maintain in, under, upon, along, over and across the present and future roads, streets, alleys, bridges, easements, and rights-of-way, and other public places owned by the Village of Wellington (hereinafter called "public rights-of-way") throughout all of the incorporated areas, as such incorporated areas may be constituted from time to time, of the Village of Wellington, Florida, and its successors (hereinafter called "grantor") in accordance with the grantee's customary practice with respect to construction and maintenance, electric light and power facilities, including conduits, poles, wires, transmission and distribution lines, and all other facilities installed in conjunction with or ancillary to all of the grantee's electric light and power operations (hereinafter called "facilities"), for the purpose of supplying electricity and other services related to the supply of electricity to the grantor, its successors, and persons within and beyond the boundaries thereof.  
Section 2. - Installation or location of facilities; interference with public rights-of-way. 
The facilities of the grantee shall be installed, located or relocated so as not to unreasonably interfere with drainage canals in public rights-of-way which existed prior to the installation of grantee's facilities, or with traffic over the public rights-of-way or with reasonable egress from and ingress to abutting property. To avoid conflict with such drainage canals and traffic, the location or relocation of all facilities shall be made as representatives of the grantee may prescribe in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations with reference to the placing and maintaining in, under, upon, along, over and across said public rights-of-way; provided, however, that such rules or regulations shall not prohibit the grantee's use of said public rights-of-way or unreasonably interfere with the grantee's ability to furnish reasonably sufficient, adequate and efficient electric service to all of its customers. When any portion of a street is excavated by the grantee in the location or relocation of any of its facilities, the portion of the street so excavated shall within a reasonable time be replaced by the grantee at its expense and in as good condition as it was at the time of such excavation and in compliance with the standards under which the street was originally constructed. Grantor shall not be liable to the grantee for any cost or expense in connection with such location or relocation of grantee's facilities made necessary by the grantor's improvement of any of the present and future public rights-of-way used or occupied by the grantee hereunder, except, however, the grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its costs from funds available from sources other than the grantor as may be provided by law and for costs resulting from improvement of any drainage canal not in existence on the effective date hereof.  
Section 3. - Liability of grantor. 
The grantor shall in no way be liable or responsible for any accident or damage that may occur in the construction, operation or maintenance by the grantee of its electric facilities hereunder, and the acceptance of this ordinance shall be deemed an agreement on the part of the grantee to indemnify the grantor and hold it harmless against any and all liability, loss, cost, damage, or expense which may accrue to the grantor by reason of the existence of grantee's facilities in the public rights-of-way or negligence, default or misconduct of the grantee in the construction, operation, or maintenance of its electric facilities hereunder.  
Section 4. - Rates, rules and regulations of grantee. 
All rates, rules and regulations established by the grantee from time to time shall at all times be reasonable and the grantee's rates for electricity shall at all times be subject to such regulation as may be provided by law.  
Section 5. - Payment for rights and privileges by grantee. 
As a consideration for this franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor no later than the end of Florida Power & Light Company's first monthly billing period ending after the effective date of this ordinance and no later than the end of each succeeding monthly billing period during the term of franchise, an amount which added to the amount of all licenses, excises, fees, charges, and other impositions of any kind whatsoever (except ad valorem property taxes and nonad valorem tax assessments on property) levied or imposed by the grantor against Florida Power & Light Company's property, business or operations and those of its subsidiaries during Florida Power & Light Company's monthly billing period ending 30 days prior to each such payment will equal five percent of Florida Power & Light Company's billed revenues, less actual writeoffs, from the sale of electrical energy to residential, commercial and industrial customers within the incorporated areas of the grantor for the monthly billing period ending 30 days prior to each such payment, and in no event shall payment for the rights and privileges granted in the franchise exceed five percent of such revenues for any monthly billing period of Florida Power & Light Company.  
Section 6. - Considerations of grantor. 
As a further consideration of this franchise, the grantor agrees (a) not to engage in the business of distributing and selling electricity at retail during the term of this franchise or any extension thereof in competition with the grantee and (b) not to itself distribute, or seek to have the grantee transmit and/or distribute, electric power generated by or on behalf of the grantor at one location to the grantor's or any other retail customer's facilities at any other location(s).  
Section 7. - Termination of franchise by grantee—Upon other grantees receiving more favorable conditions; notice. 
If the grantor grants a right, privilege or franchise to any other person or otherwise enables any other such person to construct, operate or maintain electric light and power facilities within any part of the incorporated areas of the grantor in which the grantee may lawfully serve or compete on terms and conditions that the grantee considers more favorable than the terms and conditions contained herein, the grantee may at any time thereafter terminate this franchise. Such termination shall be effective on the last day of the month in which written notice termination is delivered to the grantor's clerk. Such notice shall, without prejudice to any of the rights reserved for the grantee herein, inform the grantor of such terms and conditions.  
Section 8. - Same—Upon competitive disadvantage; notice. 
If as a direct or indirect consequence of any legislative, regulatory or other action by the United State of America or the State of Florida (or any department, agency, authority, instrumentality or political subdivision of either of them) any person is permitted to provide electric service within the incorporated areas of the grantor to a customer then being served by the grantee, or to any new applicant for electric service within any part of the incorporated areas of the grantor in which the grantee may lawfully serve, and the grantee determines that its obligations hereunder, or otherwise resulting from this franchise in respect to rates and service, place it at a competitive disadvantage with respect to such other person, the grantee may, at any time after the taking of such action, terminate this franchise. Such termination shall be effective on the last day of the month in which written notice of termination is delivered to the grantor's clerk. Such notice shall, without prejudice to any of the rights reserved for the grantee herein, inform the grantor of the circumstances which resulted in the exercise of its right to terminate.  
Section 9. - Failure of grantee to comply with ordinance; forfeiture; appeal; time for compliance. 
Failure on the part of the grantee to comply in any substantial respect with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be grounds for forfeiture of this grant, but no such forfeiture shall take effect if the reasonableness or propriety thereof is protested by the grantee until there is final determination (after the expiration or exhaustion of all rights of appeal) by a court of competent jurisdiction that the grantee has failed to comply in a substantial respect with any of the provisions of this franchise, and the grantee shall, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than six months after such final determination, make good the default before a forfeiture shall result with the right in the grantor at its discretion to grant such additional time to the grantee for compliance as necessities in the case require.  
Section 10. - Failure of grantor to comply; remedy of breach; withholding of payments. 
Failure on the part of the grantor to comply in any substantial respect with any of the provisions of this ordinance, including: 
(a)  Denying the grantee use of public rights-of-way for reasons other than unreasonable interference with traffic, drainage system use, operation or maintenance; 
(b)  Imposing conditions for use of public rights-of-way contrary to Florida law and contrary to FPL's standard practices; or 
(c)  Unreasonable delay in the issuance of a permit, if any, to construct its facilities in public rights-of-way, 
shall constitute a breach of this franchise. Grantee shall notify the grantor of any such breach in writing and the grantor shall remedy such breach as soon as practicable and in any event by not later than 90 days. Should the breach remain unresolved after 90 days, FPL, at its the sole discretion, may withhold all or part of the payments provided for in section 5 hereof until such time as the breach is remedied or a court of competent jurisdiction has reached a final determination in the matter. Grantor recognizes and agrees that nothing in this franchise constitutes or shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of the grantee's delegated sovereign right of condemnation and that the grantee, in its sole discretion, may exercise such right to obtain a greater right than is granted herein.  
Section 11. - Examination of grantee's records by grantor; audit requirements. 
Grantor may, upon reasonable notice and within 90 days after each anniversary date of this franchise, at grantor's expense, examine the records of the grantee relating to the calculation of the franchise payment for the year preceding such anniversary date. Such examination shall be during normal business hours at the grantee's office where such records are maintained. Records not prepared by the grantee in the ordinary course of business may be provided at the grantor's expense and as the grantor and the grantee may agree in writing. Information identifying the grantee's customers by name or their electric consumption shall not be taken from the grantee's premises. Such audit shall be impartial and all audit findings, whether they decrease or increase payment to the grantor, shall be reported to the grantee. The grantor's right to examine the records of the grantee in accordance with this section shall not be conducted by any third party employed by the grantor whose fee for conducting such audit is contingent on findings of the audit.  
Section 12. - Interdependent nature of ordinance provisions. 
The provisions of this ordinance are interdependent upon one another, and if any of the provisions of this ordinance are found or adjudged to be invalid, illegal, void or of no effect, the entire ordinance shall be null and void and of no further force or effect.  
Section 13. - Person defined. 
As used herein, "person" means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a business trust, a joint stock company, a trust, an unincorporated association, a joint venture, a governmental authority, or any other entity of whatever nature.  
Section 14. - Conflicting ordinances repealed. 
The grantee shall file its acceptance of the franchise with the grantor's clerk within 30 days of adoption hereof. The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date upon which the grantee files such acceptance.  
Section 15. - Acceptance deadline; effective date. 
Once the grantee files its acceptance of the franchise granted herein, this ordinance shall replace Ordinance No. 96-17, as modified by Ordinance No. 97-07, and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Until grantor files its acceptance of this franchise, the franchise granted by Ordinance No. 96-17, as modified by Ordinance No. 97-07, shall remain in full force and effect and is hereby ratified.  
DIVISION 2. - PAYMENT TO VILLAGE INCREASED 
Ordinance No. 97-07 
An ordinance of the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida, exercising the option to adjust the amount to be paid by Florida Power & Light Company to the Village of Wellington pursuant to Ordinance No. 96-17, The Electric Franchise Ordinance; providing for an effective date and for other purposes. 
Whereas, the Village of Wellington, Florida, adopted Ordinance No. 96-17 granting an electric franchise to Florida Power & Light Company on June 25, 1996; and 
Whereas, Florida Power & Light Company accepted the electric franchise Ordinance No. 96-17 on June 25, 1996; and 
Whereas, said franchise ordinance provides that the Village of Wellington shall have the option to adjust the amount to be paid by Florida Power & Light Company to the Village of Wellington beginning with the first monthly payment made after October 1, 1997; and 
Whereas, the Village of Wellington desires to exercise its option to adjust the amount to be paid by Florida Power & Light Company. 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida, that: 
 
Section 1. - Increase of payment option exercised. 
The Village of Wellington hereby exercises its option pursuant to section 5 of Ordinance No. 96-17 to increase to five percent the amount to be paid to the Village of Wellington by Florida Power & Light Company, beginning with the first monthly payment made after October 1, 1997.  
Section 2. - Due date of payment; limit on amount. 
Florida Power & Light Company shall pay to the Village of Wellington no later than the end of Florida Power & Light Company's first monthly billing period ending after October 1, 1997, and no later than the end of each succeeding monthly billing period during the term of the franchise, an amount which added to the amount of all licenses, excises, fees, charges and other impositions of any kind whatsoever (except ad valorem property taxes and nonad valorem tax assessments on property) levied or imposed by the Village of Wellington against Florida Power & Light Company's property, business or operations and those of its subsidiaries during Florida Power & Light Company's monthly billing period ending 30 days prior to each such payment will equal five percent of Florida Power & Light Company's billed revenues, less actual writeoffs, from the sale of electrical energy to residential, commercial and industrial customers within the incorporated areas of the Village of Wellington for the monthly billing period ending 30 days prior to each such payment, and in no event shall payment for the rights and privileges granted in the franchise exceed five percent of such revenues for any monthly billing period of Florida Power & Light Company following this exercise of the Village of Wellington's option.  
Section 3. - Notice to grantee. 
The Village of Wellington Clerk is hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this ordinance to Florida Power & Light Company no later than 90 days prior to October 1, 1997.  
Section 4. - Effective date of ordinance. 
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption [April 29, 1997].  
ARTICLE II. - FLORIDA PUBLIC UTILITIES COMPANY 
 
Sec. 1. - Gas franchise agreement. 
A franchise agreement has been entered into whereunder the village has franchised, licensed, and permitted Florida Public Utilities Company, a Florida for profit company to dispense gas to all residents or occupants of premises within the village as requested. This franchise agreement shall remain in effect to May 24, 2035, at which time it will be subject to an automatic six month Nov. 24, 2035 extension privilege unless either the franchisee or village elects not to so extend. Copies of the franchise agreement are available for review and inspection with the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2005-15, § 1, 5-24-05) 


LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS OF VILLAGE OF WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the Village Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
(2019) 
____________ 
Anne Gerwig 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Drahos, Vice Mayor 
John T. McGovern 
Michael J. Napoleone 
Tanya Siskind 
Village Council 
____________ 
Paul Schofield 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Laurie S. Cohen 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Chevelle D. Nubin, MMC 
Village Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
WELLINGTON, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS PUBLICATION 
____________ 
Darell Bowen 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carmine Priore, Vice Mayor 
Lizbeth Benacquisto 
Matt Willhite 
Howard K. Coates, Jr. 
Village Council 
____________ 
Paul Schofield 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Jeffery S. Kurtz 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Awilda Rodriguez 
Village Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This volume is a publication of the Land Development Regulations of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
    Source materials for this publication is Ordinance No. 2005-16 adopted June 28, 2005. 
    The Code has been printed as adopted and the original numbering system has been retained. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected without notation; words or phrases added by the editor for purposes of clarification are enclosed in brackets. 
Amendatory Legislation 
    A feature of this publication that is particularly useful is the Code Comparative Table. Any amendatory legislation may be located therein by number and date of enactment, and the sections or subsections amended will be listed. In addition, the sources of any amendments to the Code are listed in a parenthetical history note following the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section derives unamended from the Land Development Regulations as originally adopted. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this volume is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE LDR1:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE LDRCT:1 INDEX LDRi:1  
Index 
    As part of the publication project, a comprehensive index was prepared. Each particular subject has been placed under several headings, some couched in lay phraseology and others in legal terminology. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    Another special feature of this volume is the supplemental service, by which the publication will be kept up to date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendments, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages can be distributed to holders of copies of the publication with instructions for the manner of inserting the pages and deleting the obsolete pages. The instruction sheet for the most current supplement should be placed in the front of the volume, and it is recommended that deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of A. Lawton Langford, Corporate President, and Pattie F. Smith, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Awilda Rodriguez, Village Clerk and Tamika Rogers, Assistant to the Village Clerk for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wellington, Florida. 2009. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of these Land Development Regulations will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 2008-16  5-26-2009 Omit 1 2009-09  9-15-2009 Omit 1 2009-10 10-27-2009 Include 1 2009-12  7-14-2009 Include 1 2009-14  9-15-2009 Omit 1 Supp. No. 2 2008-20  7-14-2009 Omit 2 2009-13  8-11-2009 Include 2 2009-16  1-27-2010 Omit 2 2009-17  1-12-2010 Include 2 2010-05  4-27-2010 Include 2 2010-07  8-31-2010 Omit 2 2010-08  4-27-2010 Include 2 2010-09  8-31-2010 Omit 2 2010-10  5-25-2010 Include 2 2010-11  6- 8-2010 Omit 2 2010-14  6- 8-2010 Include 2 2010-21 12-14-2010 Include 2 2010-22 12-14-2010 Include 2 2010-25  1-11-2011 Omit 2 Supp. No. 3 2011-02  4-12-2011 Omit 3 2011-04  5-24-2011 Include 3 2011-06  5-24-2011 Omit 3 Supp. No. 4 2012-09  7-10-2012 Include 4 Supp. No. 5 2009-16 11-24-2009 Include 5 2012-03  2-14-2012 Include 5 2012-06  4-10-2012 Include 5 2012-10 10- 9-2012 Omit 5 Supp. No. 6 2013-01  5-14-2013 Include 6 2013-02  5-14-2013 Omit 6 2013-03  5-14-2013 Include 6 2013-04  4- 9-2013 Omit 6 2013-07  4- 9-2013 Omit 6 Supp. No. 7 2012-11 11-13-2012 Omit 7 2013-11  9-10-2013 Include 7 2013-14  9-24-2013 Omit 7 Supp. No. 8 2014-04  4-22-2014 Include 8 Supp. No. 9 2014-06  9-23-2014 Include 9 2014-09  7- 8-2014 Omit 9 2014-20  9-23-2014 Omit 9 2014-22 11-11-2014 Omit 9 2014-23  8-26-2014 Include 9 2014-25 11-11-2014 Include 9 2014-30  9-23-2014 Omit 9 Supp. No. 10 2014-21 11-25-2014 Omit 10 2014-26  3-10-2015 Omit 10 2014-27  1-13-2015 Include 10 2015-01  3-24-2015 Include 10 2015-02  5-12-2015 Include 10 Supp. No. 11 2015-04 10-27-2015 Include 11 2015-08 10-27-2015 Include 11 2015-13  1-12-2016 Omit 11 Supp. No. 12 2016-03  4-12-2016 Omit 12 2016-20  9-13-2016 Include 12 2016-21  9-27-2016 Omit 12 Supp. No. 13 2016-09 12-13-2016 Include 13 2016-12  9-27-2016 Include 13 2016-16  2-28-2017 Omit 13 2016-17  2-28-2017 Include 13 Supp. No. 14 2016-08 12-13-2016 Omit 14 2017-07  6-13-2017 Include 14 2017-09  8-22-2017 Include 14 2017-11  9-26-2017 Include 14 Supp. No. 15 2017-20 10-24-2017 Omit 15 2017-21  1- 8-2018 Include 15 2018-08  1-23-2018 Omit 15 Supp. No. 16 2018-09  9-25-2018 Omit 16  
Article 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2005-16 adopted June 28 2005 adopted the Land Development Regulations as set out herein. The Exhibit A Location Map is set out herein. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 1.1.1. - Title and citation. 
    This Code shall be known as the "Land Development Regulations" and may also be cited and referred to herein as this "Code" or the "LDR". 

(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 6-28-2005) 
Sec. 1.1.2. - Authority. 
    The Village Council has the authority to adopt this Code pursuant to Article VIII, Sec. 1(f), Fla. Const., Sec. 125.01, et seq, .Fla. Stat., Sec. 163.3161, et. seq. Fla. Stat., Rule 9J-5, Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.), Rule 9J-24, F.A.C., and such other authorities and provisions that are established in the statutory or common law in the State of Florida. 
Sec. 1.1.3. - Findings. 
    The Village Council hereby makes the following findings: 
A.  Village of Wellington, pursuant to Sec. 163.3161, et. seq., Fla. Stat., the Florida Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act (hereinafter the "Act"), is required to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  After adoption of the Comprehensive Plan, the Act, and in particular Sec. 163.3202(1), Fla. Stat., mandates that the Village implement the adopted Comprehensive Plan with land development regulations that are consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Sec. 163.3194(1)(b), Fla. Stat., requires that all land development regulations enacted or amended by The Village shall be consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and any land development regulations existing at the time of adoption which are not consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, shall be amended so as to be consistent. 
D.  Sec. 163.3194(1)(a), Fla. Stat., mandates that after a Comprehensive Plan has been adopted in conformity with the Act, all development undertaken by, and all actions taken in regard to development orders by, governmental agencies in regard to land covered by the Comprehensive Plan shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Pursuant to Sec. 163.3194(3)(a), Fla. Stat., a development order to land development regulations shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan if the land uses, densities or intensities, and other aspects of development permitted by such order or regulation are compatible with and further the objectives, policies, land uses, and densities or intensities in the Comprehensive Plan and if it meets all other criteria enumerated by the local government. 
F.  Sec. 163.3194(3)(b), Fla. Stat., states that a development approved or undertaken by a local government shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan if the land uses, densities or intensities, capacity or size, timing and other aspects of development are compatible with and further the objectives, policies, land uses, densities or intensities in the Comprehensive Plan and if it meets all other criteria enumerated by the local government. 
G.  In 1998, the Village adopted the Village Comprehensive Plan (hereinafter) the "Comprehensive Plan") as its Comprehensive Plan Pursuant to the requirements of Sec. 163.3161 et. seq., Fla. Stat., and Rule 9J-5, F.A.C. 
H.  This Code is adopted to implement the Comprehensive Plan. It is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, in part, because the land uses, densities, or intensities, capacity of size, timing, and other aspects of development permitted, further the objectives, policies, land uses, and densities and intensities in the Comprehensive Plan, and meet all other criteria enumerated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
I.  This Code is also adopted to preserve and enhance the present advantages that exist in the Village; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water, and natural resources, consistent with the public interest; overcome present handicaps, and deal effectively with future problems that may result from the use and development of land; prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water, sewage, drainage, solid waste, parks, schools, fire and police facilities; conserve, develop, utilize, and protect natural resources; protect human, environmental, social, and economic resources; and maintain, through orderly growth and development, the community character and stability of present and future land uses and development in The Village. 
Sec. 1.1.4. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Implementation of Comprehensive Plan. It is the purpose of the Village Council that this Code implement and ensure that all development orders approved in the Village are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Comprehensive and consistent regulations. It is also the purpose of the Village Council that this Code establish comprehensive and consistent standards and procedures for the review and approval of all proposed development of land in The Village. 
C.  Efficient and effective regulations. It is the further purpose of the Village Council that the development review, approval, and permitting process under this Code be efficient, in term of time and expense, effective, in terms of addressing the natural resource and public facility implications of proposed development, and equitable, in terms of consistency with established regulations and procedures, respect for the rights of property owners, and consideration of the interest of the citizens of The Village. 
CHAPTER 2. - RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
    The adoption of this Code is consistent with, compatible with and furthers the goals, objectives, policies, land uses, and densities or intensities in the Comprehensive Plan. 
CHAPTER 3. - APPLICABILITY 
    The provisions of this Code shall apply to the development of all land in the Village, except as expressly and specifically provided otherwise in this Code. No development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this Code. 
CHAPTER 4. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
    The provisions of this Code are the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Code and implement and ensure consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
CHAPTER 5. - EXEMPTIONS; EFFECT OF CODE AND AMENDMENTS OF PREVIOUSLY APPROVED DEVELOPMENT ORDERS 

Sec. 1.5.1. - General. 
    As provided in this Section, the provisions of this Code and any amendments hereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully approved development order approved prior to the effective date of this Code if the development order remains valid. Specifically, uses, site design elements and tabular data shown on a valid building permit, a certified master plan or site plan, or an approved subdivision plan or land development permit will not be subject to LDR provisions for any information clearly shown. 
Sec. 1.5.2. - Subsequent Development Orders and Applications in Process. 
A.  General. The section establishes a procedure which honors previously approved development orders and the associated site elements and requires that subsequent development orders comply with this Code. This section recognizes that conflicts may arise when a development previously approved has not obtained a final development order. In cases of such conflict, the Planning & Zoning Director and the Village Engineer shall advise an applicant to what extent this Code shall be applied. The Planning & Zoning Director and the Village Engineer shall apply the standards of this Code to the greatest extent physically possible given the constraints of the site, the constraints of the existing valid plats of record, the provisions of this section, and the need to mitigate impacts to assure compatibility. 
B.  No final development order. Projects with a valid development order which are required to have but do not have either: (1) a certified master plan or site plan, or (2) an approved subdivision plan or land development permit, may apply for certification or approval of the subsequent development permit as provided herein. Uses or site design elements not specifically shown on an approved plan shall be required to comply with this Code, or any amendments hereto, for the purposes of obtaining a subsequent development order, unless otherwise provided in Section 1.5.B.2.b), below. 
1.  Any applications for certification or approval of a master plan, site plan, subdivision plan or land development permit may be accepted, reviewed and approved under the standards of ordinance 73-2 and 73-4, as amended, provided: 
a.  the application is approved or certified prior to September 30, 1992; 
b.  provided the application is in compliance with Ordinance 73-2 and 73-4, as amended: 
c.  the development order is valid; and 
d.  the landscaping is improved to comply with the standards of this Code, as follows 
i.  Projects with a development order issued prior to April 8, 1986 shall be required to comply with the Landscape Code in Article 7 of the LDR; except that residential projects over eighty (80) percent built-out shall be exempt from this requirement. 
ii.  Projects with a development order approved on or after April 8, 1986 shall be required to comply with perimeter Landscape Standards in Article 7 of the LDR; except that residential projects over eighty (80) percent built-out shall be exempt from this requirement. 
2.  Issuance of subsequent development orders shall be based on the requirements if this Code, except where a requirement of this Code and physical constraints of a site render a previously approved site element not fully usable. In such cases, the requirements of this Code may be modified to allow a subsequent development order to be approved consistent with the density or intensity, or other site element shown on a previously approved plan. Through the DRC, the specific property development regulation (Article 6) of site development requirement (Article 7, except sections 7.5, and 7.6, and Article 17) causing conflict may be modified, and a subsequent development order may be issued, using the following procedure. 
a.  The development shall use flexible regulations, described in Sec. 6.8 of this Code. If still unable to use a previously approved site element then, 
b.  The applicant may elect to demonstrate with clear and convincing evidence that a subsequent development order implementing the previously approved site element could have been approved pursuant to ordinance 73-2, as amended to June 22, 1992. For residential development, housing classifications may not change to accommodate density. 
C.  Applications filed prior to the effective date of this Code. An application for a special exception, special permit, district boundary change (rezoning), site plan review committee approval, subdivision plan or land development permit, or a building permit which is filed with and accepted by the department prior to the effective date of this Code may be reviewed and processed under the terms of Ordinances No. 73-2 and 73-4, as amended. In addition, all relevant applications shall be certified by prehearing conference on or before the effective date of this Code and receive site plan or subdivision certification on or before September 30, 1992, in order to continue to be reviewed and processed under the terms of Ordinances 73-2 and 73-4, as amended. However, these applications must also comply with Sec. 1.5.B.2.a.(4).(b) herein. After approval, the application shall be considered a project with a valid development order for the purposes of modifications and applicability of the general requirements of this Code, or any amendments hereto. Applications submitted after September 30, 1992 shall be reviewed under the standards of this Code. 
D.  Subsequent development orders and modifications to previously approved development orders and permits. The provisions of the LDR shall apply to any request to modify any development order or permit. However, only the area directly effected by the proposed modifications shall be subject to the LDR, except that non-residential projects shall provide additional landscape improvements provided no required parking or intensity is lost. A Landscape Betterment Plan may be submitted to ensure no required parking or intensity is lost. 
1.  Non-residential projects which have not commenced development. Non-residential projects which have not commenced development shall be required to comply with the Landscape Code in Article 7 of the LDR for the entire site. 
2.  Previous commencement of development. Non-residential projects which have commenced development on site shall install additional landscaping as follows: 
3.  Newly developed freestanding building part of a larger project. Freestanding buildings with vehicular circulation on four (4) sides shall provide additional landscaping for the unmodified portion of the project at least equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the landscaping to be installed at the new development, or 
4.  Renovation or additions. Structural additions or renovation to previously approved uses shall comply with the landscaping requirements of this code when the value of the addition or renovation exceeds thirty five percent (35%) of the appraised value of the parcel on which renovations shall occur. 
5.  All requests for modifications to a previously approved development order. All requests for modifications to previously approved development orders shall provide assurance that existing landscaping complies with the original development order and Code requirements. 
6.  Additions or renovations to vehicular use areas. Renovations or additions to vehicular use areas shall be governed by Section 7.2.B.12.b.(8) of the Off-street parking and Loading requirements. 
E.  Village Council Conditions. Village Council conditions shall govern project development and site design in the event they exceed this Code. 
F.  Uses no longer regulated as Special Exceptions. All uses approved under Ordinance 3-57 or Ordinance 72-3 shall be required to develop pursuant to the terms of their development order except as provided in this section. Use approved as conditional uses under Ordinance 3-57, as amended, or as special exceptions under Ordinance 73-2, as amended, and which are only subject to Development Review Committee (DRC) use approval shall modify the conditional use or special exception use prior to the issuance of a subsequent development permit by the DRC. All Board imposed conditions shall be carried forward and remain applicable to the subject property, except those that are substandard to this Code. Future modifications to the approved plans shall be made consistent with the procedures and requirements of the Land Development Regulations. 
Sec. 1.5.3. - Existing uses. 
    All uses existing on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto, that preexisted or were permitted pursuant to either Ordinance 3-57, as amended, or Ordinance 73-2, as amended, and have continued pursuant to the standards for nonconforming uses, and which are not permitted in this Code shall be considered nonconforming under the terms of this Code. Uses not legally permitted by this Code or either Ordinance 3-57, as amended, or Ordinance 73-2, as amended, or which did not preexist Ordinance 73-2, shall be considered illegal. 
Sec. 1.5.4. - Invalid approvals. 
    Development orders and permits that are invalid shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this Code. Invalid development orders and permits are projects which have been revoked, have expired or have been found by any Board empowered to enforce this Code to be not in compliance with any conditions of development approval or time certain requirements pursuant to Section 5.8 of this Code, or any amendments hereto. 
CHAPTER 6. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 1.6.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    Within the provisions established by this Code, there exist uses of land, structures and lots that were lawfully established before this Code was adopted or amended, that now do not conform to the terms and requirements of this Code. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate and limit the continued existence of those uses, structures and lots that do not conform to the provisions of this Code or any amendments thereto, and where possible bring the use into conformance with this Code. 
Sec. 1.6.2. - General. 
    It is the intent of this section to permit these nonconformities to continue, but not to allow nonconformities to be enlarged or expanded, except under the limited circumstances established in this article. The provisions of this article are designed to curtail substantial investment in nonconformities to preserve the integrity of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. In determining whether a use is nonconforming and will be protected by the provisions of this article, the following shall apply: 
A.  Nonconforming uses status shall not be provided for any use which was illegally commenced, is unlawfully continued, or commenced after the use restrictions become applicable. 
B.  Nonconforming use status shall only be provided where a use is actually commenced not merely contemplated. Further, the use must be continuous during business hours and not an occasional or irregular use of the property. 
C.  An accessory nonconforming use shall not become the principal use. 
D.  Documents shall be provided by the property owner to establish that a use lawfully existed prior to the adoption of applicable use regulation. Affidavits alone are not sufficient evidence to establish nonconforming status. 
CHAPTER 7. - NONCONFORMING USES 
    There are two (2) classes of nonconforming uses; major and minor. Table 1.7-1 shall govern whether a nonconforming uses is major or minor, except that any use in a location nonconforming to the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Element shall be deemed a major nonconforming use. A nonconforming use is designated as major when it is established in a zoning district where the use is prohibited and the location is so significantly inappropriate that its location creates or threatens to create incompatibilities potentially injurious to the public welfare. Therefore, strict limits are set forth in this section for the expansion and continuation of major nonconforming uses. A minor nonconforming use is prohibited in the district in which it is located, or is inconsistent with the physical or permit requirements of this Code. Minor nonconforming uses do not create or threaten to create incompatibilities injurious to the public welfare. Therefore, provisions which allow limited expansion of minor nonconforming uses are established. A nonconforming use shall either be a major nonconforming use or minor nonconforming use as identified in Table 1.7-1. 

Sec. 1.7.1. - Major Nonconforming Use. 
A.  Normal maintenance or repair. Normal maintenance or repair of structures where major nonconforming uses are located may be performed in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, as well as repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the current assessed value of the structure. 
B.  Enlargement or expansion. A major nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or expanded in area occupied, except a major nonconforming use may be enlarged in any area of a structure that was manifestly designed and approved for such use, prior to the date the use became nonconformity. 
C.  Relocation. A structure containing a major nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole, or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless the relocation of the structure containing the major nonconforming use decreases the nonconformity. 
D.  Change in use. A major nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other use, unless any new or additional use conforms to the provisions of this Code for the zoning district in which the use is located. A major nonconforming use physically superseded by a permitted use shall not be reestablished. 
E.  Discontinuance or abandonment. If a major nonconforming use is discontinued, abandoned, or becomes an accessory use for a period of more than six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) consecutive years, then such use may not be re-established or resumed, and any subsequent use shall conform to the provisions specified by this Code. When government action can be documented as a reason for discontinuance or abandonment, the time of delay by government shall not be calculated for the purpose of this section. 
Sec. 1.7.2. - Minor Nonconforming Use. 
A.  Normal maintenance or repair. Normal maintenance or repair of structures where minor nonconforming uses are located may be performed in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, as well as repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the current assessed value of the structure. 
B.  Enlargement or expansion. A minor nonconforming use may be enlarged or expanded as follows: 
1.  A minor nonconforming use prohibited in the district in which it is located may expand on one (1) occasion, through the administrative variance process as established in Sec. 5.7.G. The administrative variance shall be permitted provided that the enlargement or expansion complies with Art. 11, Adequate Public Facilities Standards, would not exceed ten (10) percent of the floor area of that individual structure or ten (10) percent of the original assessed value of the structure on site, whichever is less. 
2.  A minor nonconforming use that is not in compliance with this Code's physical requirements, such as landscaping, locational criteria or parking regulations, or this Code's permit requirements, such as possessing a required development order for conditional use, may expand on one (1) occasion, pursuant to Development Review Committee review. Based on the standards set forth in this section, the DRC shall deny, approve or approve with conditions the request for expansion pursuant to the process established in Article 5 of this Code. 
The request shall be permitted provided all of the following apply: 
a.  The enlargement or expansion would not exceed ten (10) percent of the floor area of the structure or appraised value of the structures on site, whichever is less; 
b.  The expansion does not create any additional nonconformities; 
c.  The use and expansion are in compliance with Article 11, Adequate Public Facilities Standards; 
d.  The use and expansion complies with Environmental Control Rules I and II; 
e.  The use and the expansion will result in a reduction of nonconforming features to the greatest extent practicable; 
f.  The use and the expansion will comply with the landscape, vegetation preservation and protection, and lighting provisions of this Code; and, 
g.  The use and the expansion will comply with Article 15, Traffic Performance Standards. 
C.  Relocation. A structure containing a minor nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole, or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless the relocation on the structure containing the minor nonconforming use decreases the nonconformity. 
D.  Change in use. A minor nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other use, unless any new or additional use conforms to the provisions of this Code for the zoning district in which the use is located. A minor nonconforming use that is physically superseded by a permitted use shall not be reestablished. 
E.  Discontinuance or abandonment. If a minor nonconforming use is discontinued, abandoned, or becomes an accessory use for a period of more than six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) consecutive years, then such use may not be re-established or resumed, and any subsequent use shall conform to the provisions specified by this Code. When government action can be documented as the reason for discontinuance or abandonment, the time of delay by government shall not be calculated for the purpose of this section. 
Table 1.7-1 Schedule of Nonconforming Uses 
Land Use Zoning District SA AR CN IL PIPD CF Agricultural B B B B B B Residential, Single Family B B B B B B Residential, Multifamily A A B B B B Mobile Home B B B B B B Commercial, less than 25 sq. ft. B A B B B B Commercial, greater than 25 sq. ft. A A A B B B Office A A B B B B Light Industrial A A A B B A Heavy Industrial A A A A B A Institutional A A B B B B  
Note: 
•  Regardless of zoning district, whether a use is a major nonconforming or a minor nonconforming use is determined by the specific land use in a zoning district. 
•  "A" constitutes a Major Nonconforming Use. 
•  "B" constitutes a Minor Nonconforming Use. 
CHAPTER 8. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 
    A nonconforming structure devoted to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, may be continued in accordance with the provisions in this section. 

Sec. 1.8.1. - Normal maintenance. 
    Normal maintenance or repair to permit continuation of a nonconforming structure may be performed in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, as well as repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the current assessed value of the structure. 
Sec. 1.8.2. - Enlargement or expansion. 
    A nonconforming structure may be enlarged or expanded if the enlargement or expansion meets the requirements of this Code (except the dimensional lot area requirements of the zoning district in which it is located), as long as the enlargement or expansion does not change or increase the nonconformity, or add structures or uses prohibited in the zoning district. 
Sec. 1.8.3. - Relocation. 
    A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless it conforms to the standards and requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Sec. 1.8.4. - Damage and restoration of nonconforming structure. 
A.  A nonconforming structure that is reconstructed, destroyed or rebuilt by any means to an extent of more than thirty (30) percent of its value at the time of reconstruction, or destruction, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Code. This subsection shall apply to the cumulative changes in value as a nonconforming structure is redeveloped and improved over the previous seven (7) years. 
B.  The value of the nonconforming structure shall be determined by taking one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the most recent assessed value of the nonconforming structure, as determined by reference to the records of the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser. 
C.  In determining whether the value of the improvement exceeds thirty (30) percent of the property's value, the "aggregate cost approach" as outlined in the most current building valuation data published by the Southern Building Code Congress International in the periodical 'Southern Building,' or other comparable guidelines adopted in law or accepted in practice by the Building Director, shall be used as the sole basis for calculation. 
D.  Should a nonconforming structure be reconstructed, destroyed and rebuilt by any means to an extent less than thirty (30) percent but more than twenty (20) percent of its assessed value, it may be restored only upon application to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board as a variance request pursuant to the terms in Sec. 5.7. 
E.  To establish its jurisdiction over the variance request, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall determine whether the valuation falls within the parameters established in this subsection. If it does, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall determine whether the nonconforming structure can function adequately without meeting the Code requirements that render it a nonconforming structure. 
F.  In making its determination, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall be guided by the following standards: 
1.  The degree of nonconformity of the structure; 
2.  If the nonconformity will continue. Whether the relationships among the various design elements of the lot, parcel or structure (such as parking, landscaping, vehicular circulation, or access points) are adequate to meet minimum health and safety standards; 
3.  Whether continuation of the nonconforming structure will create or contribute to a health and safety hazard in or adjacent to the nonconforming structure; and 
4.  Whether the nonconforming structure can be reduced in intensity or redesigned to mitigate the effects of the nonconformity. 
Sec. 1.8.5. - Unsafe structure. 
    Any portion of a nonconforming structure which becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and which is declared unsafe or unlawful by a duly authorized Village official, but which an owner wishes to restore, repair, or rebuild, shall be restored, repaired, or rebuilt in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
CHAPTER 9. - NONCONFORMING LOTS 

Sec. 1.9.1. - Residential development. 
    A single-family dwelling and customary accessory uses may be developed on a single lot, if all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  Development permissible prior to creation of nonconformity. Development of a single family dwelling and customary accessory uses were permissible under the applicable Code at the time the single lot was created. 
B.  Record of creation. The single lot was: 
1.  Of record or was the subject of a recorded agreement for deed or other recorded instrument of conveyance prior to January 23, 1973. Lots created by conveyance after this date shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer for compliance with Art. 8, Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements; or 
2.  Shown on a recorded map, plat, drawing or survey prior to the adoption of this Code; or 
3.  Determined to be a lot within an antiquated subdivision as determined by the Comprehensive Plan; and 
4.  Not subject to the lot recombination requirements of Art. 8., Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements, or the Comprehensive Plan. 
5.  Legally subdivided prior to the adoption of this Code. 
C.  Property development regulations. The proposed use is permitted and the single lot meets the minimum property development regulations that are generally applicable in the zoning district in which it is located, except for the minimum lot area and dimensions, minimum yard setback requirements, maximum lot coverage and maximum total floor area. If the single lot, tract or parcel of land does not meet the setback and lot coverage regulations of the current underlying zoning district, the following minimum yard setback, and maximum lot coverage requirements may be applied, for the specific lot characteristics which are nonconforming, in lieu of the district property development regulations. 
1.  Minimum Yard Setback Requirements 1 . 
Front 30% of depth Side (corner) 20% of width Side (interior) 15% of width Rear 20% of depth  
1 Lots one and one-half (11/2) acre or smaller, that cannot accommodate current setbacks or a percentage setback for a particular yard, may apply a minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback. 
2.  Maximum Lot Coverage: 40% of total lot area. 
Sec. 1.9.2. - Non-residential development. 
    Non-residential development and customary accessory uses may be developed on a single lot if all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  Development permissible prior to creation of nonconformity. Development of the non-residential development and customary accessory uses were permissible under the applicable Code at the time the single lot was created. 
B.  Record of creation. The single lot was: 
1.  Of record or was the subject of an agreement for deed which was recorded or proof of agreement is furnished, or other recorded instrument of conveyance prior to January 23, 1973. Lots created by conveyance after this date shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer for compliance with Art. 8, Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements; or 
2.  Shown on a recorded map, plat, drawing or survey prior to the adoption of this Code; or 
3.  Determined to be a lot within an antiquated subdivision as determined by the Comprehensive Plan; and 
4.  Not subject to the lot recombination requirements of Art. 8., Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements. 
5.  Legally subdivided prior to the adoption of this Code. 
C.  Property development regulations. The proposed use is permissible under this code and all supplementary development regulations for the use, including but not limited to minimum lot areas or additional setbacks or the proposed use obtains a variance pursuant to the requirements of Sec. 5.7. 
Sec. 1.9.3. - Zoning district amendment on lots of record. 
    When amending the zoning district designation of a portion of a single lot of record, that portion proposed for amendment shall be subject to the density or intensity requirements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
CHAPTER 10. - PROPERTIES AFFECTED BY EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDINGS 

Sec. 1.10.1. - Applicability. 
    This section of the Code shall apply to all properties impacted by an eminent domain action. Site improvements and conditions, including nonconforming features, existing prior to the time of the eminent domain action shall not be affected this section. Nonconforming uses shall not be affected by this section. The provisions of this section shall not alone cause a specific use on a property impacted by an eminent domain action to cease. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, an "eminent domain action" occurs when property is acquired through an eminent domain proceeding or where such property is voluntarily conveyed under the threat of condemnation to a condemning authority. 
Sec. 1.10.2. - Properties Affected by Eminent Domain Action. 
    Properties, and site improvements developed thereupon, impacted by eminent domain action may continue to exist and may expand as outlined below. 
A.  General. Where, due to an eminent domain action, a reduction in the size of a lot causes a reduction below the required lot area, setbacks, parking, landscaping, sign location or other development regulations in this Code, the structure(s) on the property, the use(s) within the structure(s) and other site improvements may continue to exist in the configuration remaining after the condemnation, except that: 
1.  Accessways. The length of accessways shall not be less than ten (10) feet measured from the right-of-way line, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Village Engineer based on accepted traffic engineering principles; and 
2.  Direction. Ingress and egress to the site shall be in a forward direction. Where parking is reduced, the use of off-site parking, cross parking agreements and shared parking agreements are encouraged. 
B.  Enlargement or change in use. A structure or other site improvement located on property reduced by an eminent domain action may be enlarged or expanded if the enlarged or expanded portion meets the requirements of this Code. Changes in use are allowed if permitted by the applicable zoning district. Additional parking is required only for the increase in parking required by the enlargement or change in use. The required parking for the new use shall be calculated by subtracting the number of required spaces for the new use (less any excess spaces existing at the time of the eminent domain action, if any) from parking requirement for the most current use. For the purpose of determining the required parking, the code in effect at the time of the enlargement or change in use shall be used. There shall be no reduction in required spaces designated for physically disabled persons. 
C.  Redesign of Sites. Redesign of sites, at any time, is encouraged for the purposes of achieving safer sites and enhanced landscaping along roadways. Toward this end, site improvements may be relocated or replaced elsewhere on site and shall be approved provided the redesign meets code requirements, except as modified in this section. Redesign shall follow the permitting procedures of this code, except for provisions noted below which are intended to provide additional flexibility. 
1.  Variance required for new deviation from regulations. A variance shall be obtained for any additional deviation from required property development regulations or site design standards proposed by the redesign. Any redesign or expansion which reduces an existing deviation from required property development regulations or site design standards does not require a variance. For the purposes for applying the variance standards in Sec. 5.8 of this code, the eminent domain action shall be presumed to be sufficient evidence to demonstrate hardship for variances resulting from the eminent domain action. 
2.  Amendment of Village Council approved site plans. Where a proposed redesign is located on property which is the subject of a site plan approved by the Village Council, redesign shall be approved by the Development Review Committee even if the redesign proposes site plan changes in excess of the administrative limits contained in Secs. 5.4.5.M.and 5.4.6.M, of this Code, provided it meets code or the provisions of this section. Conditions imposed by the Village Council shall not be amended without Village Council approval. 
3.  Variance and DRC approval not required. To encourage site redesign, in cases when Development Review Committee site plan approval and a variance would both be required, only a variance shall be required. 
4.  Parking area reduction. If site redesign involves either a lot combination, vehicular use area or other alteration required by subsection 1.10.2.1 (Accessways), a reduction of up to thirty-five (35%) percent of the required spaces shall be permitted by right provided: 
a.  The access standards of Secs. 7.7 and 7.2.3.M of this code are met; and 
b.  A landscape buffer strip a minimum of five (5) feet wide with landscaping is installed along the frontage of the property. 
D.  Damage or restoration of structures. A structure subject to this section which becomes damaged may be reconstructed in the location and manner as it legally existed after the eminent domain action except that a structure that is destroyed or damaged in excess of more than fifty (50) percent of its value at the time of reconstruction shall be considered a vacant lot pursuant to Sec. B.6, below. In determining the value of such a structure, the standards and procedures described in Sec. 1.8.4 of this code shall be used. 
E.  Signs. Any existing legally established point of purchase or free standing sign that is located within the property included in the eminent domain action may be relocated on site subject to the standards of this Section of the Code and the following criteria: 
1.  Sign number and size. Any sign(s) to be relocated shall comply with the height, size (face area) and maximum number of signs allowed requirements of the Code. 
2.  Sign relocation. In no event shall the front setback be less than five (5) feet from the ultimate right-of-way and have less than a two (2) feet side setback, except upon receipt of a sign relocation permit. 
3.  Sign relocation permit. Signs that must be relocated which are physically precluded from compliance with the setback requirement in subsection 1.10.2.5.2, above, may obtain, upon payment of a fee, a sign relocation certificate from the Planning & Zoning Director subject to this subsection. The Planning & Zoning Director shall issue a sign relocation certificate provided the applicant can meet the following standards: 
a.  The sign relocation in accordance with subsection 1.10.2.5.2, above, would create additional loss in the number of required parking; 
b.  The proposed sign location does not encroach into the right-of-way, unless it is part of a negotiated settlement with the condemning authority; and 
c.  There is no other location on the subject property to place the sign consistent with safe vehicular use area design. 
F.  Vacant lots. A vacant lot reduced by an eminent domain action to any size or configuration below the required district lot size, frontage, depth or width specified in Sec. 6.5, property development regulations, may be developed. Uses subject to special lot size requirements of Sec. 6.4, supplemental regulations, shall be required to comply with those standards. In all cases, required district setbacks shall be used. 
G.  Lot combination. This subsection is intended to encourage the combining of lots for the purposes of creating safer, more functional and aesthetically pleasing developments and attaining a greater degree of compliance with code requirements. This subsection may apply to the combined lots whether or not they are owned by the same person. 
Combined lots may be developed as a single lot for the purposes of applying property development regulations provided either a cross parking or cross access agreement is executed. The agreement shall be made in the form acceptable to the Village Attorney and recorded in the official records of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Lot combination shall follow the permitting requirements and procedures of this code, except as clarified or provided for below: 
1.  Parking credit. Except as provided below (razed lots), required parking for combined lots may be administratively reduced by up to twenty (20) percent upon approval by the Planning & Zoning Director of a site plan which reduces points of access and the execution of a unity of control which includes a cross parking or cross access agreement. 
2.  Razed sites. Lots which have been combined and where the principal structures have been demolished shall be considered to be a vacant lot pursuant to Sec. 1.10.2.F above. 
3.  Sites subject to approved site plans or Certificates of Conformity. For properties which are the subject of a valid Certificate of Conformity, the Certificate may be amended, upon application by the property owner and approval of the Development Review Committee, to allow the combination and the configuration shown on the Certificate may be implemented. Where a proposed lot combination is located on property which is the subject of a site plan approved by the Village Council, combination may be approved by the Development Review Committee even if the redesign proposes site plan changes in excess of the administrative limits contained in Secs. 5.4.5.M.and 5.4.6.M, of this Code. Conditions imposed by the Village Council shall not be amended without Village Council approval. 
Sec. 1.10.3. - Certificates of Conformity. 
    A Certificate of Conformity issued pursuant to either Ordinance 73-2, as amended, or Ordinance 92-20, as amended through June 1993, shall be honored provided the Certificate of Conformity has been issued to the property owner or a notice of intent to issue a certificate of conformity has been signed by the property owner before June 30, 1994. The site configurations depicted in these Certificates of Conformity shall be considered valid pursuant to Sec. 1.5 of this Code and may be implemented or amended by the Development Review Committee. All other Certificates of Conformity, including Notices of Intent to Issue a Certificate of Conformity, shall become null and void. 
[Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Sec. 1.10.2.3.4] 
CHAPTER 11. - CREATION OF POTENTIALLY BUILDABLE RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY LOTS 

Sec. 1.11.1. - Applicability. 
    The following provisions shall apply to the development of any lot which is not depicted on either a plat of record, affidavit of exemption, or affidavit of plat waiver, currently valid and in effect for the subject project. 
Sec. 1.11.2. - Determination Criteria. 
    A residential single family lot, as originally conveyed, may be considered eligible for building permits if determined that the lot complies with the following criteria: 
A.  Legal Recordation of lot. The single family lot was conveyed into ownership separate from abutting lands pursuant to a recorded deed, recorded agreement for deed or other recorded instrument of conveyance after February 2, 1973 and prior to June 16, 1992 and has not been reconvened, in whole or in part, into common ownership with an abutting property. 
B.  Density criteria. The lot created by conveyance pursuant to Section 1.11.2.A complied with the density requirements of the Comprehensive Plan in effect at the time the lot was created. 
The 1972 Land Use Plan (now termed Comprehensive Plan) was effective from December 6, 1972 through August 1, 1980. The 1980 Comprehensive Plan was effective from August 1. 1980 to August 31, 1989. The 1989 Comprehensive Plan was effective August 31, 1989 and is still in effect. 
C.  Zoning requirements. The lot complies with all other development standards of the zoning regulations adopted June 16, 1992. A variance shall not be permitted to reduce the lot size to qualify to meet the requirements of this subsection. 
D.  Legal Access. The lot has legal access, established at the time the lot was recorded, in compliance with the following: 
1.  The street classifications found in Chart 8.22-2 (Chart of minor streets); or 
2.  A recorded express casement, a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, granting the owner, its successors and assigns a perpetual right of useable access across all properties lying between said lot and a street. 
Sec. 1.11.3. - Determination of compliance. 
    Prior to the submittal of a building permit application, the property owner shall submit, on forms established by the Planning & Zoning Director, a request for a determination that the lot is in compliance with this subsection. The Planning & Zoning Director shall make a determination within ten (10) days. 
Sec. 1.11.4. - Recordation of a potentially buildable lot. 
    After issuance of a determination of compliance, but prior to the submittal of a building permit, the property owner shall record a Potentially Buildable Lot Affidavit, survey, and legal description of the lot with the Clerk of the Court, in a form established by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
Sec. 1.11.5. - Issuance of a building permit. 
    If a Buildable Lot Affidavit is recorded in accordance with the standards and procedures herein and the lot and proposed residence comply with zoning requirements, drainage requirements, environmental control rules and all other permitting requirements, a building permit may be issued. 
CHAPTER 12. - INTERPRETATION OF THE CODE 

Sec. 1.12.1. - Interpretations. 
A.  Authority. Interpretations to this Code shall be made by the Planning & Zoning Director and the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall have the authority to make all interpretations of Sec. 7.7, Driveways and Access; Article 15, Traffic Performance Standards; and Art. 8, Subdivision. The Director of PZ shall have the authority to make all interpretations of Natural Resource Protection Regulations, Sec. 7.6, Excavation, and Art. 9, Environmental Standards. The Village Attorney shall have the authority to make all interpretations of Article 7, Sec.7.15, Maintenance and Use Documents. The Planning & Zoning Director shall have the authority to make interpretations of all other provisions of this Code and the Future Land Use Map. 
B.  Initiation. An interpretation may be requested by any landowner or person having a contractual interest in land in the Village of Wellington, or any person that has submitted an application for development permit pursuant to the procedures of this Code. 
C.  Procedures: 
1.  Submission of request for interpretation. Before an interpretation shall be provided by the appropriate Village official, a Request for Interpretation shall be submitted to the appropriate Village official in a form established by that Village official and made available to the public. The request shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Village Council from time to time for the filing and processing of the Request for Interpretation. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
2.  Determination of sufficiency. Within five (5) working days after a Request for Interpretation has been submitted, the Village official responsible for rendering the interpretation shall determine whether it is sufficient. 
a.  Determined not sufficient. If the Village official determines that the request is not sufficient, a written notice shall be served on the applicant specifying the deficiencies. The Village official shall take no further action on the Request for Interpretation until the deficiencies are remedied. If the applicant fails to correct the deficiencies within ten (10) working days, the Request for Interpretation shall be considered withdrawn. 
b.  Determined sufficient. When the Request for Interpretation is determined sufficient, the Village official shall review and render an interpretation pursuant to the procedures and standards of this article. 
3.  Rendering of interpretation. Within fifteen (15) working days after the Request for Interpretation has been determined sufficient, the Village official responsible for rendering the interpretation shall review and evaluate the request in light of the Comprehensive Plan, this Code, and the Future Land Use Map, whichever is applicable, consult with the Village Attorney, and then render an interpretation. 
D.  Form. The interpretation shall be in writing and shall be sent to the applicant by mail within five (5) working days after the interpretation is made by the appropriate Village official. 
E.  Appeal: 
1.  Initiation. Twenty (20) working days after issuance of a written interpretation by the appropriate Village official responsible for rendering the interpretation, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board responsible for appeal, as provided in this Code. 
2.  Public hearing. The Board responsible for the appeal shall hold a hearing on the appeal within forty (40) working days of the appeal. 
3.  Standard of review. At the appeal hearing, the Board shall consider the interpretation of the Village official responsible for rendering the interpretation and public testimony in light of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code, whichever is applicable. The Board shall not modify or reject the Village official's interpretation, if it is supported by substantial competent evidence, unless the interpretation is found to be contrary to the Comprehensive Plan and this Code, whichever is applicable. 
F.  Official record. Each Village official responsible for rendering an interpretation shall maintain a record of the interpretation, and forward a copy to the Planning & Zoning Director. This record shall be available for public inspection, upon reasonable request, during normal business hours. 
Sec. 1.12.2. - Assistance or representation by staff. 
    Any assistance given or representation made by any member of the staff during consultation shall not constitute the approval of the Department, shall not bind the staff, the Department, the Division, the Village Manager, or the Village Council, and shall not relieve any person of any requirements of this Code, or other applicable provisions of federal or state law or local ordinances. If there exists a conflict between any staff representation and the laws, rules, codes or ordinances, such laws, rules, codes or ordinances shall prevail. Nothing herein shall authorize any change to the administrative interpretations of the Code. 
Article 2 - INTERPRETATION OF THE CODE 
REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY 
ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
    In the construction of the language of this Code, the rules set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Village Council as established in the Comprehensive Plan. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any express provisions excluding such construction. 

Sec. 3.1.1. - Generally. 
    All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Village Council as established in the Comprehensive Plan may be fully carried out. Terms used in these regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the State of Florida for the same terms. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than a general provision imposed by the Comprehensive Plan or another provision of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. Some technical terms which are unique to an article, are defined in that article, for example, all Traffic Performance Standards are in Article 15, Sec. 15.2. 
Sec. 3.1.2. - Text. 
    In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any figure, the text shall control. 
Sec. 3.1.3. - Computation of time. 
    Computation of time means the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
Sec. 3.1.4. - Day. 
    Day means a working weekday unless otherwise stated or used in reference to a violation. Violations shall be calculated on calendar days. 
Sec. 3.1.5. - Delegation of authority. 
    Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other Village officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Sec. 3.1.6. - Gender. 
    Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter. 
Sec. 3.1.7. - May. 
    May means permissive. 
Sec. 3.1.8. - Month. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
Sec. 3.1.9. - Non-technical and technical words. 
    Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Sec. 3.1.10. - Number. 
    A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing. 
Sec. 3.1.11. - Shall. 
    Shall means mandatory. 
Sec. 3.1.12. - Tense. 
    Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
Sec. 3.1.13. - Week. 
    Week means seven (7) calendar days. 
Sec. 3.1.14. - Written. 
    Written means any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or other form or method of writing. 
Sec. 3.1.15. - Year. 
    Year means a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated or three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days is indicated. 
Sec. 3.1.16. - Include. 
    Use of "include" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
Sec. 3.1.17. - Exclusivity of uses in districts. 
    The permitted uses and conditional uses in the districts established in Article 6, Zoning Districts, are exclusive, and shall be permitted subject to the standards and procedures of this Code. 
Sec. 3.1.18. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists concerning boundaries of districts as shown on the Future Land Use Map, the following rules shall be used in the interpretation of the district boundaries. 
A.  Center lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, alleys or highways shall be construed as following such center lines. 
B.  Lot, section and tract lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines, sections or tract lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
C.  Political Boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundaries shall be construed as following such political boundaries. 
D.  Shorelines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following shorelines shall be construed as following such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
E.  Parallel lines. Where boundaries are approximately parallel to a street, highway, road, alley or railroad right-of-way, the distance of such boundaries from the property line of such street, highway, road alley or railroad right-of-way, shall be, unless otherwise shown by dimensions, one (1) lot depth on lots facing said street, highway, road, alley or railroad right-of-way, or approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet, on acreage and tracts or on parallel lots, to the nearest lot line between lots to conform to adjacent district lines. 
F.  Bisecting lines. Where boundaries approximately bisect blocks, the boundaries are the median line of such blocks, between the center lines of boundary streets. 
G.  Uncertainties. Where the physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Future Land Use Map, or in case any other uncertainty exists, the Planning & Zoning Director shall interpret the intent of the Future Land Use Map as to the location of boundaries. 
H.  Street abandonments. Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the land to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, or alley. 
I.  Excluded areas. Where parcels of land and water areas have been inadvertently excluded from a district classification in any manner, said parcels shall be given a classification by the Village Council that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Such cases shall be processed in the same manner as applications for development permits for amendments to the Future Land Use Map. 
Sec. 3.1.19. - Special provisions for lots divided by district boundaries. 
    Where any lot, existing at the effective date of this Code, is located in two (2) or more districts in which different uses are permitted, or in which different use, area, bulk, accessory off street parking and loading, or other regulations apply, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
A.  Use regulations. If more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area is located in one (1) of two (2) or more districts, the use regulations applicable to the district containing the majority lot area shall apply to the entire lot, if consistent with the Land Use designation on the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Property development regulations. If more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area is located in one (1) of two (2) or more districts, the property development regulations applicable to the district containing the majority lot area shall apply to the entire lot. 
Sec. 3.1.20. - Or. 
    Either or both cases may apply. 
Sec. 3.1.21. - And. 
    All cases must apply. 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 
    Terms in this Code shall have the following definitions: 
    Absorption area means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the total surface area of the bottom of a drainfield. 
    Absorption bed means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the drainfield system in which the entire earth contents are removed and replaced with filter material and distribution pipe. 
    Abutting property means property lying immediately adjacent to and sharing a common property line with other property. 
    Access means a way to enter or exit a facility or property. 
    Access, legal means the principal means of access from a lot to a public street or to a private street over which a perpetual ingress and egress easement or right-of-way has been granted to the owners of any lot serviced by such street. 
    Access way means a non-dedicated area which is permitted for ingress or egress of vehicles or pedestrians. An access way is permitted to traverse a required landscape buffer. 
    Accessory dwelling means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family dwelling, or in an accessory structure on the same lot as the principal single-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling is a complete, independent living facility equipped with a kitchen and with provisions for sanitation and sleeping. 
    Accessory building or structure means a detached, subordinate building meeting all property development regulations, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal building or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal building or use. 
    Accessory use. See Use, accessory. 
    Acre means land or water consisting of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    Act means the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, § 163.3161, Fla. Stat, et seq. (1989) as may be amended from time to time. 
    Adequate protection by treatment means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any one (1) or any combination of the controlled processes of coagulation, sedimentation, absorption, filtration, or other processes in addition to disinfection which produces a water consistently meeting the requirements of Article 16 including processes which are appropriate to the source of supply. 
    Adequate Public Facilities Determination means a Determination approved by the Planning & Zoning Director pursuant to the terms of Article 11, Adequate Public Facility Standards, that serves as a statement that based upon existing public facility capacity and planned facility capacity, adequate public facilities are available to serve the development at the time of the approval of the Adequate Public Facilities Determination. 
    Administrative/Agency inquiry means a request for Village Council direction on procedural or interpretative matters. 
    Adopted Level of Service (LOS) means, for the purposes of Article 15, generally LOS D; however, it may be another Level of Service set by the Plan or pursuant to Policies of the Transportation Element. For the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District, it is LOS E except as set forth by the Plan. 
    Adult arcade means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, any place or establishment operated for commercial gain which invites or permits the public to view adult material. For purposes of this Code, "adult arcade" is included within the definition of "adult theater." 
    Adult bookstore/adult video store means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, an establishment which sells, offers for sale or rents adult material for commercial gain; unless the establishment demonstrates either (1) the adult material is accessible only by employees and the gross income from the sale or rental of adult material comprises less than forty (40) percent of the gross income from the sale or rental of goods or services at the establishment, or (2) the individual items of adult material offered for sale or rental comprise less than ten (10) percent of the individual items, as stock in trade, publicly displayed in the establishment and which is not accessible to minors at the establishment. 
    Adult booth means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, a small enclosed or partitioned area inside an adult entertainment establishment which is: (1) designed or used for the viewing of adult material by one (1) or more persons and (2) is accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes, but is not limited to, a "peep show" booth, or other booth used to view adult material. The term "adult booth" does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment, or a restroom. 
    Adult dancing establishment means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, an establishment selling, serving or allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages, where employees display or expose specified anatomical areas to others regardless of whether the employees actually engage in dancing. 
    Adult entertainment means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code: 
• Any adult arcade, adult theater, adult bookstore/adult video store, adult motel, or adult dancing establishment; or any establishment or business operated for commercial gain where any employee, operator or owner exposes his/her specified anatomical area for viewing by patrons, including but not limited to: massage establishments whether or not licensed pursuant to chapter 480, Florida Statutes, tanning salon, modeling studio, or lingerie studio. 
• Excluded from this definition are any educational institutions where the exposure of the specified anatomical area is associated with a curriculum or program. 
• An establishment that possesses an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Adult material means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, any one (1) or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
• Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations; recordings, other audio matter; and novelties or devices; which have as their primary or dominant theme subject matter depicting, exhibiting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or; 
• Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motel means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions. 
    Adult theater means for the purposes of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, an establishment operated for commercial gain which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part thereof or an open-air area used for viewing of adult material. "Adult motels," "adult arcade," "adult booth" and "adult motion picture theater" are included within the definition of "adult theater". An establishment which has "adult booths" is considered to be an "adult theater." 
    Adult video store. See Adult Bookstore. 
    Aerobic treatment unit means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a treatment receptacle in which air is introduced into the sewage so as to provide aerobic biochemical stabilization during a detention period. 
    Affidavit of exemption means a document, recorded in the public record, evidencing the grant of an exemption for an unrecorded subdivision existing prior to February 5, 1973, from the provisions of the former Palm Beach County Subdivision and Platting Regulations (Ord. 73-4, as amended), granted pursuant to said regulations. 
    Affidavit of waiver means a document evidencing the grant of an exception to the platting requirement or the required improvements installation requirement. 
    Affordable housing means a dwelling unit for which a household spends no more than thirty (30) percent of its gross income for housing costs. Rental housing costs include contract rent and utilities. Owner occupied housing costs include mortgage principle and interest, property taxes, insurance, and, where applicable, homeowner's association fees. The current median income for the Village of Wellington and income categories established within the Comprehensive Plan are available at the Planning, Zoning & Building Department. 
    Agreement means a Development Agreement, public facilities agreement, or other binding agreement entered into between the applicant and Village of Wellington or other service provided for the purpose of assuring compliance with the adopted level of service standards. The form of the Agreement may include, but not be limited to a Development Agreement pursuant to § 163.3220, Fla. Stat. 
    Aggrieved or adversely affected person means any person or local government which will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by the Comprehensive Plan, including interests related to health and safety, police and fire protection systems, densities or intensities of development, transportation facilities, health care facilities, or environmental or natural resources. The alleged adverse effect may be shared in common with other members of the community at large, but shall exceed in degree the general interest in common good shared by all persons. 
    Agriculture, bona fide means any plot of land where the principal use is bona fide agricultural, meaning the raising of crops inclusive of organic farming or animals inclusive of aquaculture or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy products inclusive of apiculture, or a retail or wholesale nursery on an agricultural or commercial basis. Criteria for determining bona fide agriculture is found in Sec. 6.4.4.6, Supplemental Use Standards. 
    Agricultural excavation. See Excavation, agricultural. 
    Agricultural research and development means the use of land or buildings for agriculture research and the cultivation of new agricultural products. 
    Agricultural sales and service means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of farm tools and small implements, feed and grain, tack, animal care products, farm supplies and the like, excluding large implements, and including accessory food sales and machinery repair services. 
    Agricultural transshipment means packing, crating or shipping of agricultural products not grown or raised on site, and specifically excluding slaughterhouses and fish processing. 
    Air curtain incinerator means the installation or use of a portable or stationary combustion device that is designed and used to burn trees and brush removed during land clearing by directing a plane of high-velocity, forced air through a manifold into a pit with vertical walls in such a manner as to maintain a curtain of air over the surface of the pit and a recirculating motion of air under the curtain. 
    Air rights mean the right to use space above ground level. 
    Air space means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the distance from the liquid level up to the inside top of a treatment receptacle. 
    Airplane landing strip, accessory means a private ground facility designed to accommodate landing and take-off operations of aircraft used by individual property owners, farm operators, or commercial operations. 
    Airport means any public or privately owned or operated ground facility designed to accommodate landing and take-off operations of aircraft, equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
    Air Stripper Tower (Remedial System) means a temporary accessory petroleum contamination remedial system which treats contaminated groundwater from a site and treated groundwater is then reintroduced into the aquifer using an on-site recharge mechanism. A typical system includes air stripper towers or shallow tray aerator and infiltration gallery, groundwater recovery wells, and an aboveground centrifugal pump. 
    Alley means a right-of-way providing a secondary means of access to property and is not intended or used for principal traffic circulation. 
    Alteration or materially alter means the result of human-caused activity which modifies, transforms or otherwise changes the environment, including but not limited to the following: 
• The addition, removal, displacement, or disturbance (severe pruning, hatracking, poisoning) of vegetation, but shall exclude prescribed ecological burning for the management of native Florida communities, the removal of trees, seedlings, runners, suckers, and saplings of prohibited plant species identified in Article 9. Environmental Standards. 
• Demucking and grading of soil. 
• The removal, displacement, or disturbance of rock, minerals or water. 
• The grazing of cattle or other livestock. 
• The removal, addition, or moving of sand. 
• Any construction, excavation or placement of a structure which has the potential to affect coastal biological resources, the control of beach erosion, hurricane protection, coastal flood control of shoreline and offshore rehabilitation. 
    Alteration, building means any change in the structure which will increase the number of dwelling units, the floor area, or height of the structure. 
    Alternative system means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), any approved on-site sewage disposal system which consists of a treatment receptacle other than a septic tank. 
    Amusements, temporary means an activity which includes the provision of rides, amusements, food, games, crafts or performances outside of permanent structures. Typical uses include carnivals, circuses, auctions, and tent revivals. 
    Annular space means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), the space between two (2) casings or between the outer casing and the wall of the well bore. 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies. 
    Antiquated subdivision means "Antiquated Subdivision" in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Applicant means the owner of record, the agent pursuant to an agent's agreement acceptable to the Village Attorney or the mortgagor in the case of bankruptcy. For the purposes of adequate public school facilities, applicant shall mean approved agent or contract purchaser seeking a site-specific development order of any amendment thereto. 
    Approved source when used in reference to bottled water, means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a source, whether it be from a spring, artesian well, drilled well, municipal water supply or any other source, that has been inspected and the water sampled, analyzed, and found to be of a safe and sanitary quality in accordance with provisions of Section 16.2. 
    Archaeological Evaluation Report means a letter prepared by the County Archaeologist evaluating the potential significance of an archaeological site after issuance of a Suspension Order by the Department. 
    Archaeological site means a property or location which has yielded or might yield information on the Village, County, State or Nation's history or prehistory. Archaeological sites are evidenced by the presence of artifacts and features on or below the ground surface indicating the past use of a location at least seventy-five (75) years ago by people or the presence of non-human vertebrate fossils. Archaeological sites include aboriginal mounds, forts, earthworks, village locations, camp sites, middens, burial mounds, missions, historic or prehistoric ruins which are, or may be the source of artifacts or other items of significant archaeological value. 
    Archaeologist, qualified means an archaeologist who is a member of, or is qualified for membership in the Florida Archaeological Council or the Society of Professional Archaeologists. 
    Architect means a person duly registered and licensed to practice architecture in the State of Florida. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM); the base flood depth ranges from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminable; and velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the flood plain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Arena, auditorium or stadium means an open, or partially or fully enclosed facility primarily used or intended for commercial spectator sports or entertainment. Typical uses include convention and exhibition halls, sports arenas, commercial equestrian arenas and amphitheaters. 
    Arterial street. See Street, arterial. 
    Artifacts means relics, specimens or objects of historical, prehistorical, archaeological or anthropological nature, over seventy-five (75) years old, which may be found on, above, or below the surface of the earth, including land and water, which have a scientific or historic value as objects of antiquity, as aboriginal relics or as anthropological specimens, including but not limited to clothing, tools and weapons made of ceramics, worked stone, shell, bone, teeth, hide, feathers and horn, metal coins, glass, beads, building material, daub, and plant fibers. Objects over seventy-five (75) years old but not of significant archaeological value shall not be considered an artifact for purposes of this code. Further, objects under seventy-five (75) years old and deemed by a qualified archaeologist to be of significant archaeological value shall be subject to the provisions of this Code. 
    Artificial light source shall mean any exterior source of light emanating from a man-made device, including but not limited to, incandescent, mercury vapor, metal halide or sodium lamps, spotlights, flood lights, landscaping lights, street lights, vehicular lights, construction or security lights. 
    Art studio means the workshop of a professional artist, sculptor, photographer, or other craftsperson. 
    Asphalt or concrete plant means an establishment engaged in the manufacture, mixing or batching of asphalt, asphaltic cement, cement or concrete products. 
    Assembly, nonprofit institutional means a site or facility, open to the public, owned or operated by a not-for-profit organization for social, educational or recreational purposes. Typical uses include museums, cultural centers, recreational facilities, botanical gardens or nonresidential community services such as soup kitchens and medical services. 
    Assembly, nonprofit membership means a site or facility owned or operated by a not-for-profit organization for social, educational or recreational purposes where paid membership is required. Typical uses include fraternal or cultural organizations and union halls. 
    Assured construction means, for the purposes of Article 15, Road Construction Improvements scheduled to be made to the Wellington Roadway system by one (1) or more of the following means: 
(a)  Inclusion in the adopted Five-Year County Road Program for commencement of construction; provided any anticipated non-public funds are secured by Performance Security; 
(b)  Inclusion in the adopted Five-Year Florida Department of Transportation Work Program for commencement of construction; 
(c)  Wellington Roadway or Intersection improvement for which a contract for construction which is secured by performance security has been executed and which, by its terms, requires that construction be completed within six (6) years; 
(d)  Wellington Roadway or Intersection improvement which will be constructed pursuant to an agreement; and which, by its terms, requires that construction be completed within six (6) years: 
(e)  Wellington Roadway or Intersection improvements which is required to be constructed pursuant to a condition of a development order which by its terms requires that it be completed within six (6) years and which has been secured by performance security; 
(f)  Specific inclusion in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan for commencement of construction within five (5) years provided: (1) the improvements are financially feasible, based on currently available public revenue sources adequate to complete the improvement; and (2) a comprehensive plan amendment would be required to eliminate, defer, or delay construction. 
    Attic means the non-habitable storage area immediately beneath the pitch of a roof. 
    Auction, enclosed means an establishment engaged in the public sale of goods to the highest bidder, with all of the activity and display of merchandise occurring inside an enclosed building. 
    Auction, outdoor means an establishment engaged in the public sale of goods to the highest bidder, with all or a portion of the activity and display of merchandise occurring outside of an enclosed building. 
    Automotive paint or body shop means an establishment engaged in the painting, repainting, or retouching of motor vehicles, or performance of major external repairs of a non-mechanical nature. 
    Automotive service station means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other motor fuels, which may include accessory activities such as the sale of accessories or supplies, the lubrication of motor vehicles, the minor adjustment or minor repair of motor vehicles, or the sale of convenience food items. 
    Aviculture means the breeding, raising and care of birds. 
    Background traffic means, for the purposes of Article 15, the projected traffic generation from previously approved but incomplete projects, and other sources of traffic growth, as described in Section 15.4.4.C. 
    Base building line means a line horizontally offset from and running parallel to the centerline of a street from which setbacks for front yard, corner side yard, and lot standards are measured as set forth in Section 6.5.7.G. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Bed and breakfast means an owner-occupied single-family dwelling that offers lodging for paying guests and which serves breakfast to these guests. 
    Berm means mounds or walls of earth that molded into landforms in a landscaped area. When berms are used for screening, buffering, or any other purpose, the berm shall be constructed such that soil erosion is prevented and sight triangles, are unobstructed. The surface of the berms shall be completely covered with plant material or durable mulch so that bare soil is not visible. Allowance for soil settlement shall be calculated at ten (10) percent after the berms are compacted. 
    Biohazardous waste means any solid waste or liquid waste which may present a threat of infection to humans. The term includes, but not limited to, non-liquid human tissue and body parts; hospital, laboratory or veterinary waste which contains human-disease causing agents; discarded sharps; human blood, human blood products and body fluids. 
    Blank copy means any paraphernalia including pennants, streamers, and banners that are intended solely to attract attention and which contain no letters or symbols. 
    Block means a parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, parks or other public space or a combination thereof. 
    Boarding house means a dwelling, or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or operation to three (3) or more boarders. 
    Boat trailer means a trailer used or designed to be used for the carrying of boats. 
    Boatyard means a facility intended to provide complete construction or repair services for marine crafts in addition to such dry storage as may be found complimentary to the primary use, but not including docking of pleasure craft for residential purposes. 
    Boundary plat. See Plat, boundary. 
    Bottled water means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), water that is sealed in a container or package and is offered for sale for human consumption or other uses. 
    Bottled water plant means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any place or establishment in which bottled water is prepared for sale. 
    Branch means, for purpose of Section 7.3 (Landscaping and Buffering), a secondary shoot or stem arising from one (1) of the main axes (i.e., trunk or leader) of a tree. 
    Breakaway walls mean any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic, or other suitable building material, that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific later loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Broadcasting studio means an establishment engaged in the provision of commercial broadcasting services accomplished through the use of electronic mechanisms. Typical uses include radio and television broadcasting studios. 
    Buffer, landscape. See Landscape, buffer. 
    Buffer, perimeter landscape means a continuous area of land which is required to be set aside along the perimeter of a lot in which landscaping is used to provide a transition between and to reduce the environmental, aesthetic and other impacts of one (1) type of land use upon another. 
    Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after the setbacks have been provided. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature. 
    Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the primary use of the lot on which it is located. 
    Building construction means the erection of a structure intended for human habitation in the case of residential land use, or occupancy or use of such in the case of non-residential land use. 
    Building coverage means that portion of the area of a lot, expressed as a percentage, occupied by the square footage of the ground floor area of a building or structure. 
    Building height means the vertical distance in feet from finished grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line for mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs, measured from the grade. 
    Building Official means the Division Head of the Building Division of PZB. 
    Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the governmental authority having jurisdiction, authorizing the construction of any building. Building permit includes a tie-down permit for a structure or building that does not require a building permit, such as a mobile home, in order to be occupied. 
    Building sewer means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a pipe conveying sewage from a house or building to an on-site sewage disposal system. 
    Building site means a portion or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a certain use or occupied by a building or group of buildings that are united by a common interest or use and the customary accessory buildings and open spaces belonging to the same. 
    Building supplies, retail means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of building supplies and home improvement products. 
    Building supplies, wholesale mean an establishment engaged in the sale or fabrication and allied products to contractors for the construction, maintenance, repair and improvement of real property. Retail sales of lumber and allied products to the consumer may be conducted, but must be clearly accessory to the primary use. 
    Buildout period means, for the purposes of Article 15, the anticipated time between the issuance of the development order and December 31 of the year of completion of a proposed project as assumed in the Traffic Impact Study and approved by the Village Engineer in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 15.4.4.B. 
    Bulkheads mean structures of concrete, wood, or other permanent material affixed to the land adjacent to a water management tract or other water body for the purpose of establishing a vertical surface at the waters edge and stabilizing the land behind the bulkhead; provided, however, that water control structures and endwalls around outfalls and bridges shall not be considered bulkheads. 
    Caliper means quantity in inches of the diameter of supplemental and replacement trees measured at the diameter at breast height or four and one-half (41/2) feet above the ground. 
    Campground means a plot of ground established as a commercial campsite for recreational use and not as living quarters. 
    Camping cabin means an accessory use for recreational vehicle parks which consists of a cabin used for sleeping. 
    Canopy, tree means the upper portions of trees consisting of limbs, branches, and leaves, which constitute the upper layer of a forested community. 
    Capacity means for the purpose of impact fees, the maximum number of vehicles for a given time period which a road can safely and efficiently carry, usually expressed in terms of vehicles per day. For the purpose of impact fees, the capacity of a road shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) vehicles per day per through lane. 
    Capacity projects means, for the purposes of adequate public school facilities, new school construction, or any project that adds necessary improvements to accommodate additional permanent student stations or core facilities needed for the educational program of each type of school based on the requirements of State Requirements for Educational Facilities. 
    Capital drainage facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of drainage facilities necessary to meet the LOS for Capital Drainage Facilities. 
    Capital facilities; Capital improvements means land, infrastructure, structures, and fixtures having a cost or value of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); personal property and equipment having an aggregate cost or value of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); hard-bound books and materials having a cost or value of at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which must be of a non-consumable nature and be expected to be in service for at least one (1) year; and, in the case of school sites, the land only, and not any improvements to the land. 
    Capital facility costs means all costs directly associated with the acquisition, design, engineering, site preparation, construction and placement of a capital facility. It excludes operation and maintenance costs, and the repair, replacement, or renovation of existing capital facilities where the capital facility improvement does not add capacity. In the case of the school site acquisition fee, it means the costs directly associated with the acquisition of fee simple absolute marketable title in land, and does not include the costs of improvement to that land. 
    Capital Improvement Element means the Capital Improvement Element of the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan. 
    Capital Potable Water Facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of potable water facilities necessary to meet the LOS for Capital Potable Water Facilities. 
    Capital Recreation and Park Facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of buildings and park equipment necessary to meet the LOS for district, community and neighborhood parks. 
    Capital Road Facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of roads on the Major Road Network System necessary to meet the LOS for Capital Road Facilities. 
    Capital Sanitary Sewer Facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of sanitary sewer facilities necessary to meet the LOS for Capital Sanitary Sewer Facilities. 
    Capital Solid Waste Facilities means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of solid waste facilities necessary to meet the LOS for Capital Solid Waste Facilities. 
    Car wash or auto detailing means an establishment primarily engaged in the washing or detailing of motor vehicles, which may use production line methods with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and which may employ some hand labor. Detailing includes hand washing and waxing, window tinting, striping, and interior cleaning. 
    Carport/Private garage means an accessory roofed structure or a portion of a main building providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles of the occupants of the main building. 
    Catchment means a sub-area of a drainage basin which contributes stormwater runoff by overland flow to a common collection point. 
    Certificate of Concurrency Reservation means a certificate approved by the Planning & Zoning Director with or without conditions and pursuant to the terms of Article 11, Adequate Public Facility Standards that constitutes proof of adequate public facilities to serve the proposed development, when all conditions have been met. A subsequent application for a development permit for development for which a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation has been approved, shall be determined to have adequate public facilities as long as the development order for which the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation was approved has not expired, and if relevant, the conditions in the Reservation are complied with, and the development is not altered to increase the impact of development on public facilities. 
    Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. See Village of Wellington Building Code of Ordinances, Article 2, Chapter 18. 
    Certificate to Dig means a certificate that is necessary prior to: 
• Issuance of a development order for parcels identified on the map of known archaeological sites; 
• Removal of a suspension order on a site where artifacts or fossilized human remains or non-human vertebrate fossils are found during the development process; or 
• Issuance of a development order for a Type III Excavation. 
    Champion tree means the largest tree of a species which has been designated by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
    Chipping and mulching means an establishment using a permanent facility designed to cut tree limbs, brush or construction debris into small pieces for use as mulch. 
    Church or place of worship means a premises or site used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious services or established place of worship, retreat site, camp, convent, seminary or similar facilities owned or operated by a tax exempt religious group for religious activities. 
    Clearing means the removal or material damage of landscape materials by disturbing excavating or removing the underlying soil. 
    Closure permit means that permit required by activities which must cease operation in Zone Two pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.3 Wellfield Protection. 
    Clustered lots means residential parking lots grouped on a common street or parking tract where access is either a dead-end street, loop, or otherwise designed so as to preclude its extension for access to additional lots. 
    Code means Code of Laws and Ordinances of Village of Wellington, Florida, including the Land Development Regulations (LDR). 
    Code Enforcement Manager means the Agency Head of the Division of Code Enforcement. 
    Code Enforcement Officer means any authorized agent or employees of the Village whose duty is to assure code compliance. 
    Collector street. See Street, collector. 
    College or university means an institution of higher learning offering undergraduate or graduate degrees, and including the buildings required for educational or support services, such as classrooms, laboratories, dormitories and the like. 
    Colonnade means, for the purpose of Section 6.8.3 (Multiple Use Planned Development District), a covered pedestrian structure over a sidewalk that is open to the street except for supporting columns. Awnings are not considered colonnades. 
    Commercial gain means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for any establishment which has received an occupational license. For the purpose of this Code, commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
    Commercial vehicle means a vehicle which is not used solely for personal nonbusiness activities. The following factors will be considered when determining commercial status: (1) Outside lettering designating a business of any kind, (2) use of vehicle, (3) size of vehicle. The following types of vehicles shall be considered commercial for the purposes of this section, but shall not be the only types of vehicles considered as commercial: truck cab; semi-trailer; taxi; tow truck; stepvan; construction vehicle; bus; trailer or utility trailer; a vehicle outfitted for commercial purposes or a vehicle with three (3) or more axles. 
    Community park means those facilities generally five (5) to sixty (60) acres in size that in Village of Wellington provide active recreational facilities to population bases under twenty-five thousand (25,000) persons. Recreational facilities include play areas, small groups of fields or courts suitable for programmed activities, community centers, and adequate bicycle and automobile parking areas and pedestrian paths to serve the facility. 
    Community vegetable garden means a plot of land used as a vegetable garden intended to be cultivated and harvested by a group of residents of the surrounding area. 
    Community water system means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a water system which serves at least fifteen (15) service connections used by year-round residents or which serves at least twenty-five (25) year round residents. 
    Compatibility means land uses that are congruous, similar and in harmony with one another because they do not create or foster undesirable health, safety or aesthetic effects arising from direct association of dissimilar, contradictory, incongruous, or discordant activities, including the impacts of intensity of use, traffic, hours of operation, aesthetics, noise, vibration, smoke, hazardous odors, radiation, function and other land use conditions. 
    Compensatory littoral zone or area means that underwater area within the water management tract or water body graded and planted as compensating for lost littoral zones from bulkheading or shading from structures over the water. 
    Complaining land means that land which is included in a residential district receiving sound levels above those permitted by Section 7.8, Miscellaneous Standards. 
    Completely enclosed means a building separated on all sides from the adjacent open area, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows or entrances or exit doors normally provided for the accommodation of persons, goods, or vehicles. 
    Composting facility means a facility that is designed and used for transforming, through biological decomposition, food, yard wastes and other organic material into soil or fertilizer. This use does not include backyard composting bins serving individual families. 
    Comprehensive Plan means the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. 
    Concurrency Exemption Determination means a determination that the land in the Village of Wellington area is exempt from the concurrency standards of the Plan. 
    Concurrency requirements of the Plan means the provisions in the Plan and the implementing land development regulations requiring that public facilities for traffic circulation, mass transit, sanitary sewer, potable water, recreation/open space, fire-rescue, solid waste, and drainage are available at the minimum levels of service concurrent with the impact of the Development; and, as to the applicability of expanded or more stringent traffic performance standards pursuant to State mandates under Ch. 163, Florida Statutes such requirements as set forth in the future traffic performance standards ordinance(s). 
    Concurrency Service Area (CSA) means the specific geographic unit within a School District in which school concurrency is applied and measured. 
    Concurrency Service Area Level of Service Standards means the maximum acceptable percentage of school utilization, as identified in the Agreement, determined by dividing the total number of students for all schools of each type of school in each CSA by the total number of permanent student stations for that type of school. 
    Condemnee means either: 
• The owner of a parcel of land against which an eminent domain proceeding has been initiated by a governmental authority; or 
• The owner of a parcel of land that has sold that parcel of land to a governmental authority under the threat of an eminent domain proceeding against the owner of a parcel of land, or 
• The governmental authority that has been sold a parcel of land by a land owner threatened by an eminent domain proceeding for that parcel of land. 
    Condemnor means either: 
• The governmental authority instituting an eminent domain proceeding against the owner of a parcel of land; or 
• The governmental authority that has been sold a parcel of land by a property owner threatened by an eminent domain proceeding for that parcel of land. 
    Condition of Approval means a condition imposed as part of, or associated with, the issuance of a valid local government development order. 
    Conditional use means those uses that are generally compatible with the other uses permitted in a district, but that require individual review of their location, design, configuration, intensity and density of use, structures, and may require the imposition of conditions pertinent thereto in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location, pursuant to Articles 5 and 6. 
    Cone of depression means an area of reduced water levels which results from the withdrawal of groundwater from a point of collective source such as a well, wellfield, dewatering site or quarry. The area extent and depth of the depression is a function of the hydraulic properties of the aquifer, the pumpage rates and recharge rates. 
    Congregate living facility means a residential land use consisting of any building or section thereof, residence, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or any other residential structure, whether or not operated for profit, which undertakes, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, care, housing, food service, and one (1) or more personal services for persons not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. In addition, the term shall include rehabilitative home care development service housing, senior housing and adult congregate living facilities for the physically impaired, mentally retarded, developmentally disabled persons, or persons sixty (60) years of age or older. The term shall not mean "nursing home," "intermediate care facility," or similar facility which provides medical care and support services to persons not capable of independent living. For the purposes of Article 10, Impact Fees the term shall include adult foster home, nursing home, adult congregate living facility, and adult day care center, as defined by Chapter 400, Florida Statutes. 
    Congregate living facility, Type 1 means a congregate living facility that provides a residence for no more than six (6) persons. 
    Congregate living facility, Type 2 means a congregate living facility that provides a residence for more than six (6) but less than fourteen (14) persons. 
    Congregate living facility, Type 3 means a congregate living facility that provides a residence fourteen (14) or more persons. 
    Congregate living personal services means assistance with or supervision of essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and ambulating; supervision of self-administered medication and such other similar services as may be defined by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. 
    Consecutive water system means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a water supply which receives water from some other water supply system, serves at least fifteen (15) service connections used by year round residents or serves at least 25-year round residents. 
    Consistency means, for the purposes of adequate public school facilities, the condition of not being in conflict with and in furtherance of the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the School Concurrency Agreement. 
    Construction means the placement, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or demolition of a building or structure on land, the placement of concrete, asphalt, similar materials on land, or grading or earthwork of land. 
    Construction work means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action to buildings or land. 
    Contaminant means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Contiguous means, but is not limited to, lands separated only by streets, easements, pipelines, power lines, conduits, rights-of-way under ownership of the land owner of one (1) of the subject parcels, a property owners association or a governmental agency, or a public utility. For density purposes only, contiguous means lots that share a common border. (Lots that touch point-to-point, and lots which are separated by waterways, streets or major easements are not considered contiguous for density calculations.) 
    Contractor's storage yard means storage and accessory office performed by building trade and service contractors on lots other than construction sites. 
    Control device means the element of a discharge structure which allows release of water under controlled conditions. 
    Control elevation means the lowest elevation at which water can be released through a control device. 
    Convenience store means an establishment, not exceeding three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of gross floor area, serving a limited market area and engaged in the retail sale or rental, from the premises, of food, beverages, and other frequently or recurrently needed items for household use, excluding gasoline sales. 
    Convenience store with gas sales means an establishment, not exceeding three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of gross floor area, serving a limited market area and primarily engaged in the retail sale or rental, from the premises, of food, beverages, and other frequently or recurrently needed items for household use, including accessory gasoline sales. 
    Core facilities means, for the purposes of adequate public school facilities, the media center, cafeteria, toilet facilities, and circulation space of an education plant. 
    County means Palm Beach County, Florida. 
    County Health Director means the Agency Head of the Palm Beach County Public Health Unit (PBCPHU). 
    Covenant means a recordable instrument that runs with the land, binds the fee simple owner, heirs, successors, and assigns, and is recorded. It may include recorded Development Agreements or other agreements. Covenants may include Village of Wellington as a party or intended beneficiary, shall recite the benefit intended, and shall include any terms or conditions under which it may be released. 
    Cross-connection means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any physical arrangement whereby any drinking water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the drinking water supply as the result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
    CRALLS means, for the purposes of Article 15, a Constrained Roadway at a Lower Level of Service - a Major Thoroughfare on which a lower Level of Service is set as designated by Palm Beach County. 
    Cul-de-sac means a dead-end street terminating in a circular vehicular turn-around. 
    Data and information processing means the use of an establishment for business offices of an industrial nature, including corporate centers, mail processing and telemarketing centers, Such uses are not frequented by the general public. 
    Day care center, general means an establishment, licensed by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, which provides daytime or nighttime care, protection for twenty-one (21) or more children or adults for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis. 
    Day care center, limited means an establishment, licensed by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, which provides daytime care, protection and supervision for six (6) to twenty (20) children or three (3) to twenty (20) adults for a period of less than thirteen (13) hours per day on a regular basis. Limited day care centers do not provide nighttime care. 
    Day labor employment service means an establishment engaged in providing temporary day labor services for the construction or industrial trades. 
    Dead-end street. See Street, dead-end. 
    Decision/order means an administrative act of any Board, unless otherwise noted, constituting final agency action consistent with their powers as described herein. 
    Density means the ratio of the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
    Density bonus means density afforded by special density programs such as Transfer of Development Rights and Voluntary Density Bonus Program which is an increase in the residential density of development that the Council permits on a parcel of land over and above the maximum density PUD permitted by the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan as amended for the future land use category in which it is located. 
    Density, maximum level means the amount of density allowed by the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. 
    Density, minimum level means the amount of minimum density that must be attained when land is developed pursuant to the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. 
    Density, standard means the amount of density allowed by the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. 
    Department means the departments and divisions of the Village which are assigned the responsibility of administering and enforcing this Code, generally referred to as the Planning Department. 
    Detention means the collection and temporary storage of stormwater runoff for the purpose of treatment and/or discharge rate control with subsequent gradual release directly to surface waters. 
    Detention/Retention means an area, typically basin-shaped, which is designed to capture substantial quantities of stormwater and to gradually release the same at a sufficiently slow rate to avert flooding. 
    Developer means any person, including a governmental agency, undertaking any development. 
    Developer's agreement means an agreement entered into among Village of Wellington, a service provider(s) and a person associated with the development of land pursuant to the terms of this Code. 
    Developer's engineer means a single engineering firm or a professional engineer registered in Florida, and engaged by the developer to coordinate the design and monitor the construction of the work required under Article 8, Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements. 
    Development means any proposed material change in the use or character of the land including, but not limited to land clearing or the placement of any structure or site improvement of land. 
    Development means the carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use or appearance of land, or the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. 
    Development means, for the purpose of impact fees, as the context indicates, either the carrying on of construction or any physical alteration of a building or structure; the result of such activity; a legally divisible parcel of land developed under a common plan; or the change in any use of a structure or land that increases the impact on capital facilities for which the particular impact fee is assessed. It includes the placement of a mobile home for dwelling purposes. 
    Development means, for the purpose of archaeological preservation, the definition in § 380.04, Fla. Stat. as well as site preparation work consisting of excavation, earth moving, and the like. This definition shall not include: (1) the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. 
    Development means, for the purpose of Article 9, Environmental Standards, and Article 11, Adequate Public Facilities Standards, the definition in § 380.04, Fla. Stat., except that it shall not include the following items listed therein: 
• Demolition of a structure; 
• Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on the Parcel unless the valid Local Government Development Order is exclusively and specifically for such; 
• Site preparation work consisting of excavation, earth moving, and the like unless tied to a contract for required improvements or backed by surety, or as part of a local development order; and 
• Lot clearing. 
    Development agreement means an agreement entered into among the Village of Wellington, a service provider and a person associated with the development of land pursuant to the terms of this Code. 
    Development of regional impact means a specific type of development as defined in § 380.06, Fla. Stat. 
    Development order means any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions an application for development permit as defined in § 163.3164(7), Florida Statutes. 
    Development order, final means a development order for Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan, or a building permit. 
    Development order, preliminary means a development order for an amendment to the Future Land Use Map, a planned development, a conditional use, a special use, a variance, a flood prevention permit, an environmentally sensitive lands permit, a wetlands permit, a wellfield protection permit, or a rezoning. 
    Development permit means any amendment to the text of this Code or rezoning, conditional use, special use, planned development, Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan, subdivision, building permit, variance, special exception, certificate of conformity or any other official action of the Village of Wellington having the effect of permitting the development of land or the specific use of land. 
    Dewatered Domestic Wastewater Residuals means the solid, semisolid or liquid residue removed during the treatment of wastewater which is more than twelve (12) percent or greater dry solids by weight. Not included is the treated effluent or reclaimed water from a domestic wastewater treatment plant. 
    Diameter at breast height (dbh) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground. 
    Director of Parks and Recreation means the Agency Head of the Village of Wellington Parks and Recreation Department. 
    Director of Planning & Zoning means the Planning Director or appointed representative. 
    Director of Water Utilities means the Agency Head of the Village of Wellington Water Utilities Department. 
    Directly accessed means, for the purpose of Article 15, the paved Link(s) that serve as the project's immediate and direct access or means of ingress and egress. Each access point of a project shall be considered to have access to at least one (1) Link provided that the access points of a project may be considered to share a common Link. If a given access point is not immediately connected to a directly assessed link, the first link or links connected shall be Links(s). If a project access point is connected to more than one (1) Link, project trips shall be assigned to the Links, and Links shall be determined to be directly accessed, in accordance with accepted traffic engineering principles. 
    Discharge structure means a structural device, constructed or fabricated from durable material such as concrete, metal, or decay-resistant timber, through which water is released to surface water from detention. 
    Dispatching office means an establishment principally involved in providing services off-site to households and businesses using land-based communication. Typical uses include janitorial services, pest control services, and taxi limousine, and ambulance services. 
    Disposition, off-site means the off-premises transportation of excavated material. 
    Disposition, on-site means the on-premise use of extractive or excavated material. 
    Distribution box means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a receptacle placed between a septic tank or other treatment receptacle and a drainfield to equalize the flow through two (2) or more lines of distribution pipe. 
    Distribution pipe means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), an open jointed or perforated pipe installed in a drainfield for dispersion of the effluent from a septic tank or other treatment unit. 
    District means any certain described zoning district of the Village of Wellington to which these regulations apply and within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    District park means those Village of Wellington facilities generally between sixty (60) and two hundred and fifty (250) acres in size that primarily provide active recreational facilities and to a lesser degree some passive recreational facilities, where possible. Recreational facilities include special facilities such as competition pools, golf courses, or boat ramps and marinas, large groups of lighted fields or courts suitable for scheduled league activities, and adequate support facilities with bicycle and automobile parking areas and pedestrian paths to accommodate those using the park. 
    Disturbed excavated area means the total area altered by excavation activities. 
    Dock, private means a structure built on or over the water which is designed or used to provide no more than ten (10) boat slips, and anchorage for and access to one (1) or more boats belonging to the property owner. Necessary services such as water, and other utilities are considered a part of a dock; which does not provide a fuel facility, however, no cooking, sleeping or business activity shall be permitted. 
    Domestic sewage means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), wastewater normally conveyed by drains and sewers, including bath, toilet wastes, laundry and kitchen wastes from residential use and waste from other household plumbing fixtures. 
    Drainage basin means a sub-area of a watershed which contributes stormwater runoff to a watercourse tributary to the main receiving water. 
    Drain trenches means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a drainfield installation in which the effluent from the septic tank or other treatment receptacle is distributed in separate trenches. 
    Drainage easement. See Easement, drainage. 
    Drainfield invert means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the inside bottom of the distribution pipe at the lowest point in a drainfield. 
    Drainfield system means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a subsurface system designed to receive the effluent from a septic tank or other treatment receptacle for treatment and absorption through the soil. The system also includes distribution box, header pipe and automatic dosing device. 
    Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground, provided, however, that the same shall not be less than a ten-foot diameter circle which is drawn through the center of the truck of a tree. 
    Drive-thru means any place of business which serves, sells or otherwise makes available its services or products to patrons situated in automobiles for their off-premise use or consumption. 
    Driveway, shared means a driveway that serves more than one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Drought-tolerant tree means a tree, excluding prohibited or controlled species, classified as very or moderately drought tolerant in the SFWMD Xeriscape Plant Guide. 
    Dry detention/retention means detention or retention of water in a storage facility which is designed, constructed, and operated to limit the duration of ponding within the facility so as to maintain a normally dry bottom between rainfall events. 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with only one (1) kitchen plus sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the unit, for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. Specialized residences, such as accessory apartments for the elderly or handicapped, congregate living facility quarters, groom's quarters, or migrant labor quarters shall not be considered "dwelling units" for the purpose of applying restriction on density contained in the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan or this Code. 
    Easement means any strip of land created by a subdivider or granted by the owner, for public or private access utilities, drainage, sanitation or other specified uses having limitations, the title to which shall remain in the name of the land owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the servitude. 
    Easement, drainage means an easement establishing rights to collect, drain or convey surface water by means of natural or man-made facilities, including, but not limited to water bodies, water courses, canals, ditches, swales, storm sewers and overland flow. It also includes any fee interest of a governmental entity in land to collect, drain, or convey water. 
    Easement, lake maintenance means an expressed easement, created by plat dedication or other instrument of record, establishing access and use rights on or to the periphery of a water management tract for purposes of construction, maintenance, and repair of wet detention/retention facilities and appurtenant structures therein. 
    Easement, limited access means an easement established adjacent to a street for the purpose of prohibiting vehicular access to the street from abutting property except at those locations specifically authorized by the Village Council. 
    Easement, public means an easement granted to a governmental entity, public agency, a utility, or the public. 
    Easement, quasi-public means an easement granted to a property owners association in which the Village or public have some beneficial interest. 
    Easement, utility means an easement established for the purpose of the installation, operation, repair, or maintenance of facilities and equipment used to provide utility services. 
    Easement holder or beneficiary means the grantee of an easement or persons directly benefiting from the existence of the easement. 
    Ecosystem means an assemblage of living organisms (plants, animals, microorganisms, etc.) and nonliving components (soil, water, air, etc.) that functions as a dynamic whole through which organized energy flows. 
    Educational Institution means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, a premises or site within a municipality or within the unincorporated area of the Village upon which there is a governmentally licensed child care facility for six (6) or more children or elementary or secondary (k-12) school, attended in whole or in part by persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Effective capacity means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the volume of a treatment receptacle contained below the liquid level line. 
    Effective depth means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the depth of a treatment receptacle measured from the inside bottom up to the liquid level. 
    Effective soil depth means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the depth of satisfactory (slight or moderate limited) soil material lying above a non-pervious soil layer such as heavy clays, hardpan, muck or bedrock. Satisfactory soils do not impede the movement of air and water or the growth of plant roots. 
    Elderly person has the meaning given to it in § 760.22(5)(a), Fla. Stat., as amended. 
    Electrical power facility means a principal use of property for an electrical generation, or transmission voltage switching station. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building that has its lowest floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter wall pilings, columns, posts or piers, shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore land to a safe condition following a calamity, or work required to protect persons or land from imminent exposure to danger. 
    Emergency means any unusual incident which results in immediate danger to the health, safety, welfare or resources of the residents of the Village, including damages to, or erosion of, any shoreline resulting from a hurricane, storm, or other such violent disturbance. 
    Eminent domain proceedings mean either (1) those formal court initiated civil actions to acquire fee simple, easement, or right-of-way interest in land for governmental purposes, or (2) a voluntary conveyance of such in lieu of formal court initiated action. 
    Employee means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, any person who works, performs or exposes his/her specified anatomical areas in an establishment, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wages by the owner or manager of the business, establishment, or premises. "Employee" shall include any person who pays any form of consideration to an owner or manager of an establishment, for the privilege to work performing or exposing his/her specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
    Employment center means an optional sector area land use zone intended to provide an appropriate location for workplace light industrial and professional office land uses that are more intensive in nature than workplace uses. Employment center uses are based upon a demonstrated need for employment within a sector area and are approved by the Village Council. 
    Encroachment, vehicular means any protrusion of a motor vehicle outside of the boundaries of a vehicular use area into a landscape or other area. 
    Encumber means to reserve or earmark funds for a specific expenditure or an identified development. 
    Energy conservation zone means a zone located no more than twenty-two (22) feet from a structure in a one hundred eighty (180) degree band from due east of the northeast point of the structure, to due south, to due west of the northwest point of the structure. 
    Enforcement Board means the Village of Wellington Code Enforcement Board. 
    Engineer means a person licensed and registered as a professional engineer in the State of Florida. 
    Enhancement means a human activity which increases one (1) or more natural functions of an existing wetland. 
    Enlargement or to enlarge means an addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any other structure, an addition of a use or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an approved use. 
    Entertainment, indoor means an establishment offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge and wholly enclosed in a building, excluding fitness centers and gun clubs. Typical uses include bowling alleys, bingo parlors, movie theaters, pool halls, billiard parlors and video game arcades. 
    Entertainment, outdoor means an establishment offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open, excluding golf courses and public parks. Typical uses of an athletic nature include archery ranges, athletic fields, batting cages, golf driving ranges and tennis courts. Other uses include go-cart tracks, miniature golf courses, jet skiing, swimming pools, tennis courts and wind surfing but excluding gun clubs. 
    Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) means a comprehensive written report prepared by a qualified ecologist or biologist that identifies and discusses the quality of any natural features and wildlife existing on a site. (See Village of Wellington Natural Resource Protection Code Technical Guide.) 
    Equestrian arena means an establishment engaged in commercial spectator activities involving horse racing or equestrian shows, but excluding any establishment engaged in pari-mutual betting. 
    Establishment means the site or premises on which the business is located, including the interior of the business, or portion thereof, upon which activities or operations are being conducted for commercial gain. 
    Establishment means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a single structure or a group of structures other than a single-family residence on one (1) or more parcels of land with common access, parking, drainage facilities and/or water supply. 
    Estate kitchen means an accessory use which is physically integrated within the main residence. 
    Excavate or excavation means any act by which material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, related or otherwise deliberately disturbed, including the conditions resulting therefrom. Excavation excludes agricultural plowing and site grading, demucking and canal dredging in preparation for construction. 
    Excavation, agricultural means excavation undertaken to support bona fide agricultural production operations including but not limited to the creation of canal laterals and roads, but excluding customary agricultural activities such as plowing and maintenance of canal laterals. 
    Excavation, commercial. See Excavation, Type III. 
    Excavation, Type I (A) means excavation necessary for the construction of a single family dwelling as permitted by right in any zoning district with a lot area greater than one (1.0) acre. 
    Excavation, Type I (B) means excavation necessary for the creation of a pond which shall be accessory to a single family dwelling permitted by right in any zoning district on a lot greater than two and one-half (2.5) acres. 
    Excavation, Type II means excavation necessary to implement a final site development plan. 
    Excavation, Type III means the mining, quarrying, developing of mines for exploration of nonmetallic minerals, except fuels, or other extractive materials primarily for commercial purposes, including but not limited to treating, crushing, or processing the material or off-site disposition for fill. 
    Excused absence means an absence by a member of an advisory board, or administrative or decision making body, due to illness, absence from the Village of Wellington, or personal hardship, if approved by official action of the advisory board, or administrative or decision making body. 
    Exfiltration system means any gallery, perforated or "leaky" pipe or similarly designed structure which is used to dispose of untreated stormwater by allowing the routed water to percolate by subsurface discharge directly or indirectly into the groundwater. 
    Expenditure means the irrevocable contractual obligation which requires the remittance of money by the applicant for services, goods, facilities, or fixtures, for the project; the post remittance of money for such. 
    FAC means the Florida Administrative Code. 
    Family means either a single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household, including not more than one (1) boarder, roomer, or lodger as herein described; or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a common household, including not more than one (1) such boarder, roomer, or lodger; or not more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a non-profit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. A common household shall be deemed to exist if all members thereof have access to all parts of the dwelling. 
    Farm residence means a dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, located on a parcel of land used for a bona fide agricultural use and occupied by the owner or operator of the farm operation. 
    Farm structure means any building or structure used for agricultural purposes excluding those used for residences. 
    Farm workers quarters mean one (1) or more residential structures located on the site of a bona fide agricultural use and occupied by year-round farm workers employed by the owner of the farm. 
    Fence means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
    Filling means the placement of any material in, on, or over a jurisdictional wetland. 
    Final site plan means the most recent site plan approved by the Development Review Committee. 
    Final subdivision plan means the most recent subdivision plan approved by the Development Review Committee. 
    Financial institution means an establishment engaged in deposit banking. Typical uses include commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions, including outdoor automated teller machine and drive-thru facilities. 
    Fire-rescue facilities mean the planning, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of fire-rescue facilities and the purchase of equipment necessary to meet the LOS for fire-rescue facilities. 
    Firewall means a wall of incombustible construction which subdivides a building or separates buildings to restrict the spread of fire and which starts at the foundation and extends continuously through all stories to and above the roof, except where the roof is of fireproof or fire-resistive construction and the wall is carried up tightly against the underside of the roof slab, pursuant to the Village of Wellington Building Code. 
    Fitness center means an enclosed building or structure generally containing multi-use facilities for conducting, including but not limited to, the following recreational activities: aerobic exercises, weight lifting, running, swimming, racquetball, handball, and squash. A fitness center may also include the following customary accessory activities as long as they are intended for the use of the members of the center and not for the general public: babysitting service, bathhouse, food service, and the serving of alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises. This use also includes dance studios and karate schools. 
    Fixed mechanical equipment means mechanical equipment, such as an air conditioning unit, water cooling tower, swimming pool pump, irrigation pump, well water pump, fan, power generator or other similar power source equipment, permanently affixed to land, as distinguished from temporary, portable, non-fixed mechanical equipment. 
    Flea market, enclosed means retail sales within a building permanently enclosed by walls and roof in which floor space is rented to individual merchants to display and sell goods. 
    Flea market, open means an outdoor retail sales area in which parcels of land are rented to individual merchants to display and sell goods. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally day land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. Terms associated with flooding include: 
•  Frequent, which means flooding which occurs more than once every two (2) years on the average; 
•  Ten (10) year flood elevation, which means that flood elevation which has a ten (10) in one hundred (100) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any calendar year. 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means the official map of the Village of Wellington, produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or by Palm Beach County, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
    Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means the land area adjacent to the normal limits of a watercourse or water body which is inundated during a flood event of specified magnitude or return period. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of slab in concrete construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Floor area means the gross horizontal square footage of all floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or other type of enclosure, or from the centerline of a wall separating two (2) buildings. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio of the gross floor area of all structures on a lot to the lot area, excluding vertical core circulation areas for multistory structures. 
    Floor area, gross leasable means that portion of the total floor area designed and used for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including any basements, mezzanines or upper floors but excluding stairwells, elevator shafts, equipment and utility rooms. The area shall be expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
    Floor area, total leasable. See Floor area, gross leasable. 
    Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH) means the report of the capacity of existing facilities. The FISH capacity is the number of students that may be housed in a facility (school) at any given time based on using a percentage of the number of existing satisfactory student stations and a designated size for each program. In the Village, permanent capacity does not include the use of relocatables unless they meet the standards for long-term use pursuant to § 235.061, Florida Statutes. 
    Food service means at least one (1) full meal being provided to each resident, every day, in a central dining area. 
    Footcandle means a unit of illumination that is equal to one (1) lumen distributed evenly over a one (1) square foot area. 
    Fossil means a remnant or trace of an organism of a past geological age. 
    Fruit and vegetable market, outdoor means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of fruits, vegetables and other agricultural food products. 
    Functions means the roles wetlands serve, including but not limited to flood storage, flood conveyance, ground water recharge and discharge, erosion control, wave attenuation, water quality enhancement and protection, nutrient removal, food chain support, wildlife habitat, breeding and habitat grounds for fishery species, and recreational values. 
    Funeral home or crematory means an establishment engaged in preparing the human deceased for burial and arranging and managing funerals. 
    Future Land Use Map means the official map upon which the boundaries of each district are designated and established as approved and adopted by the governing body, made a part of the official public records of the Village of Wellington, and shall be the final authority as to amend zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the Village and incorporated into this code by reference. 
    Garage, private. See Carport/Private garage. 
    Garage sale means the casual sale of household articles by occupants of private households. 
    Garden trash means waste consisting or accumulation of leaves, grass, shrubbery, vines and trees, or parts thereof. 
    Gas and fuel, wholesale means the use of a site for bulk storage and wholesale distribution of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons or more of flammable liquid, or two thousand (2,000) gallons water capacity or more of flammable gas, excluding below-ground storage which is clearly accessory to the principal use on the site. 
    Generic substance list means those general categories of substances set forth in Appendix 9.4. Wellfield Protection attached hereto and incorporated herein. The generic substance list is provided for informational purposes and may be revised from time to time by the Department without further action by the Village Council. 
    Glare means a discomforting condition which occurs when the brightness of a light contrasts with a low brightness background and makes it difficult for the human eye to adjust. 
    Golf course means a facility providing a private or public golf recreation area designed for executive or regulation play along with accessory golf support facilities, but excluding miniature golf. 
    Government services means buildings or facilities owned or operated by a government entity and providing services for the public, excluding utility and recreational services. Typical uses include administrative offices of government agencies, public libraries, and police and fire stations. 
    Grade, finished, for the purpose of determining height, shall mean: 
• For parcels whose lot line adjoin one (1) street only, finished grade is the average of the natural grade measured from the center of the front property line to the center of the rear lot line. 
• For parcels whose lot line adjoins more than street finished grade is the average natural grade of all measurement lines, measured from the property line(s) adjoining the street(s) to the opposite property line(s). 
    Grain milling or processing means facilities for processing and storing grain or other nonperishable crops. Typical uses include cotton gins and grain mills. 
    Grass means low growing plants which creep along the earth surface to form a solid mat or lawn. Only perennial grasses (those which live for more than one (1) growing season) shall qualify to satisfy the requirements of the Code. 
    Grassed parking means that portion of a development's required off-street parking requirement that meets the standards of Section 7.2 (Off-street parking regulations). 
    Grease trap means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a watertight receptacle or reservoir receiving wastewater from a kitchen or other source containing grease. 
    Greenhouse means an accessory structure consisting of a glass or hard plastic enclosure used to protect plants from insects, heat, cold and exposure to the sun. 
    Greenway means multi-purpose open space corridors of private and public lands, which may be located within a public right-of-way, an edge area, a landscape buffer, or an easement, and may contain pedestrian paths, bicycle facilities, jogging paths, equestrian paths and fitness trails. Greenways are employed to provide usable open space close to residential areas, and provide alternative access ways connecting a variety of uses, such as residential areas, parks, school, cultural facilities and employment centers. Greenways also provide aquifer recharge, preserve unique features or historic or archaeological sites, and can link urban rural areas. 
    Groom's quarters means on-site living quarters for persons responsible for grooming and caring for horses boarded at the stable. 
    Gross land area means the total area, including all public and private areas within the legal boundaries of a particular parcel of land or project. 
    Ground cover means low growing plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity. 
    Ground floor means a level of building, the floor of which is located not more than two (2) feet below nor more than six (6) feet above finished grade. 
    Ground water means water beneath the surface of the ground within a zone of saturation where such water is at or above atmospheric pressure, whether within the voids between soil particles or within solution channels or fractures in rock. 
    Ground-level barrier means, for the purposes of Article 9, Environmental Standards, any natural or artificial structure rising above the ground which prevents beachfront lighting from shining directly onto the beach-dune system. 
    Groves/row crops means the cultivation of fruits and vegetables for bona-fide agricultural purposes. 
    Grubbing means removal of vegetation from land by means of digging, raking, dragging or otherwise disturbing the roots of the vegetation and the soil in which roots are located. 
    Guaranty means sufficient funds over which the Village of Wellington has control irrevocably committed by written instrument to secure complete performance of a contract for required improvements, condition of a Development Order or Road Agreement. 
    Guest cottage means accessory sleeping quarters provided for non-paying guests by the occupant of a principal single family dwelling unit. A kitchen or cooking facilities are not permitted in a guest cottage. A guest cottage shall be considered an accessory use to a single family home and shall comply with the supplementary use standards as outlined in Section 6.4.4. 
    Gun club, enclosed means an indoor facility used for the discharge of firearms or projectiles at targets. 
    Gun club, open means an outdoor facility used for the discharge of firearms or projectiles at targets. 
    Habitable room means a room occupied by one (1) or more persons for living, eating, sleeping, or working purposes. It does not include toilets, laundries, serving and storage pantries, corridors, cellars, and spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods. 
    Handicapped person has the meaning given in § 393.063(6) and § 760.22(5)(a)(6) Fla. Stat. 
    Handicapped spaces means parking spaces designed, marked and reserved for exclusive use by persons properly registered as handicapped. 
    Hatracking means the severe cutting back of branches, making intemodal cuts to lateral limbs leaving branch stubs. 
    HCM Manual means, for the purposes of Article 15, the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual as published by the Transportation Research Board. 
    Health hazard means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any condition, device, or practice in a water supply system or its operation which creates or may create an imminent or substantial danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Heated or cooled area means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), that enclosed area of a dwelling unit, excluding the garage, carport, open or screened patios or decks, which is heated or cooled by mechanical systems designed to control or modify indoor temperature. 
    Heavy industry means an establishment engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing flammable, hazardous or explosive materials, or processes which potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Typical uses include manufacturing and warehousing of chemicals, dry ice, fertilizers, fireworks and explosives, pulp and paper products, and radioactive materials; fat rendering plants; slaughterhouses and tanneries; steel works; and petroleum refineries. 
    Hedge means shrubs planted in a continuous line which will block at least eighty (80) percent of a view in a maximum of two (2) growing seasons after installation. 
    Helipad/helistop means an area designated for the landing and departure of helicopters. 
    Heliport means an area designated for the landing or departure of helicopters, and including any or all of the area or buildings which are appropriate to accomplish these functions, including refueling. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historical Growth Rate Table means, for the purposes of Article 15, a table prepared by the County Traffic Division and /or the Village Engineer showing the preceding three (3) year's increase or decrease in average annual daily traffic on various links, based upon traffic counts and which provide the information to be used in projecting the background traffic during the buildout period of the proposed project. 
    Home instruction, inside means teaching which takes place inside the dwelling unit of the instructor. Typical instruction includes music lessons and academic tutoring. 
    Home instruction, outside means teaching which takes place outside the dwelling unit, on the property of the instructor. This type of instruction is limited to subject matter which necessitates outside instruction. Typical instruction includes tennis, swimming lessons, dog training and equestrian lessons. 
    Home occupation means a business, profession, occupation or trade conducted within a dwelling unit for gain or support by a resident of the dwelling unit pursuant to the limits of this code. 
    Hospital means a medical facility as provided in § 395.002(12), Florida Statutes, as amended. 
    Hospital or medical center means a facility licensed by the State of Florida which maintains and operates organized facilities for medical or surgical diagnosis, care, including overnight and outpatient care, and treatment of human illness. A hospital is distinguished from a medical center by the provision of surgical facilities. 
    Hotel or motel means a commercial establishment used, maintained or advertised as a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for short term rent to tenants, in which rooms are furnished for the accommodation of such guests, which may have as an accessory use one (1) or more dining rooms. Typical uses include hotels, motels, single room occupancy (SROs) and rooming and boarding houses. 
    Impact Fee Coordinator shall mean the Person appointed by the Village Manager to perform such functions as designated under this Ordinance or the designee of such Person. 
    Impervious surface means any area of land consisting of or covered by material that prevents absorption of water into the ground. 
    Incinerator means a permanent facility operated alone or in conjunction with a resource recovery facility or landfill for the purpose of burning biohazardous waste, solid waste or trash to ash as regulated by the Environmental Control Board under Ordinances 92-22 and 92-23. 
    Incompatibility of land use means issues arising from the proximity or direct association of contradictory, incongruous or discordant land uses or activities, including the impacts of noise, vibration, smoke, odors, toxic matter, radiation and similar environment al conditions. 
    Inconsistent use means for the purpose of Section 6.5, Property Development Regulations, any and all construction not related to the purpose of the easement, and any and all landscaping other than turf grass (seed/sod). 
    Independent calculation/independent analysis means the data, analysis and report prepared by a fee-payer for the purpose of establishing a different impact fee amount than the one set forth in Article 10. 
    Industrial equipment/heavy machinery means farm tractors and implements, bulldozers, drag lines, cranes, derricks, heavy earth moving equipment normally used in farming, excavation or heavy construction activities. For the purposes of this definition, all machinery that uses steel tracks for traction shall also be considered heavy machinery. 
    Industrial waste means waste generated from commercial and industrial operations, other than agricultural, including but not limited to the processing, manufacturing, packaging, repair, maintenance or production of marketable goods. Construction and demolition debris shall be considered industrial waste. 
    Industrial wastewater means, wastewater generated by commercial or industrial establishments as a result of manufacturing, preparation, processing, or handling of materials, chemicals and/or food products, and from cleaning or washing operations. Laundromats, food service establishments, bakeries and car wash facilities are specifically included in this definition. 
    Ingress means entry. 
    In-kind contribution means the conveyance, dedication, construction, placement, delivery or remittance of land, buildings, improvements, fixtures, personal property or money to the Village of Wellington or the Palm Beach County School Board for capital facilities for which impact fees are levied. 
    Intensity means the number of square feet per acre and specific land use for non-residential uses. 
    Internal trips means, for the purpose of Article 15, trips from a Proposed Project that do not exit the Project or enter the Wellington Roadway system. 
    Inundation means the presence of water, in motion or standing, of sufficient depth to damage property due to the mere presence of water or the deposition of silt or which may be a nuisance, hazard or health problem. 
    Invasive non-native plant species or invasive non-native vegetation refers to those species defined as Category 1 invasive plant species by the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council. 
    Irrigation system means a system of pipes or other conduits designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
    Kennel, commercial means a commercial establishment, including any building or land used, for the raising, boarding, breeding, sale or grooming of such domesticated animals as dogs and cats, not necessarily owned by the occupants of the premises, for profit. 
    Kennel, private means any building used, designed or arranged to facilitate the non-commercial care of dogs cats owned by the occupants of the premises. 
    Kitchen means that portion of a structure used or designed to be used for the preparation of food, and including or designed to include a stove, refrigerator and sink. 
    Kitchen, estate means an accessory kitchen physically integrated within the principal dwelling. 
    Laboratory means a designated area or areas used for testing, research, experimentation, quality control, or prototype construction, but not used for repair or maintenance activities (excluding laboratory equipment), the manufacturing of products for sale, or pilot plant testing. 
    Laboratory, industrial research means an establishment engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature, other than medical testing and analysis and routine product testing, which is offered as a service or which is conducted by and for a private profit-oriented firm. 
    Lake finger means that portion of a dead-end water body which is less than fifty (50) feet in width and longer than one and one-half (11/2) times its width, as measured from the point at which the dead-end water body is less than fifty (50) feet wide. 
    Lake maintenance easement. See Easement, lake maintenance. 
    Land means the earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures customarily regarded as land. 
    Land application means the application or disposal of effluent or sludge on, above or into the surface of the ground through spray irrigation, land spreading, of other methods. 
    Land development permit means, for the purposes of Article 8, the development permit issued by the Village of Wellington authorizing construction of required improvements for a subdivision. 
    Land development regulations mean ordinances enacted by the Village of Wellington for the regulation of any aspect of development and includes any zoning, rezoning, subdivision, health, environmental, or sign regulations controlling the development of land. 
    Land use activity generating traffic means the carrying out of any building activity or the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land that attracts or produces vehicular trips over and above that produced by the existing use of the land. 
    Landscape architect means an individual engaged in the professional practice of landscape architecture. Such individual shall be licensed and currently registered within the state to practice under the bylaws as established by F.S. Chapter 481, Part II. 
    Landscape barrier means a landscape design feature constructed within a landscape buffer that is intended to channel pedestrian movement and impede vehicular access and to provide an abrupt transition between otherwise incompatible uses. A landscape barrier may consist of living plants (such as a hedge), structures (such as a wall or fence), or changes in grade (such as a berm). 
    Landscape buffer means a continuous area of land which is required by Section 7.3, Landscape and Buffering, to be set aside along the perimeter of a lot or parcel in which existing native vegetation, relocated native vegetation, and landscaping is used to provide a transition between and to reduce the negative environmental, aesthetic, compatibility and other impacts of one (1) use upon another. Buffers may contain both signage and pedestrian paths. 
    Landscape maintenance service means an establishment engaged in the provision of landscape installation or maintenance services, but excluding retail or wholesale sale of plants or lawn and garden supplies from the premises. 
    Landscaping means any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) or nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials). Landscaping may include the preservation and incorporation of existing trees, vegetation, or ecosystems into site development. 
    Laundry service means an establishment that provides home-type washing, drying, dry-cleaning, or ironing machines for hire, to be used by customers on the premises, or that is engaged in providing household laundry and dry cleaning services with customer drop-off and pick-up. 
    Legal access. See Access, legal. 
    Legal positive outfall means the permanently established connection of a stormwater discharge conveyance facility serving a development site to a watercourse or water body under the control and jurisdiction of one (1) or more public agencies, said connection being subject to all applicable agency permitting and approval requirements. 
    Level of Service (LOS) means an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be provided by a public facility or service based on and related to the operational characteristics of the public facility or service. For the purposes of Article 15, the measure of the functional and operational characteristics of a roadway or intersection based upon traffic volume in relation to road capacity or the amount of vehicle delay or average speed. For the purposes of adequate public school facilities, level of service shall mean the measure of the utilization, expressed as a percentage, which is the result of comparing the number of students enrolled in any school with the satisfactory student stations (FISH capacity) at a given location or within a designated area (i.e., a CSA); e.g., a facility with one thousand (1,000) students and a FISH capacity of nine hundred seventy (970), has a LOS of one hundred three (103) percent, also referred to as the utilization of a facility. 
    Library services mean those services provided by the Palm Beach County Library Taxing District. 
    Light cutoff means a luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors or refractor panels which direct light and eliminate light spillover and glare. 
    Limb means the same as the definition for branch. 
    Limited access easement. See Easement, limited access. 
    Limited access street. See Street, limited access. 
    Link means, for the purposes of Article 15, the portion of a Wellington Roadway between two (2) Wellington Intersections. 
    Listed species means those plant and animal species indicated as endangered, threatened, rare, commercially exploited, or species of special concern by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 
    Litter means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, can, bottle, box, container, paper, tobacco product, tire, appliance, mechanical equipment or part, building or construction material, tool, machinery, wood, motor vehicle or motor vehicle part, vessel, aircraft, farm machinery or equipment, sludge from a waste treatment facility, or air pollution control facility, or substance in any form resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or government operations. 
    Littoral Zone means that region of the shoreline beginning at the OHW and extending waterward to a maximum depth of minus three (-3) feet OHW. 
    Live/Work Unit means a residential dwelling unit combining residential living space with and accessory work space used by one (1) or more of the residents of the dwelling unit. 
    Livestock raising means the breeding, raising and caring for animals that are used for products. Livestock shall also include horses. 
    Loading space means the off-the street area designated for loading and unloading of trucks, in the form which may include one (1) or more truck berths located either within a building or in an open area on the same lot. 
    Local government means the Village of Wellington. 
    Local government development order means a Development Order properly issued by the Village through procedures established by Code which establishes the specific use or uses of land, sets the density, and involves an active and specific consideration by the Village of particular detailed development concept. It shall include Affidavits of Exemption and Subdivision approval. It typically involves the submission and review of a master plan, site plan, or building plans, but may not necessarily involve such. It shall not include land use designations established by a Local Government's Comprehensive Plan. It does not include comprehensive general rezoning/district boundary changes initiated by the Village. It typically involves a petition of the land owner for his property alone and not adjoining properties. It does not include vegetative removal, clearing, grading or demolition permits. 
    Local government comprehensive plan means the Comprehensive Plan of a local government adopted pursuant to § 163.3161, et seq. Fla. Stat. 
    Local planning agency means the local planning agency designated by the Village of Wellington to prepare the Comprehensive Plan pursuant to § 163.3161, et seq., Fla. Stat. 
    Local street. See Street, local. 
    LOS for Rural Service Area means the LOS established for the areas identified as the Rural Service Area in the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    LOS for Urban Service Area means the LOS established for those areas identified as the Urban Service Area in the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Lot means the smallest division of land identified as a single unit of ownership for conveyance and legal development purposes, and delineated by a closed boundary which is either: 
• Depicted on a record plat; 
• Depicted on a survey, map, or drawing for which an affidavit or waiver or affidavit of exemption has been recorded; or 
• Described on a recorded deed or agreement for deed. 
The total area of abutting lands joined pursuant to a recorded unity of title shall be deemed a single lot for the purposes of this code. As used herein, the term shall be synonymous with the terms "plot," "parcel," or "tract" when referring to lands within a closed boundary not further divided by one (1) or more interior property lines. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of a lot to the midpoint of the rear property line. 
    Lot frontage means that side of the property line abutting a legally accessible street right-of-way. On a corner lot, the frontage may be designated by the owner, subject to the approval by the Zoning Division who will determine whether it is consistent with the orientation of the other lots and improvements on the same side of the accessible street right-of-way. 
    Lot line, front means the lot line adjacent to a street. 
    Lot line, interior means any lot line not adjacent to a street. 
    Lot line, rear means that lot line which is opposite, generally parallel to, and most distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. 
    Lot, corner means either a lot bounded entirely by streets, or a lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
    Lot, interior means any lot neither a corner lot nor a through lot. 
    Lot, through (double frontage) means any lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets. 
    Lounge, cocktail means a use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, lounges, and similar uses other than restaurants or alcohol sales for off-premises consumption. A cocktail lounge is distinct from a restaurant that sells alcohol when the establishment cannot qualify for a "Consumption on Premises, Special Restaurant Exemption" pursuant to the State Beverage Law. 
    Luminaire means a complete lighting unit, consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts. 
    Machine or welding shop means a workshop where machines, machine parts, or other metal products are fabricated. Typical uses include machine shops, welding shops and sheet metal shops. 
    Machinery, heavy. See Industrial equipment. 
    Manufactured building means a closed structure, building assemble, or system of subassemblies, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, or other service systems manufactured with or without other specified components, as a finished building or as part of a finished building, which is used as a dwelling unit or residence or office. This above definition does not apply to mobile homes. Manufactured building may also mean, at the option of the manufacturer, any dwelling unit or residence of open construction made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site. 
    Manufacturing and processing means an establishment engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding heavy industrial processing. Typical uses include factories, large-scale production, wholesale distribution, publishing and food processing. 
    Map of known archaeological sites means a map adopted as part of this ordinance and updated as needed identifying known archaeological sites in the Village of Wellington. 
    Marginal access street. See Street, marginal access. 
    Marina. See Marine facility. 
    Marine facility means a commercial facility relating to boating. Typical uses include boat docks, marinas, boatyards, yacht clubs and marina boatels. 
    Mass transit facilities mean the planning of, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or the construction of or purchase of mass transit facilities and equipment necessary to meet the LOS for mass transit facilities. 
    Master property owner's association means a Property Owner's Association of which membership is mandatory with the ownership of property subject to the Master Property Owner's Association and which has the authority to represent the members and bind the members by such representation. 
    Material, excess means excavated material not required for backfill or grading of the premises as determined by a final site plan. 
    Material, extractive or excavated means earth, sand, gravel, rock, shellrock, muck, or other mineral or organic substance, other than vegetation, which naturally occurs upon a lot. 
    Maximum contaminant level means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), the maximum permissible level of a contaminant in water which is delivered to the free flowing outlet of the ultimate user of a water system. Contaminants added to the water under circumstances controlled by the user, except those resulting from corrosion of piping and plumbing caused by water quality, are excluded from this definition. 
    Maximum day means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), the highest day of water consumption within any twenty-four (24) hour period from midnight without fire flow expected or recorded by the water supply system. 
    Medical marijuana dispensing organization means an organization approved by the Florida Department of Health to cultivate, process and dispense low-THC cannabis or medical cannabis pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2017-232, Laws of Florida and Chapter 64-4 "Compassionate Use" of the Florida Administrative Code. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center means an entity that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils or ointments), transfers sells, distributes, dispenses or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying patients or their professional caregivers, and is registered by the Florida Department of Health. 
    Medical or dental laboratory means a facility for the construction or repair of prosthetic devices or medical testing exclusively on the written work order of a licensed member of the dental or medical profession and not for the public. 
    Medical or dental office or clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by one (1) person or group of persons practicing any form of healing or health-building services to individuals, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists, or any such profession, the practice of which is lawful in the State of Florida. 
    Meeting hall means a building designed for public assembly. 
    Mezzanine means a low-ceilinged story between two (2) main stories of a building. A mezzanine shall be counted as one (1) story if it covers more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the area of the floor next below. 
    Migrant farm labor quarters means one (1) or more residential buildings occupied or intended for seasonal occupancy by transient farm workers who are employed by the owner of the farm. 
    Military installation means a facility designed for use by a branch of the Armed Forces. 
    Mined lake means a body of water, excluding canals of conveyance, greater than one (1) acre in size or greater than six (6) feet in depth from OHW and which will remain open for longer than hundred eighty (180) days. Multiple (more than one (1)) bodies of water constructed on a parcel or parcels of property under common ownership or control shall be considered a mined lake when such water bodies have a combined surface area greater than one (1) acre. 
    Mined lake, existing means a lake constructed, under construction or to be constructed under a permit of a jurisdictional agency prior to the effective date of Section 7.6 (Excavation). 
    Mining operation means the extraction of subsurface materials for use at a location other than the immediate construction site. 
    Minor street. See Street, minor. 
    Minor vehicle repair and related services means limited vehicle repairs, including tire repair and changing, belt, water pump and steering pump replacement, electrical system repair, tune-ups, oil changes, light bulbs and headlight replacement, fluid replacement and similar minor services including the hand washing, waxing or detailing of a vehicle. Such services as paint and body work, reupholstering of seats, replacement of roof linings, replacement or rebuilding of engines, transmission repair, muffler replacement, and brake repair shall not be considered minor repair. 
    Mitigation means an action or series of actions that will offset the adverse impacts to the native upland ecosystems in the Village of Wellington that cause a project to be not approved. 
    Mixed use means a group of different uses of land within a building for which applications for development permits are sought. 
    Mobile home means a detached, transportable single family dwelling unit, manufactured upon a chassis or undercarriage as an integral part thereof, without independent motive power, designed for long term occupancy as a complete dwelling unit and containing all conveniences and facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to approved utility systems. 
    Mobile home dwelling means the use of a lot or a unit for one (1) mobile home. 
    Mobile minor vehicle repair and related services means a business which travels to the customer's vehicle in order to perform minor repairs or related services. 
    Monument sales, retail means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of monuments, such as headstones, footstones, markers, statues, obelisks, cornerstones, gargoyles and ledges, for placement on graves, including indoor or outdoor storage. 
    Motion picture production studio means the use of a lot or building for the production of films or videotapes for exhibition or sale. 
    Motor vehicle shall have the meaning ascribed by the statutes of the State of Florida providing for the regulation, registration, licensing and recordation of ownership of motor vehicles in the State of Florida. 
    Mound system means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a drainfield system in which the distribution pipe is installed in fill material above natural grade. 
    Mulch means nonliving organic and synthetic materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture, 
    Multifamily means the use of a structure designed for two (2) or more dwelling units which are attached, or the use of a lot for two (2) or more dwelling units excluding mobile homes. Typical uses include apartments and residential condominiums. 
    Municipality means a general purpose local governmental entity created by the State Legislature and governed by § 166.01, et seq., Florida Statutes. For the purposes of adequate public school facilities, municipalities means all municipalities in Palm Beach County, except those that are exempt from participating in the school concurrency program, pursuant to § 163.3180, Florida Statutes. 
    Native plant materials means that material recognized as such by the Florida Department of Agriculture. 
    Native plant species. See Plant species, native. 
    Native upland vegetation means the plant component of a native Florida upland community (a characteristic assemblage of native plant and animal species which are interrelated and occupy predominantly upland terrain), which includes intact upland vegetation include, but are not limited to, Florida scrub, pine flatwoods, scrubby flatwoods, coastal dune and strand, hammocks (natural, tropical, mesic, and hydric), dry prairies, and drained cypress heads. 
    Natural area means waterways, wetlands, nature preserves, and other lands designated on the preliminary development plan to be preserved in perpetuity. 
    Neighborhood means the developed and undeveloped areas of a TND, including the "neighborhood proper", adjacent "edge areas", and adjacent through streets. A TND may consist of one (1) or more neighborhoods. 
    Neighborhood park means the smallest class park that is less than ten (10) acres in size and usually less than five (5) acres. Recreational facilities are generally few in number due to size restraints and developed according to the demands and character of the neighborhood that they serve. 
    Neighborhood proper means the area of a neighborhood, including its blocks, streets, alleys, squares, and parks, but excluding adjacent edge areas and through streets. 
    Net trips means, for the purposes of Article 15, Project Trips minus Pass-by Trips and the Previous-Approval Traffic or traffic from the Existing Use established in accordance with Section 15.2.2. 
    Net usable land means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (Environmental Control Rule I), the total area of a parcel less all street, wet areas, canals, right-of-ways, drainage easements and other impairments to the owner's unrestricted use thereof as a building site. 
    New capital facilities means newly constructed, expanded or added capital facilities which provide additional capacity. New capital facilities shall not include that portion of reconstruction or remodeling of existing facilities that does not create additional capacity. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this Code. 
    New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective date of this code. 
    News stand or gift shop means a small establishment, occupying no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area, primarily engaged in the retail sale of gifts, novelties, greeting cards, newspapers, magazines or similar items. 
    Noncombustible refuse means wastes that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperature (eight hundred (800) to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) degrees F) such as metals, mineral matter, appliances, metal furniture, auto bodies or parts, and other similar material or refuse not usual to housekeeping or to operation of stores or offices. 
    Non-commencement means the failure to begin, or the discontinuation of, construction activity that would make a material change in a structure as evidenced by the cancellation, lapsing, or revocation of a building permit; or the failure to begin, or the discontinuation of, any other land use activity that would make a material change in the use of land. It shall include the over-payment of an impact fee due to miscalculation. 
    Non-community water supply means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a water system for provision of piped water under pressure for human consumption, culinary, sanitary or domestic purposes that serves at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year but is not a community water system. 
    Nonconforming lot means a single lot, tract or parcel of land of record that was conforming at the time of its creation, but which fails to meet the requirements for area, width or depth under the current district regulations of this Code or the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure that was lawfully established before this Code was adopted or amended, that does not conform to the property development regulations of area, height, lot coverage, yard setbacks, lot location, parking, or other dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use that was lawfully established before this Code was adopted or amended which does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconformities mean uses of land, structures, lots and landscaping that were lawfully established before this Code was adopted or amended, that are not in conformity with the terms and requirements of this Code. 
    Nonplan collector street. See Street, collector, nonplan. 
    Nonputrescible materials mean materials incapable of decomposition or causing environmental nuisances or obnoxious odors. 
    Nonresidential activity means any activity which occurs in any building, structure or open area which is not used primarily as a private residence or dwelling. 
    Non-transient non-community water supply means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a water system for provision of piped water under pressure for human consumption, culinary, sanitary, or domestic purposes that regularly serves at least twenty-five (25) of the same person over six (6) months per year but is not a community water system. 
    Nursery, retail means the cultivation, for wholesale or retail sale, of horticultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs, sod, and trees, intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. 
    Nursery, wholesale means the cultivation for wholesale sale of horticultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs, sod, and trees, intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. 
    Nursing or convalescent facility means an establishment where, for compensation pursuant to a previous arrangement, care is offered or provided for three (3) or more persons suffering from illness, other than a contagious disease, or sociopathic or psychopathic behavior, which is not of sufficient severity to require hospital attention, or for three (3) or more persons requiring further institutional care after being discharged from a hospital, other than a mental hospital. Patients usually require domiciliary care in addition to nursing care. 
    "O" Horizon means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the layer of organic matter on the surface of a mineral soil. This soil layer consists of decaying plant residues. 
    Office means a building used primarily for conducting the affairs of or the administration of a business, organization profession, service, industry or similar activity. 
    Office of industrial nature means an establishment providing executive, management, or administrative support, but not involving medical or dental services, the sale of merchandise, or professional services (business or professional offices). Typical uses involve corporate headquarters or other similar offices whose function does not include frequent visits by the public or the provision of services. 
    Office, business or professional means an establishment providing executive, management, administrative or professional services, but not involving medical or dental services or the sale of merchandise, except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical uses include property and financial management firms, employment agencies, travel agencies, advertising agencies, secretarial and telephone services, contract post offices; professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; and business offices of private companies, utility companies, public agencies, and trade associations. 
    Off-site improvements means improvements constructed outside of the boundaries of the project which are required as a part of a development approval. 
    Off-street loading space means the stall and berth along with the apron or maneuvering area incidental thereto. 
    One-foot drawdown contour means the locus of points around a well or wellfield where the free water elevation is lowered by one (1) foot due to a specified pumping rate of the well or wellfield. 
    On-site sewage disposal system means, for the purpose of Section 16.1, a system of piping, tanks, or treatment devices and a drainfield for treatment and disposal of domestic sewage. 
    Open space means unbuilt land reserved for but not limited to one (1) or more of the following uses: conservation, passive recreation, protection, ornamentation (i.e., scenic corridor), linkage and buffer/development barrier use and water retention. 
    Open to the public means those park acres developed according to the Park and Recreation Department's adopted Park Master Plan and made available to the general public for specific recreational purposes whether for a fee or free of charge. 
    Operating permit means the permit required of certain activities to operate within wellfield zones, the criteria for which are set forth under Section 9.6. 
    Ordinary High Water (OHW) means, for areas with an established control elevation, the control elevation will be the OHW. For areas without an established control elevation, the wet season water table prior to the excavation activity will be OHW. 
    Original value of the structure means the value of the structure at the time it was issued a Certificate of Occupancy, based upon an appraisal by a Member of the Appraiser's Institute (MAI). 
    Outbuilding means, for the purpose of Section 6.8.4, a detached accessory building constructed on a residential lot housing a garage, accessory apartment or handicapped or elderly apartment. 
    Owner means the owner of the freehold estates, as appears by deed of record, or agreement for deed. It shall not include short-term lessees, reversioners, remainderman, or mortgagees. It shall include lessees with a lease of more than twenty-five (25) years. 
    Owner, motor vehicle means the person to which the motor vehicle is registered on the motor vehicle certificate of title and shall include, if under lease, rental agreement or loan under any other type of arrangement, gratuitous or otherwise, the person having possession or control of the vehicle. 
    Package wastewater treatment facility means a facility consisting of a prefabricated wastewater treatment unit and on-site disposal system, intended to provide sewer service to a single development which does not have central sewer service available. 
    Package, water treatment facility means a facility consisting of a prefabricated water treatment unit, intended to provide water service to a single development which does not have central water service available. 
    Packing plant means a facility, accessory to bona fide agriculture, used for the packing of produce not necessarily grown on site. 
    Pain Management Clinics means a privately owned pain management clinic facility or office which advertises in any medium for any type of pain management services or employs a physician who is primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing or dispensing controlled substance medications and is required to register with the Florida Department of Health pursuant to § 458.309(4) or § 459.005(3) Florida Statutes (2009), as amended from time to time. A physician is primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing or dispensing controlled substance medications when the majority of patients seen are prescribed or dispensed controlled substance medications for the treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain. Chronic nonmalignant pain is pain unrelated to cancer which persists beyond the usual course of the disease or the injury that is the cause of the pain, or for more that ninety (90) days after surgery. 
    Parcel means a unit of land legally established property lines. 
    Parcel Control Number means a Palm Beach County identification number assigned for each parcel of land. 
    Park means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, a tract of land within a municipality or unincorporated area which is (1) kept for ornament and/or recreation, and which is open to the public, whether or not the land is publicly owned, or (2) land privately owned which is kept for ornament and/or recreation purposes and which is limited to surrounding landowners. A playground shall be considered a park. 
    Park means a developed or planned site owned by a governmental entity that offers the general public an opportunity to partake in a variety of recreational activities that may be active, passive, or special in nature in a safe and convenient manner that is compatible with its environs. 
    Park, neighborhood means, for the purpose of Section 6.8.4, an open space area providing passive and active recreation and usable open green space within walking distance of housing. 
    Park, passive means a public or private outdoor recreational use relying on a natural or man-made resource base and developed with a low intensity of impact on the land. Typical uses include trail systems, wildlife management and demonstration areas for historical, cultural, scientific, educational or other purposes that relates to the natural qualities of the area, and support facilities for such activities. 
    Park, public means a publicly-owned or operated park or beach providing opportunities for active or passive recreational activities to the general public. 
    Parking garage, commercial means a building or other structure that provides temporary parking or storage for motor vehicles, where some or all of the parking spaces are not accessory to another principal use. 
    Parking lot means an off-street, private or public area constructed at grade which is used for the temporary parking of automobiles, motorcycles and trucks. Parking lots include access aisles, ramps, maneuvering and all vehicle use areas. 
    Parking lot, commercial means a paved area intended or used for the off-street parking or storage of operable motor vehicles on a temporary basis, other than accessory to a principal use. 
    Parking lot, shared or common means a parking lot or area that serves more than one (1) lot, use or residential dwelling. 
    Parking space means a surfaced or grassed area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size and approved to store one (1) motor vehicle. 
    Parking tract means a parking lot delineated on a plat or otherwise created by instrument of record for the purpose of providing common vehicular parking and legal access for owners of abutting lots. 
    Parking, off-street means the minimum number of parking spaces per land use as required by this section. 
    Pass-by trips means, for the purposes of Article 15, trips generated by a proposed project which are passing trips already on the road LINK on which the proposed project is located. 
    Passive recreation and observation uses means activities, such as walking, hiking, and bird watching, which rely on the natural qualities of the area for enjoyment and have a low impact on the land. 
    Patio means an open unoccupied space which may be partially enclosed by wall, fence, or building and not considered part of the residential living structure. 
    Patio home. See Zero lot line dwelling. 
    Peak hours means, for the purposes of Article 15, the period as established pursuant to Section 15.4.4. 
    Peak season means, for the purposes of Article 15, the time from January 1 through March 31. inclusive. 
    Percolation pond means an artificial impoundment similar to a holding pond for which the design and operation provides for fluid losses through percolation of seepage. 
    Percolation test means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a test conducted in compliance with Section 11 hereof to determine the rate of percolation or seepage of water through soils in the area of the drainfield, the result of which test is expressed as time in minutes per one inch drop of water. 
    Performance security means funds irrevocably committed by written instrument that are sufficient to secure the complete performance of a contract or condition of a development order, Development Agreement, or covenant. Performance securities shall be denominated in United States dollars. The form of the security shall be approved by the Village Attorney, and may include: 
• An irrevocable letter of credit; 
• An Escrow Agreement; 
• A Surety Bond; 
• A cash bond; or 
• Any other form of comparable security. 
    Person means any individual, public or private corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, property owners' association two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, governmental agency, or any other legal entity. 
    Person means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, includes an individual(s), firm(s), association(s), joint ventures(s), partnership(s), estate(s), trust(s), business trust(s), syndicate(s), fiduciary(ies), corporation(s), and all other or any other similar entity. 
    Personal services mean an establishment engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature, or the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement or similar services, which may involve the limited accessory sale of retail products. Typical uses include art and music schools, beauty and barber shops, driving schools, licensed therapeutic massage studios, photography studios, and tanning salons. 
    Pervious surface area means all that area of land that can be landscaped or planted, allows natural passage through by water, and is not covered by nonpervious manmade materials or structures, such as buildings or paving. 
    Phased development means development which is designed, permitted or platted in distinct, sequential stages to be developed over a specified period of time. 
    Plan means the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan as amended from time to time. 
    Planning & Development Services Director means the department head of the divisions including, but not limited to, planning and zoning, code compliance, and building, as directed by the Village Manager. For the purposes of the Land Development Regulations, references including "Planning Director", "Planning & Zoning Director", "Growth Management Director", "Executive Director" or "Director of Community Services". 
    Plan collector street. See Street, plan collector. 
    Planned Development means a planned development district or a previously approved planned development. A regulation containing the term "planned development" means that the regulation applies to a planned development district and a previously approved planned development. 
    Planned Development District means a zoning district which is approved pursuant to the policies and procedures of Section 6.8, Planned Development Districts of this code including: PUD, Residential Planned Unit Development District; TND, Traditional Neighborhood Development District; MXPD, Mixed-Use Planned Development District; MUPD, Multiple Use Planned Development District; PIPD, Planned Industrial Park Development District; MHPD, Mobile Home Park Planned Development District; RVPD, Recreational Vehicle Park Planned Development District; and, SWPD, Solid Waste Disposal Planned Development District. 
    Planning & Zoning Manager means the division head of the Village of Wellington Planning & Zoning Division. 
    Plant species, controlled means those plant species, as listed in Section 7.3 (Landscaping and Buffering), that are demonstrably detrimental to native plants, native wildlife, ecosystems, or human health, safety, and welfare. 
    Plant species, native means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of South Florida. Plant species which have been introduced by man are not native vegetation. 
    Plant species, prohibited means those species as defined in the landscape section of this code, as being demonstrably detrimental to native plants, wildlife, the ecosystem or public health, safety, or welfare. 
    Plat means a map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being a complete, exact representation of the subdivision and other information in compliance with the requirements of all applicable provisions of Article 8 and Chapter 177, Fla. Stat., and may include the terms "replat," "amended plat," or "revised plat." 
    Plat of record means a plat which conforms to the requirements of the applicable state laws and Article 8, Subdivision, which has received all required Village approvals for recordation, and which has been placed in the official records of the Village of Wellington and Palm Beach County Clerk of the Courts. 
    Plat, boundary means a map or delineated representation for recordation of a single lot for development purposes prepared, approved, and recorded in accordance with requirements and procedures for a plat pursuant to Article 8 and Chapter 177, Fla. Stat. 
    Plat, final means a finished plat including all signatures required for recordation except those signifying approval by the Village. 
    Plat, preliminary means a copy of the plat in sufficient form to readily compare the plat with the subdivision plan and construction plans. 
    Pole trailer shall have the meaning ascribed by the statutes of the State of Florida providing for the regulation, registration, licensing and recordation of ownership of motor vehicles in the State of Florida. 
    Pollutant means any substance which is harmful or threatening to plant, animal or human life. 
    Porch means an unairconditioned, roofed structure attached to a dwelling unit. 
    Positive drainage means the provision of a stormwater management system which conveys stormwater runoff to a point of legal positive outfall. 
    Potable water facilities mean the planning of, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or construction of potable water facilities necessary to meet the LOS for potable water facilities. 
    Pottery shop, custom means an establishment engaged in the manufacture of products from clay. 
    Potting soil manufacturing means an establishment engaged in producing potting soil, including the use of incineration. 
    Preliminary development plan means a generalized depiction of use categories presented to the appropriate review body for planned development districts, previously approved planned developments (master plans and site plans), and conditional use A and B approvals. 
    Premises mean any lot, area, or tract of land whether used in connection with a building or not. 
    Preservation management plan means a plan that will provide for the perpetual viability of a designated preserve area including the ongoing control of invasive non-native plant species. 
    Preserve or preserve area means that portion of native vegetation which is required to be set aside from development or other alteration activities, protected from the removal of any native plant species, managed to maintain viability for wildlife habitat, and maintained free of non-native plant species. 
    Previous Approval means, for the purposes of Article 15, a development order which: 
In the unincorporated area, received a Concurrency Exemption Determination based on a development order for which completed application was made prior to or on May 21, 1987. It does not include an amendment or amendments to a Previous Approval applied for after May 21, 1987; and 
In the incorporated area is a valid development order formally approved by a municipality which either: 
(1)  For which a complete application was made to, and accepted by, a Municipality, prior to February 1, 1990; or 
(2)  In the case of a Development of Regional Impact, a Development of Regional Impact which received a report and recommendation by the Treasure Coast Regional Planning Council prior to February 1, 1990, all pursuant to formally established procedures pursuant to the Municipality's land development regulations. It does not include applications for Site Specific Development Orders on a lot subject to an Interlocal Agreement entered by the municipality and the County, after May 21, 1987, as a result of an annexation where the agreement requires compliance with traffic performance standards. It does not include an amendment or amendments to a Previous Approval applied for on or after February 1, 1990. 
    Previous Approval Traffic means, for purposes of Article 15, Project Traffic resulting from units or square footage of a Previous Approval established pursuant to Section 15.2.2. of this Article. 
    Previously Approved Planned Development means a Planned Development approved by rezoning, special exception or conditional use prior to the effective date of this code. Previously Approved Planned Developments include: Planned Unit Developments; Traditional Neighborhood District Developments; Mixed-Use Developments; Planned Neighborhood Commercial Developments; Planned General Commercial Developments; Large Scale Community and Regional Shopping Center Developments thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and fifty thousand (50,000) square feet; Planned Office Business Park Developments; Planned Industrial Park Developments; Planned Industrial Park District Developments; Mobile Home Rental Park, Condominium, and Conditional Use Developments; Recreational Vehicle Park Developments; Sanitary Landfill, Resource Recovery Facility, Volume Reduction Plant and Incinerator Developments; and other special exceptions, or conditional uses approved prior to the effective date of this code which support land uses regulated by Section 6.8. 
    Previously Captured Project means, for purposes of Article 15, a Project approved after February 1, 1990. 
    Principal use see Use, principal. 
    Printing and copying services means an establishment engaged in retail photocopy, reproduction, or blueprinting services. 
    Privacy fence or wall means a structural barrier of an opaque quality, constructed such that the privacy of the area to be enclosed is maintained. 
    Private street. See Street, private. 
    Private water system means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a well, spring, cistern or other similar source of water and appurtenances of piped water for human consumption and other domestic purposes used only by individual family units including private homes, duplexes and a building of four (4) family units or less. 
    Project means a land use or group of land uses involving the development of a particular parcel of land at a particular density which was granted a Valid Local Government Development Order, or which substantially complies with applicable provisions of the Village of Wellington LDR as determined by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
    Project Traffic/Project Trips means, for the purposes of Article 15, the number of trips generated by the proposed project (this includes reductions for internal trips). In the event no specific use, size, or density is proposed, the maximum Trips possible under the development order shall be Project Traffic. Project traffic shall be generated using the latest edition of Trip Generation handbook published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers unless local trip generation rates are documented. 
    Prop root means the structures originating below the lowest limbs of the red mangrove that are also known as stilt roots. 
    Property owners' association means an organization recognized under the laws of the State, operated under recorded maintenance and ownership agreements through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision, be it a lot, home, property or any other interest, is automatically a voting member, and each such member is automatically subject to a charge for a prorated share of expenses, either direct or indirect, for maintaining common properties within the subdivision, such as roads, parks, recreational areas, common areas and other similar properties. Within the text of this Code, a property owners' association is considered to be a single entity for property ownership. As used in this Code, the term "property owners association" shall also be deemed to include a homeowners' association, condominium association or cooperative (apartment) association, as defined in Chapter 711, Fla. Stat., as amended, having a life tenure of not less than twenty (20) years, as well as a third party having an agreement with a condominium or cooperative association as permitted by Chapter 711, Fla. Stat., as amended. 
    Proportionate Share Program means, for the purposes of Article 15, the established method whereby the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors as required by and in a manner consistent with § 163.3180, F.S. and as detailed in Section 15.6. 
    Proposed New Residential Development means any application for residential development or amendment to a previously approved residential development that increases the number of housing units. This shall include any request for any approval of the type that establishes a density of development and which approves a site-specific development order on a specific parcel of property. 
    Pruning means the removal of plant parts, dead or alive, in a careful and systematic manner so as to not damage other parts of the plant. 
    Public agency means any government or governmental agency, board, commission, authority or public body of the Village of Wellington, Palm Beach County, the State of Florida, or of the United States government, or any legally constituted governmental subdivision or special district. 
    Public easement. See Easement, public. 
    Public facilities means capital facilities including but not limited to for roads, parks and recreation, fire-rescue, library, law enforcement, public buildings, and school sites. 
    Public Facilities Agreement means an agreement entered into by the Village of Wellington or a Service Provider and a developer or landowner for the purpose of ensuring public facility capacity is reserved for a proposed development. 
    Public Health Unit means the HRS/Palm Beach County Public Health Unit. 
    Public street. See Street, public. 
    Public utility means an entity owning, operating, managing or controlling a system or proposing construction of a system that is providing or proposing to provide water or sewer service, electricity, natural or manufactured gas, or any similar gaseous substance, telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public for compensation. 
    Public works projects means projects that may be conducted by government agencies or are linear projects, such as pipelines, transmission lines, telephone lines, etc., that are constructed for no single property. 
    Quasi-public easement. See Easement, quasi-public. 
    Quasi-public use means a use or group of uses open for general public use, such as stadiums, amphitheaters, civic centers, and colleges. It does not include shopping centers or other retail uses, and hotels. 
    Queuing area means a one-way aisle that provides a waiting area for a specified number of cars. 
    Raised basement means, for the purpose of Section 6.8.4, a semi-underground story of a building. 
    Reclamation means increasing land use capability to be made suitable for development, by changing the land's character or environment through drainage, fill or revegetation. 
    Recreation and park facilities mean the planning of, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or construction of buildings and park equipment necessary to meet the LOS for Urban Park and Recreation Facilities and Rural Park and Recreation Facilities. 
    Recreation facility means a facility designed and intended for use by occupants of a residential development. Typical uses include golf courses, swimming pools and tennis courts and required recreational areas. 
    Recreational vehicle means any vehicle designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which is self-powered or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a land area under unified control designed and intended to accommodate short-term, overnight parking of recreational vehicles and not for permanent residential use. 
    Recycling center means a permanent facility designed and used for collecting, purchasing, storing and redistributing pre-sorted, recyclable materials that are not intended for disposal. A recycling center shall be used for limited processing of recyclable materials, such as can and glass crushing and sorting. 
    Recycling collection station means a mobile container designed and used for deposit of recyclable materials and typically monitored by a person. 
    Recycling drop-off station means a totally enclosed structure, containing no more than five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area, within which pre-sorted, non-biodegradable recyclable materials are collected for redistribution or sale for the purpose of reuse. 
    Recycling plant means a permanent facility designed and used for receiving, separating, storing, converting, baling or processing of non-hazardous recyclable materials that are not intended for disposal. The use may include construction debris recycling or other intensive recycling processes such as chipping and mulching. 
    Regional park means the largest class park in the Village of Wellington. It generally exceeds two hundred fifty (250) acres in size and also provides access to a substantial resource base. Regional parks primarily provide passive recreational facilities and to a lesser degree active recreational facilities where no adverse impact on the resource base results. Recreational facilities in regional parks are primarily passive or resource based in nature with picnicking, camping, hiking, fishing, and boating as the main activities. Special facilities such as museums, golf courses, or water skiing facilities may also be included, as well as some of those active facilities often found in district parks. 
    Regulating plan means, for the purpose of Section 6.8.4, a graphic and written representation of the detailed land use and development regulations applicable to a particular TND. 
    Regulated Substances means: 
• Those deleterious substances and contaminants, including degradation and interaction products which, because of quality, concentration, or physical, chemical (including ignitability, corrosivity, reactiveness and toxicity), or infectious characteristics, radioactivity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, bioaccumulative effect, persistence (non-degradability) in nature, or any other characteristic, may cause significant harm to human health and environment (including surface and groundwater, plants, and animals). 
• Those substances set forth in, but not limited to, the Lists of Hazardous Wastes (40 CFR Part 261, Subpart D), 40 CFR, Part 261, Appendix VIII-Hazardous Constituents, and EPA Designation Reportable Quantities and Notification Requirements for Hazardous Substances Under CERCLA (40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986); as amended from time to time provided, however, that this section shall only apply whenever the aggregate sum of all quantities of any one (1) Regulated Substance at a given facility/building, at any one time, exceeds five (5) gallons where said substance is a liquid, or twenty-five (25) pounds where said substance is a solid. The section shall also apply if no single substance exceeds the above reference limits but the aggregate sum of all Regulated Substances present at one facility/building, at any one time, exceeds one hundred (100) gallons if said substances are liquids, or five hundred (500) pounds if said substances are solids. 
• Where Regulated Substances are dissolved in or mixed with other non-Regulated Substances, only the actual quantity of the Regulated Substance present shall be used to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. Where a Regulated Substance is a liquid, the total volume of the Regulated Substance present in a solution or mixture of said substance with other substances shall be determined by volume percent composition of the Regulated Substance, provided that the solution or mixture containing the Regulated Substance does not itself have any of the characteristics identified in paragraph one of this definition. 
    Religious activities means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, any daily, weekly, or periodic activity associated with or that occurs at a religious institution. 
    Religious institution means for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, a premises or site which is used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious ecclesiastical or denominational organization or established place of worship, retreat, site, camp or similar facilities owned or operated by a bona fide religious group for religious activities shall be considered a religious institution. 
    Repair means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), modification or addition to a failing on-site sewage disposal system which are necessary to allow the system to function or which are necessary to eliminate a public health or pollution hazard. Pumping of septage from a system and making minor structural corrections to a tank or building sewer do not constitute repair. 
    Repair and maintenance, general means an establishment engaged in the repair and maintenance of motor vehicles or other heavy equipment or machinery, including automobiles, boats, golf carts, mopeds, motorcycles and trucks, excluding paint and body work. Typical uses include automobile repair garages, automobile tune-up stations, automotive glass shops, quick-lubes and muffler shops. 
    Repair services, limited means an establishment engaged in the repair of personal apparel and household appliances, furniture, and similar items, excluding repair of motor vehicles. Typical uses include apparel repair and alterations, small appliance repair, small motor repair (including golf carts, mopeds and lawn mowers), bicycle repair, clock and watch repair, and shoe repair shops. 
    Required recreation areas means recreational tracts of land with facilities required within a residential development, dedicated or reserved to a property owners association for the perpetual use by all residents of the development for recreation. 
    Residence. See Dwelling unit. 
    Residential access street. See Street, residential access. 
    Residential development means a building, or many buildings or dwelling units, or portion of a building or land used primarily for human habitation and for the purposes of adequate public school facilities, it shall mean any development that is comprised in whole, or in part, of dwelling units for permanent human habitation. 
    Residential district means any area that has a district classification of AR, CRS, RE, RTS, RS, RM and RH, as well as residential pods of any Planned Development District. Any creation of an additional residential district by amendment to the Future Land Use Map which occurs shall automatically be included in the definition of residential district for the purposes of this Code. 
    Residential zoning district includes, for the purpose of the Adult Entertainment Establishment provisions of this Code, the following zoning districts which have not been designated in the comprehensive plan as commercial or industrial: 
• AR - Agricultural Residential 
• PUD - Planned Unit Development 
    Respondent/Alleged violator means those persons including both landowners and tenants who have been issued a Notice of Violation. 
    Restaurant, fast food means an establishment where the principal business is the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation is that of a fast-food or drive-in restaurant offering quick food service, where orders are generally not taken at the customer's table, where the food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers, and where food and beverages may be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle. 
    Restaurant, general means an establishment excluding drive-thrus, where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation consists of one (1) or more of the following: 
• A sit-down restaurant where customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are generally served food and beverages in non-disposable containers by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed; or 
• A cafeteria of cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages generally are served in nondisposable containers and consumed within the restaurant; or 
• A restaurant, which may have characteristics of a fast food restaurant, having floor areas exclusively within a shopping or office center, sharing common parking facilities with other businesses within the center, and having access to a common interior pedestrian access way. 
• This use may include the on-premise sale, service and consumption of alcoholic beverages as an accessory and secondary use. 
    Restaurant, specialty means an establishment, excluding drive-thrus, engaged in the retail sale of a limited variety of baked goods, candy, coffee, ice cream or other specialty food items, which may or may not be prepared for on-premises sale and which may be consumed on the site. 
    Retail sales, general means an establishment providing general retail sales or rental of goods, but excluding those uses specifically classified in another use type. Uses include typical retail stores such as but not limited to clothing stores, auto parts stores, bookstores, business machine sales, food stores (excluding convenience stores), and marine supply sales (excluding boat sales). Uses shall also include the sale of bulky goods such as household goods, lawn mowers, mopeds, motorcycles and golf carts. Retail establishments may rent and perform incidental repair to their products. For impact fee purposes, general retail will also include services such as entertainment, eating and drinking establishments, and personal services. 
    Retail sales, mobile, temporary or transient means retail sales operation without a fixed or permanent location. Typical uses include sales of flowers or food products; transient sales operations which include travel to several locations in one (1) day, such as lunch wagons, or ice cream trucks; temporary seasonal sales such as Christmas trees or sparklers; and special event sales which require a tent or temporary structure. 
    Retention means the collection and storage of a specific portion of stormwater runoff without subsequent direct release to surface waters of said portion or any part thereof. 
    Retention or detention pond means any pit, pond, or excavation excluding canals of conveyance which creates a body of water by virtue of its connection to groundwater, and which is intended to receive stormwater. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land dedicated or deeded to the perpetual use of the public. 
    Road facilities mean the planning of, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or construction of roads on the major road network system necessary to meet the LOS for road facilities. 
    Rooming house. See Boarding house. 
    Rubbish means waste consisting of any accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags, wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweeping, and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, and also any bottles, cans, container, or any other products which due to their ability to retain water may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects; rubbish shall not include noncombustible refuse. 
    Rural subdivision means a division of land within an Agriculture Residential (AR) district. 
    Salvage or junk yard means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discard material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition; or for the sale of parts thereof. 
    Sand means sediments having a distribution of particle diameters between 0.074 and 4.76 millimeters, as defined in the Unified Soils Classification System. Sand grain analyses shall follow the methodology described in Folk, Robert L. 1980, Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks to determine grain size distribution. 
    Sanitary hazard means any percolation pond for domestic wastewater effluent disposal, the land application of domestic wastewater sludge or domestic wastewater effluents that have not received high-level disinfection as defined in Florida Administrative Code Chapter 17-610, and any on-site sewage disposal system (septic tank). 
    Sanitary landfill means a permitted disposal facility employing an engineered method of disposing of solid waste on land in a manner which minimizes environmental hazards by spreading the solid wastes in thin layers, providing a sand fill or approved substitute cover. 
    Sanitary nuisance means any act, or the keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or permission of anything, by an individual, municipality, organization or corporation, by which the health or life of an individual may be threatened or impaired or by which or through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be caused. 
    Sanitary sewer facilities mean the planning of, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or construction of sanitary sewer facilities necessary to meet the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities. 
    Sanitary survey means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), on-site review of the water source, facilities, equipment, operation and maintenance of a public water system for the purpose of evaluating the adequacy of such source, facilities, equipment, operation and maintenance for producing and distributing drinking water meeting the quality standards of this regulation. 
    School Board means the Palm Beach County School Board. 
    School Concurrency Agreement means, for purposes of adequate public school facilities, the Interlocal Agreement among the Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners, the municipalities of Palm Beach County, and the Palm Beach County School Board effective January 25, 2001, and recorded in the Official Records Book 12272, Page 973, Public Records, Palm Beach County, Florida. 
    School District means the school district for Palm Beach County created and existing pursuant to Section 4, Article IX of the State Constitution. 
    School District Five-Year Capital Facilities Plan means the School District of Palm Beach County Five-Year Work Plan and Capital Budget as authorized by § 235.185, Florida Statutes. 
    School District Six-Year Capital Improvement Plan means a table of expenditures and revenues detailing how the School District of Palm Beach County shall achieve and maintain the LOS for public school facilities. 
    School, primary means a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation as an elementary or middle school by the State Department of Education of Florida. 
    School, private means a use and attendant buildings operated by a private organization for educational or training purposes, as follows: 
• a primary school 
• a secondary school 
    School, public means a use and attendant buildings operated by the Palm Beach County School District for educational or training purposes, including charter schools, as follows: 
• a primary school 
• a secondary school 
    School, secondary means a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation as an high school by the State Department of Education of Florida. 
    Screen enclosure means a structure, which may or may not be roofed, used to completely enclose an outdoor living space with screening. 
    Screening means landscaping, berms, fences, walls or any combination thereof used to block or significantly obscure, in a continuous manner, the view from one (1) area to another. 
    Security or caretaker quarters mean a residence located on a site for occupancy by a caretaker or security guard. 
    Seedling, sapling, runner, or sucker means any young plant or tree in early stages of growth. 
    Self-service storage, limited-access means a multi-storied self-service storage facility, with limited access points from the exterior of the building to interior halls that serve individual bays. 
    Self-service storage, multi-access means a one-story self-service storage facility with multi-access points from the exterior of the building to individual bays. 
    Semi-public water system means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), a water system for provisions of piped water under pressure for human consumption, culinary, sanitary or domestic purposes to: 
• Less than twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year, or 
• At least twenty-five (25) individuals daily less than sixty (60) days out of the year. 
    Senior housing means housing for seniors within a multi-family residential district, where the residents of the entire building and lot shall be limited to persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older, which is licensed by the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) pursuant to Chapter 58A-5, F.A.C. 
    Septage means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a mixture of sludge, fatty material and wastewater removed during the pumping of on-site sewage disposal systems, grease traps, laundry interceptors and portable toilets. 
    Septic tank means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a watertight receptacle constructed to promote separation of solid and liquid components of sewage, to provide limited digestion of organic matter, to store solids, and to allow clarified liquid to discharge for further treatment and disposal in a drainfield. 
    Septic tank system means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a building sewer, septic tank, distribution box and drainfield. When pump equipment is utilized, it is also considered part of the septic tank system. 
    Service provider means any agency that is responsible for the provision of public facilities to development in the Village of Wellington. 
    Service station. See Automotive service station. 
    Service truck means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a vehicle used to pump out the contents of on-site sewage disposal systems, grease traps, laundry interceptors or portable toilets. 
    Setback means the required minimum horizontal distance between any structure and the related front, side, or rear property lot line or base building line. 
    Setback, front means the setback extending along the full length of the front lot line. 
    Setback, interior side means the setback extending along an interior side lot line between the front and rear setbacks. 
    Setback, rear means the setback extending along the full length of the rear lot line. 
    Setback, street side means the setback extending along a street side lot line between the front and rear setbacks. 
    Sewer system, central means a regional sewerage system, owned and operated by a municipal, county, special district or other governmental entity, which provides sewer service to several developments located within its service area. 
    Sewer system, individual means a privately owned sewerage system, which provides sewer service to a single development, because of unavailability of a central sewer system. 
    Shade house means an accessory agricultural structure consisting of a screened enclosure with a screened or roll plastic roof used to protect plants from insects, heat and exposure to the sun. 
    Shade tree means a tree that reaches a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet at maturity, provides relief from direct sunlight for at least six (6) months each year, and is indicated as a shade tree on the Recommended Tree List. 
    Shared parking means the approved use of the same off-street parking spaces for two (2) or more distinguishable uses where peak parking demand of the different uses occurs at different times of the day, or where various uses are visited without moving the automobile, and where the provision of parking spaces is a net decrease from the combined total of each use's individual off-street parking requirements if provided separately. 
    Shooting range, private means a private facility, not used for the general public or commercial purposes, for the discharging of firearms. 
    Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments planned, developed, managed and operated as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
    Shrub means a self-supporting woody perennial plant more than thirty (30) inches in height at maturity, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base. 
    Sidewalk, curb or vehicular sign means signs placed on or affixed to vehicles or trailers which are parked on a public right-of-way, public land, or private land so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product, service or activity, or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby land. 
    Sight distance means the extent of unobstructed vision in a horizontal and vertical plane. 
    Sight triangle means a point of measurement whereby an individual in a vehicle has the ability to sight a prescribed distance without pulling onto a vehicular thoroughfare. 
    Significant means, for the purposes of Article 15, significant or significance shall refer to the amount of traffic that has been deemed to be of a level that requires the analysis of roadway Links and/or intersections. 
    Significant archeological value An archaeological site, fossil or artifact which could yield or has yielded information deemed by a qualified archaeologist to be of significant scientific, historical, ethnic or public significance to the history or prehistory of the Village of Wellington, County, State or Nation. 
    Single-family means the use of a lot or a structure for one (1) detached dwelling unit, excluding a mobile home but including a manufactured building. 
    Single-family cluster means a dwelling unit which is part of a cluster of similar dwelling units within a planned development but which is separated from other similar units by common areas dedicated to a property owners' association. 
    Single-family district means the AR district, as well as single-family pods of Planned Development districts. 
    Site-related improvements mean road construction or road improvements at or near the development site which are necessary to interface the development's external trips with the major road network system, or which are necessary to interface the development's internal trips with the major road network system where a portion of the major road network system is included within the development. 
    Site-specific development order means a development order issued by the Village of Wellington which establishes the density or maximum density, and which approves a specific plan of development on a lot or lots pursuant to an application by or on behalf of an owner or contract purchaser, including applications initiated by the Village of Wellington. It may apply to a lot or lots under single ownership or a group of lots under separate ownership. It shall apply to all parcels or lots in their entirety taken together of any subdivision. It includes site specific rezonings, special exceptions, conditional uses, special permits, master plan approvals, site plan approvals, plat approvals, building permits, and any "Development of Regional Impact" development order as defined in § 380.06, Florida Statutes. It may or may not authorize the actual commencement of development. Two (2) or more development orders which individually do not constitute a site-specific development order shall be considered a site-specific development order if when taken together, they meet the definition of a site-specific development order. 
    Soil classification means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the soil mantle as classified in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Classification Methodology. 
    Soil limitation ratings means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the three (3) rating categories, which are: 
•  Slightly limited means soils with favorable properties for the use of drainfield systems. 
•  Moderately limited means soils that have properties moderately favorable for use of a drainfield system. Limitations in this category may be overcome by site alteration involving removal of impervious or too rapidly percolating soil layers, addition of fill, or lowering of high water table through approved drainage methods, or any combination of the above. 
•  Severely limited means soils which have one (1) or more properties unsuitable for the use of a drainfield system. 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge, septage, dewatered domestic wastewater residuals, grit and screenings from a domestic wastewater treatment facility or other discarded solid or liquid material resulting from domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural activities or governmental operations but does not include storm water discharges or other significant pollutants in water resources such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluent, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water pollutants. 
    Solid waste facilities mean the planning of, engineering for, preparation of acquisition documents for, acquisition of land for, or construction of solid waste facilities necessary to meet the LOS for solid waste facilities. 
    Solid waste transfer station means a facility where solid waste from several relatively small vehicles is placed into one relatively large vehicle before being transferred to a solid waste processing or disposal facility. Solid waste may be sorted but not processed at the transfer station. 
    Source property means the land from which the subject sound is originating including public or private streets, sidewalks or other public or open space areas. 
    Special allocation means the assignment by the Village Council of impact fee credits for in-kind contributions to a feepayer, or a portion of a development. It may involve the pro rating of impact fee credits for in-kind contributions. 
    Special needs facility means a residential land use consisting of any building or section thereof, residence, private home, boarding home, home for those who require support, or any other residential structure, whether or not operated for profit, which undertakes, for a period extending twenty-four (24) hours, housing, food service, and one (1) or more personal services for persons not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. 
    Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered: 
• Human genitals and pubic region; or 
• The opening between the human buttocks, i.e., the anal cleft; or 
• That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple); this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed; or 
• Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
• Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulations, arousal or tumescence; 
• Acts of human analingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or 
• Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast; or 
• Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1. through 2. 
    Specimen tree means a tree that substantially contributes to the aesthetics of an area and which is protected through the permitting process, or which attains one-third ( 1/3 ) (thirty-three (33) percent) or greater of the champion tree diameter at breast height (dbh). A specimen tree may be native or nonnative and must be in good health. 
    Speculative clearing means the clearing of property for which no final development order has been issued. 
    Spent means the commitment of funds to a particular capital facility acquisition by the awarding of a contract. 
    Spill means the unpermitted release or escape of a Regulated Substance, irrespective of the quantity thresholds identified in the definition of "Regulated Substance," directly or indirectly to soil, surface water or groundwater. 
    Spillover light means light that is distributed into areas where the illumination is not needed or intended. 
    Sport vehicle includes but is not limited to: dune buggy, racing vehicle, all-terrain vehicle or other type of off-road vehicle designed primarily for off-road use. 
    Square footage means the gross constructed area of all buildings and structures covered by a solid or screened roof and totally or partially enclosed by walls or other material. Nonresidential outdoor areas covered or uncovered which functionally extend the primary use, such as open seating and open retail are included, except that uses which generally completely occur outdoors, such as vehicle or monument sales, nurseries, gasoline sales, salvage yards, and outdoor storage, are not included. Nonresidential canopies and screened enclosures which functionally extend the primary use are included. Decorative canopies or canopies designed to protect from weather are not included. For impact fee purposes of residential development, the square footage means the conditioned area of the building as measured to the outside of the exterior wall. If the residential structure or addition has no conditioned area, square footage shall be the living area of the building as measured to the outside of the exterior wall. 
    Stable, commercial means an establishment for boarding, breeding, training or raising of horses not necessarily owned by the owners or operators of the establishment, rental of horses for riding, or other equestrian activities, excluding uses classified as equestrian arena. 
    Stable, private means an establishment for the care of horses owned by the occupants or owners of the premises. 
    Stall or berth means the space within which vehicles are placed during actual loading or unloading operations. 
    Stand for sale of agricultural products means a roadside stand for the retail sale of fruit, vegetables, flowers, and house plants not necessarily grown on the site. 
    Standard subsurface means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), an on-site sewage disposal system consisting of a treatment receptacle, distribution box and a gravity-fed drainfield installed below the natural ground surface. 
    State standards for the purpose of Article 8, Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements, means the various design and construction guidelines, policies and standards promulgated, and amended, by the departments and agencies of the State, including but not limited to the Policy and Guidelines for Vehicular Connections to Roads on the State Highway Systems, Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (as adopted by the Department of Transportation), Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (a/k/a "The Greenbook"), Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Roadway and Traffic Design Standards, and Handbook for Drainage Connection Permits. 
    Storage, agricultural means the storage of equipment or products accessory or incidental to a primary agricultural use. 
    Stormwater means the flow of water that results from and occurs immediately following a rainfall event. 
    Stormwater management plan means an engineering drawing and written report outlining the proposed secondary and tertiary stormwater management system needed for the proper development of a specific increment of the Village of Wellington, including details of drainage-related conditions and characteristics of the existing development site and surrounding lands. 
    Stormwater management system means a comprehensive system designed and constructed or implemented to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse stormwater in order to prevent or reduce inundation, flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation, and water pollution, or otherwise affect the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of stormwater which occurs either as overland surface flow or subsurface lateral flow through normally unsaturated soils, and which is neither intercepted by vegetation, evaporated, nor recharged to groundwater. 
    Stormwater system, primary means classified surface waters of the State which convey stormwater runoff toward the ocean or a major inland water body. 
    Stormwater system, secondary means that component of a stormwater management system which consists of facilities and features designed to provide for treatment and control of stormwater runoff generated by specifically delineated lands, in order to meet regulatory requirements governing the quality and quantity of stormwater discharged to the primary stormwater system. 
    Stormwater system, tertiary means that component of a stormwater management system which consists of facilities and features designed to provide for rapid removal of stormwater from structures, building sites, streets, and other areas of development or uses sensitive to damage or disruption by inundation. 
    Stormwater treatment means removal of pollutants, debris, and other undesirable materials from stormwater runoff by means of natural chemical, biological or physical processes, including, but not necessarily limited to, detention, retention, filtration, percolation, sedimentation, floatation, and skimming. This definition does not normally include active treatment processes, requiring the consumption of electrical or mechanical energy. 
    Story, building means that part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above. The maximum height shall be fourteen (14) feet measured from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. Attics and raised basements shall not be included in calculations of a building story unless they are used for residential or parking purposes. 
    Stream means any river, creek, slough, or other natural watercourse whether or not the bed shall have been dredged or otherwise improved in whole or in part. 
    Street means a strip of land, owned privately or publicly, which affords legal access to abutting land and is designated for vehicular traffic. "Street" includes road, thoroughfare, parkway, avenue, boulevard, expressway, lane, throughway, place, and square, or however otherwise designated. Streets are further classified according to the function they perform. 
    Street frontage. See Lot frontage. 
    Street local means a street designed and maintained primarily to provide legal and vehicular access to abutting land. A local street is of limited continuity, is not for through traffic, and is the middle order street of minor streets, being of a higher classification than a residential access street. 
    Street, arterial means a major street of higher classification than a plan collector street, used primarily for traffic traveling considerable distance within or through an area not served by an expressway, of considerable continuity, and used primarily as a main traffic artery. 
    Street, collector means a street which carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets. Collector streets have more continuity, carry higher traffic volumes and may provide less access than local streets. 
    Street, collector, non-plan means a collector street which is not included on the Thoroughfare Plan and which is the highest classification of minor street. 
    Street, collector, plan means a collector street which is part of the Thoroughfare Plan, and which is the lowest classification of major street. 
    Street, dead-end means a street with only one (1) outlet. 
    Street, limited access means a street to which access from abutting property is under the control and jurisdiction of the Village of Wellington or the County pursuant to a limited access easement or other regulatory access restriction. 
    Street, major means a street depicted on the adopted thoroughfare plan; a thoroughfare plan road. Major streets are further classified as collector street, arterial street, and expressway. 
    Street, marginal access means a special purpose local street which is parallel and adjacent to a plan collector street, expressway, arterial street or other limited access street and which has its principal purpose of relieving such streets from local service of abutting property by providing access to abutting property and separation from through traffic. A marginal access street may also be called a "frontage street". 
    Street, minor means any street not classified as a major street, and includes streets providing traffic circulation within the development. 
    Street, private means any street which: 
• Has not been dedicated for public use; 
• Is reserved to a property owners' association pursuant to recorded restrictions and covenants or a plat of record; or 
• Is dedicated for public use but has not been accepted for maintenance by the Village of Wellington, the State or a special district. 
    Street, residential access means the lowest order of minor street which is intended to carry the least amount of traffic at the lowest speed. 
    Structure means that which is three (3) feet or more in height, built or constructed or erected or tied down having a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, such as buildings, homes, mobile homes, towers, walls, fences, billboards, shore protection devices, and poster panels. 
    Subdivision means the division of land, whether improved or unimproved, whether previously platted or not, into two (2) or more contiguous lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership. The term shall include any modification of legal boundaries for the purpose of redividing or combining any lot(s) depicted on a record plat, or on a certified survey or other map recorded pursuant to an affidavit of exemption or affidavit of waiver. When appropriate to the text, the term refers to the process of subdividing or the land proposed to be or which has been subdivided. 
    Substantial change in land use means either (1) a change in land use or site design that increases the intensity of land use, (2) a change in land use or site design that creates or increases incompatibility of adjacent land uses, or (3) an increase in the total floor area of multiple-family dwellings or nonresidential buildings which results in increased traffic. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, where the improvement creates additional enclosed space that contains equipment or utilities relative to the primary structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any development for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Place. 
    Sugar mill or refinery means an establishment for the extraction and refining of sugar from agricultural products. 
    Superintendent means the Superintendent of the Palm Beach County School Board. 
    Supplier of water means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any person who owns or operates a water supply system. 
    Surface water means water upon the surface of the earth whether contained within natural or artificial boundaries or diffused. 
    Surveyor means a land surveyor registered in the State of Florida. 
    Suspension Order means suspension of construction work directly over the potential archaeological find. During the initial site visit, a qualified archaeologist may extend the boundary of the suspension order based on the potential significance and geographic coverage of the find. 
    Swale means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a stabilized and graded depression designed to convey stormwater runoff and retain water for only a brief period following a rainfall event. 
    Swimming pool means any confined body of water, located either above or below the existing finished grade of the site, exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in surface area, and two (2) feet in depth, designed, used, or intended to be used for swimming or bathing purposes. 
    Temporary means a single period or an accumulation of periods not exceeding ninety (90) days in any 365-day period unless further restricted. 
    Temporary sign means any sign erected and maintained for a specified length of time. 
    Theater, drive-in means an establishment for the outdoor viewing of motion pictures by patrons while in their automobiles. 
    Theater, indoor means an establishment for showing motion pictures or live performances in an enclosed theater. 
    Thoroughfare plan, thoroughfare right-of-way protection map or plan means that which is described in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan, III; Existing Conditions; D; Thoroughfare Right-of-Way Protection Map. 
    Through street. See Street, through. 
    Tinted glass shall mean any window which has: 
• A visible light transmittance value of forty-five (45) percent or less; 
• A minimum five (5) year warranty; and 
• Performance claims which are supported by approved testing procedures and documentation. 
    Too numerous to count (TNTC) means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), equal to or greater than two hundred (200) non-coliform bacteria per one hundred (100) milliliters of sample. 
    Topping means undesirable pruning practices resulting in internodal cutting back of branches with little regard to the natural shape of the tree. 
    Total trips means, for the purposes of Article 15, the sum of Existing Traffic, Net Trips and Background Traffic. 
    Towing service and storage means the use of a lot for the temporary storage of operable or inoperable vehicles in conjunction with a commercial towing service, with no sales or repair or salvage activity occurring on the lot. 
    Townhouse means a dwelling unit located on an individual lot and attached by at least one (1) but no more than two (2) party wall(s) along fifty (50) percent of the maximum depth of the unit, to one (1) or more other dwelling units; has a continuous foundation; each on its own lot, with said party wall(s) being centered on the common property line(s) between adjacent lots. 
    TPS Database means, for the purposes of Article 15, a database which was initially approved by the Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners. On an ongoing basis, the Database compiles traffic from existing traffic counts as well as approved but unbuilt developments for each Wellington Roadway Link and Intersection on the roadway network in order to provide Background Traffic volumes for use in traffic studies addressing compliance with the Project Buildout Test. The Background Traffic data shall be maintained by the County and updated to reflect all new project concurrency approvals as well as the buildout status of previously approved projects. 
    Trailer coach shall have the meaning ascribed by the statutes of the State of Florida providing for the regulation, registration, licensing and recordation of ownership of motor vehicles in the State of Florida. The term shall also include all types of mobile homes and those types of self-propelled trucks or buses that have been converted or equipped with living or sleeping quarters, such as pick-up trucks with sleeping quarters installed, and converted buses. This definition shall exclude suburban, passenger vans and other types of automobiles for private use that have been equipped with camping equipment. 
    Transportation facility means a facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and freight or package express between modes of transportation. Typical uses include bus terminals, railroad stations and yards, and major mail-processing centers. 
    Transportation transfer facility (distribution) means an establishment providing for the transfer of transportation or other motorized vehicles, but not involving vehicle sales or rental (retail or wholesale). Typical uses include the transfer of automobiles, trucks, heavy equipment, or other motorized vehicles prior to distribution to retail dealers. 
    Transient occupancy means residential occupancy when it is the intention of the parties that the occupancy will be for less than one (1) month. 
    Treatment receptacle means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), that part of an on-site sewage disposal system which provides treatment of sewage prior to its disposal into a drainfield. 
    Tree means a woody perennial plant commonly with a single four (4) foot clear stem having a more or less defined crown, that usually grows to at least fifteen (15) feet in height at maturity. 
    Tree survey means a comprehensive survey document or site plan that provides the following information for trees greater than four (4) inches diameter at breast height (dbh), or palm trees with an overall height of eight (8) feet, that delineates the location and identifies the species of trees and vegetation upon a lot, and that meets the tree survey requirements of Section 7.3 (Landscaping and Buffering). The Department shall determine the applicability and the extent of each survey. The survey shall provide the following information: 
• The surveyed location, by a Florida licensed land surveyor, in relation to all proposed development, of all existing trees that are proposed to be destroyed, relocated or preserved. 
• The common and scientific name of each tree. 
• The diameter at breast height (DBH) of each tree, or, if a multiple trunk tree, the sum of the DBH of all trunks. 
    Trip means a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one (1) trip end) to a destination (the other trip end). 
    Trip generation means the attraction or production of trips caused by a given type of land development. 
    Truck shall have the meaning ascribed by the statutes of the State of Florida providing for the regulation, registration, licensing and recordation of ownership of motor vehicles in the State of Florida. 
    Ultimate right-of-way means an area set aside for future road widening or used as means of ingress, egress or approach as determined by the Department of Transportation, the Office of the Village Engineer, the Village Council, or by this Code whichever provides the widest right-of-way. 
    Understory means the structural, component of a forest community below the canopy and above the ground layer composed of a complex of woody, fibrous or herbaceous plant species. 
    Unincorporated area (law enforcement) for the purposes of Article 10, Impact Fees, means the unincorporated area of Palm Beach County and the municipalities of Cloud Lake, Golfview, Haverhill, Glen Ridge and Village of Golf. 
    Unit means a building or portion of a building, or a mobile home used primarily for human habitation purposes with separate bathing, cooking and/or dining facilities. In the case of a hotel or motel, or a congregate living facility, it shall mean the room and bathrooms. 
    Unity of control means a covenant stipulating that a lot, lots, or project with different owners shall be developed according to a common site or master plan providing unified control and the combined lots shall meet land development requirements as if they are one (1) lot. 
    Unity of title means a document recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County stipulating that a lot, lots or parcel of land shall be held under single ownership, shall not be eligible for further subdivision and shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold or divided in any unit other than in its entirety. 
    Unmarked human burial means any human skeletal or fossilized remains discovered during any land development activity or archaeological excavation. 
    Unobstructed land means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), those areas on a lot or property not used for such purposes as pools, concrete slabs, buildings, driveways, parking, tennis courts, and similar areas which would prohibit, hinder or affect the installation, operation and/or maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system. 
    Upholstery shop means an establishment engaged in furniture repair and reupholstery. 
    Urban services area means that portion of the Village of Wellington designated as the "Urban Services Area" by the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan, as such area may change from time to time, pursuant to the procedures set forth within said plan. 
    Use means any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 
    Use regulations table(s) shall refer to the tables set forth in Article 6 "Zoning Districts" listing permitted, conditional, restricted uses within various zoning and land use combinations and classifications as currently set forth in Table C of Section 6.10.7., Table 6.8-2 and Table 6.4-1 as the same may be amended and/or relocated from time to time. 
    Use, accessory means a permitted use that is customarily associated with the principal use and clearly incidental to the principal use and is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to and serves only the principal use. 
    Use, principal means the primary and major purpose for which land or building is used as allowed by the applicable zoning district. 
    Utility means a government or franchised provider of water, sewer, electric, gas, phone, cable television, or similar service. 
    Utility easement. See Easement, utility. 
    Utility, minor means elements of utility distribution, collection, or transmission networks, other than electrical generation and transmission voltage facilities, required by their nature to be relatively dispersed throughout the service area. Typical uses include gas and water regulations, electrical distribution substations, sewage lift stations, and telephone exchange buildings and substations. 
    Valid means, for the purposes of impact fees, a development order or other authorization which was legally issued, and that has not expired, lapsed, or been abandoned, revoked, or canceled; or is not subject to such by the passage of time or the conduct of the owner or developer, and on which or for which all conditions of approval are satisfied that must be satisfied by the terms or conditions of approval. 
    Value means, in the case of land, the appraised value as determined by an appraiser from a list of approved appraisers of the Village of Wellington. In the case of improvements to real property or chattel, it means the actual cost to the feepayer or developer of such improvements or chattel. In all cases, the values shall be established in or as if in an arm's length, bona fide transaction in a competitive market between a willing seller and a willing buyer, neither of whom are under any special circumstances. If the Impact Fee Coordinator rejects an appraised value, the Impact Fee Coordinator may obtain another appraisal using an appraiser from the approved list, in which case that appraisal shall prevail. 
    Variance means an abatement of the terms of the Land Development Regulations for a use, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Vegetation, native means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the State of Florida. Plant species which have been introduced by man are not native vegetation. 
    Vegetation, protected means all vegetation other than: 
• Prohibited plant species; or 
• Invasive, non-native plant species or invasive, non-native vegetation. 
    Vegetation, removal means 
• The actual extraction of vegetation; or 
• Direct or indirect actions resulting in the effective removal of vegetation through damaging or poisoning; or 
• Similar actions directly or indirectly resulting in the death of vegetation. 
    Vegetation required to be preserved by law means areas of vegetation which are clearly delineated on a Site Plan/Plat, or in some other legally binding manner based upon which the lot area is being preserved. 
    Vehicle, heavy shall mean vehicles larger than a pick-up truck or vehicles with more than four wheels or the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Class Group 4 or greater as defined in the FDOT Quality/Level of Service Handbook. 
    Vehicle sales and rental means an establishment engaged in the retail or wholesale sale or rental, from the premises, of motorized vehicles or equipment or mobile homes, along with incidental service or maintenance. Typical uses include new and used automobile sales, automobile rental, boat sales, boat rental, mobile home, manufactured housing and recreational vehicle sales, construction equipment rental yards, moving trailer rental, and farm equipment and machinery sales and rental. 
    Vehicular use area means either: (1) an area designed or used for off-street parking; or (2) an area used for loading, circulation, access, storage, or display of motor vehicles. Designated parking areas on public or private streets shall not be considered a vehicular use area. 
    Vehicular use area, specialized means an area designed for storage of vehicles in operative condition, or for warehousing, transportation or trucking operations, and which is not open to the general public. 
    Vested means vested pursuant to the application of Florida law. 
    Veterinary clinic means an establishment engaged in providing medical care and treatment for animals. 
    Village shall mean the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
    Village Attorney means the Village Attorney of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
    Village Council means the Village Council of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
    Village Engineer means the Village Engineer of the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
    Village Manager shall mean the Chief Administrative Officer of the Village, appointed by the Council or the designee of such Person. 
    Village Standards means the minimum standards, specifications, and details for design and construction of streets and other infrastructure improvements, as promulgated by the Village Engineer pursuant to Resolution R-90-740 of the Village of Wellington as may be amended. 
    Vine means a plant with a flexible stem which normally requires support to reach mature form. 
    Violator means a person who has been ordered by Code Enforcement to correct a violation. 
    Vocational school means an establishment, for profit or not, offering regularly scheduled instruction in technical, commercial, or trade skills such as, but not limited to business, real estate, building and construction trades, electronics, computer programming and technology, automotive and aircraft mechanics and technology, or other types of vocational instruction. 
    Warehousing means an establishment engaged in the storage of materials, equipment, or products within a building for manufacturing use or for distribution to wholesalers or retailers, as well as activities involving significant movement, breaking of bulk and storage of products or equipment. Typical uses include motor freight transportation, moving and storage facilities, cold storage, warehousing and dead storage facilities, but exclude self-service storage facilities and office-warehouse combinations. 
    Waste means discarded material including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trash, litter, noncombustible refuse and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater residuals means the solid, semisolid, or liquid residue removed during the treatment of municipal wastewater. Not included is the treated effluent or reclaimed water from domestic wastewater treatment plant. 
    Wastewater residuals (Dry) means domestic wastewater residuals that contain sixty-five (65) percent solids or greater, by weight. 
    Wastewater treatment facility means a facility designed for treatment and disposal of more than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day of wastewater, including large regional plants and above ground package treatment facilities. 
    Water management tract means a parcel of land under single ownership, identified and created as a single unit on a plat or other instrument of record, established for the purpose of delineating a complete facility or unified area to be utilized for detention, retention, or groundwater recharge of stormwater runoff prior to discharge from a development site. 
    Water supply system or Water supply facility or Water system or Water facility means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any or all works and auxiliaries for collection, treatment, storage and distribution of water from the source or sources of supply to the consumer or processing plants including ice-making vending machines and bottled water plants. 
    Water system, central means a regional water supply system owned and operated by municipal, county, special district or other governmental entity, which provides water service to several development located within its service area. 
    Water system, individual means a privately owned water supply system which provides water service to a single development because of unavailability of a central water system. 
    Water table elevation means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), the upper surface of the groundwater or that level below which the soil or underlying rock material is saturated with water. Water table elevation is measured from the soil surface down or up to the free water level. 
    Water treatment facility means a facility designed for treatment of ground or surface water for potable and sanitary purposes, with a design capacity of more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day. 
    Water well means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), a source of water used for drinking, culinary, sanitary and other domestic purposes. The following classifications of wells are used in this Section: 
•  Private well means a well used to provide water only for residential purposes and serving no more than four (4) dwelling units; 
•  Semi-public well means a well used to provide water for: 
• Less than twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year, or 
• At least twenty-five (25) individuals daily less than sixty (60) days out of the year; 
•  Non-community well means a well used to provide water to at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year but is not a community water system; 
•  Community water well means a well used to provide water to at least fifteen (15) service connections used by year-round residents or which regularly serves at least twenty-five (25) year-round residents; 
•  Non-potable well means a well intended exclusively for irrigation purposes, or for supplying water to a heat pump system or a well for receiving discharge water from a heat pump system; 
    Watercourse means any stream, canal, ditch, or other natural or artificial channel in which water normally flows within a defined bed, banks, or other discernible boundaries, either continuously or seasonally, whether or not such flow is uniform or uninterrupted. 
    Waters of the state means waters, as defined in § 403.031(12), Fla. Stat., subject to compliance with State Water Quality Standards adopted pursuant to Chapter 403, Fla. Stat., and set forth in Chapter 17-3, F.A.C. 
    Watershed means the land area which contributes to the total flow of water entering a receiving stream or water body. 
    Well means, for the purpose of Section 16.2 (Water Supply Systems), any opening in the ground designed to conduct water from a ground water supply to the surface by pumping or natural flow when water from such opening is used or is to be used for a drinking water supply system or irrigation purposes. 
    Wellfield means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), an area of land which contains more than one (1) potable well that is designed for a pumping rate of at least one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day. 
    Wellfield Zones 1 and 2 means zones of influence delineated by iso-travel time contours around public water supply wellheads. Zone 1 is identified as the land area within a thirty (30) day travel time and Zone 2 is the land area within a two hundred ten (210) day travel time. Zones of influence maps, including zones 3 and 4 are developed pursuant to the Wellfield Protection Section and are on file and maintained by ERM Department. 
    Wellington Intersection means, for the purposes of Article 15, the intersection of two (2) or more Wellington Roadways or the intersection of a Wellington Roadway with a County or State Major Thoroughfares. 
    Wellington Roadways means, for the purposes of Article 15, either: 
• All streets as defined in the Wellington Roadway Analysis Map as it may be amended from time to time; 
• All roadways that function as Wellington Roadways as determined by the Village Engineer based on the following criteria: 
1.  Provides continuity of an existing roadway; 
2.  Provides connectivity to other Links of the roadway network; 
3.  Carries or is projected to carry a volume of at least eight hundred (800) peak hour directional trips. 
All proposed and approved roads that would, if built, function as arterials and major collectors during the buildout period of the proposed project as determined by the Village Engineer in accordance with accepted traffic engineering principles. 
    West County Agricultural Area (WCAA) means that area roughly bounded by Lake Okeechobee, Palm Beach County/Hendry County Line, South Florida Water Management District Levees L-4, L-5, L-6, L-7 and L-8 and is the agriculture production designation on the land use map of the land use element of the comprehensive plan, also known as the Everglades Agricultural Area (EAA). 
    Wet detention/retention means detention or retention in a storage facility not designed, constructed, and operated so as to provide dry detention/retention. 
    Wetland means those areas defined in § 373.019(22), Florida Statutes, and those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and a duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Soils present in wetlands generally are classified as hydric or alluvial, or possess characteristics that are associated with reducing soil conditions. The prevalent vegetation in wetlands generally consists of facultative or obligate hydrophytic macrophytes that are typically adapted to areas having soil conditions described above. These species, due to morphological, physiological, or reproductive adaptations, have the ability to grow, reproduce, or persist in aquatic environments or anaerobic soil conditions. Florida wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bayheads, bogs, cypress domes and strands, sloughs, wet prairies, riverine swamps and marshes, hydric seepage slopes, tidal marshes, mangrove swamps, and other similar areas. Florida wetlands generally do not include longleaf or slash pine flatwoods with an understory dominated by saw palmetto. 
    Wettest season means, for the purpose of Section 16.1 (On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems), that period of time each year in which the groundwater table elevation can normally be expected to be at its highest elevation. 
    Wholesaling, general means an establishment engaged in the display, maintaining inventories of goods, storage, distribution and sale of goods to other firms for resale, or the supplying of goods to various trades such as landscapers, construction contractors, institutions, industries, or professional businesses. In addition to selling, wholesale establishments sort and grade goods in large lots, break bulk and redistribute in smaller lots, delivery and refrigeration storage, but excluding vehicle sales, wholesale greenhouses or nurseries, wholesale of gas and fuel, and wholesale building supplies. 
    Wildlife corridor means a continuous corridor of habitat, with a width of at least one (1) mile, that is established by linking conservation areas, wildlife preserves, sanctuaries, refuges, parks, open space areas, and agricultural areas to provide a pathway for wildlife movement. 
    Wood or lumber processing means an establishment engaged in the production of lumber or similar building material products from wood. 
    Woodworking or cabinetmaking means an establishment engaged in the production of finished products from wood. 
    Work means all required construction as shown on approved construction plans and specifications for all facilities and features of any kind which are required, related to the process of subdivision of land under Article 8, Subdivision, Platting and Required Improvements. 
    Yard. See Setback. 
    Zero lot line home means the use of a lot for one (1) detached dwelling unit with at least one (1) wall, but not more than two (2) walls or a portion thereof, located directly adjacent to a side lot line, excluding a mobile home but including a manufactured building. 
    Zones of Influence means zones delineated by iso-travel time contours and the one (1) foot drawdown contour within cones of depression of wells which obtain water from the unconfined or surficial aquifer system. These zones are calculated, based on the rate of movement of groundwaters in the vicinity of wells at a specified pumping rate. 
    Zones of Influence Maps mean aerial photographs at scales determined by the Department showing the location on the ground of the outer limits of Zones of Influence for present and future public potable water supply wells and wellfields permitted for one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day or more. 
    Zoo means a place where animals are kept in captivity for the public to view. 
(Ord. No. 2003-06; June 10, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 4, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2010-21, § 3, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1(Att. A), 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 2(Att. B), 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
CHAPTER 3. - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AADT Average annual daily traffic AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ACLF Adult Congregate Living Facility ADT Average daily trips ANSI American National Standards Institute CIE Capital Improvement Element CO Certificate of Occupancy CRALLS Constrained Road At A Lower Level of Service CSA Concurrency Service Area CTF Citizens Task Force Db Decibel DCS Director of Community Services dbh Diameter at breast height DEPW Department of Engineering and Public Works DO Development Order DRC Development Review Committee DRI Development of Regional Impact EAA Everglades Agricultural Area ECR I Palm Beach County Environmental Control Rule I (Onsite Sewage Disposal Systems) ECR II Palm Beach County Environmental Control Rule II (Water Supply Systems) ESL Environmentally Sensitive Land ESLO Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance F.A.C. Florida Administrative Code FAR Floor area ratio FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map FDER Florida Department of Environmental Regulation FDOT Florida Department of Transportation FHBM Flood Hazard Boundary Map Fla. Stat. Florida Statutes GOPs Goals, Objectives and Policies of the Comprehensive Plan HCM Highway Capacity Manual LDP Land Development Permit LDR Land Development Regulations (Wellington) LOS Level of Service MAI Member of the Appraiser's Institute MF Multifamily MPO Metropolitan Planning Organization NGVD National Geodetic Vertical Datum OHW Ordinary High Water OLW Ordinary Low Water PBC Palm Beach County PBIA Palm Beach International Airport PBCPHU Palm Beach County Public Health Unit PUD Planned Unit Development PZAB Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board PZB Planning & Zoning Building Department SF Single Family SFWMD South Florida Water Management District SIC Standard Industrial Code TCRPC Treasure Coast Regional Planning Council TIS Traffic Impact Study (or Statement) tntc Too numerous to count TPS Traffic Performance Standards USA Urban Services Area USB Urban Services Boundary v/c Volume to capacity VDBP Voluntary Density Bonus Program VPPO Vegetation Preservation and Protection Ordinance WCAA West County Agricultural Area WPZ Wellfield Protection Zones ZLL Zero lot line  
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 2(Att. B), 4-22-2014) 
Article 4 - DECISIONMAKING, ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT BODIES 
REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY 
Article 5 - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 26, 2017, repealed the former Art. 5, §§ 5.1.1-5.1.18, 5.2.1-5.2.3, 5.3.1-5.3.4, 5.4.1-5.4.4, 5.5.1-5.5.4, 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.7.1-5.7.5, 5.8.1-5.8.10, 5.9.1-5.9.4, 5.10.1-5.10.13, Art. 5, Ch. 11, 5.12.1-5.12.8, 5.13.1-5.13.5, and enacted a new Art. 5 as set out herein. The former Art. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 14, 2012. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 5.1.1. - Purpose, intent and applicability. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to provide the development review procedures that shall apply to all development applications, excluding platting, re-platting, or other applications governed by Article 8. All development applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and all other applicable Land Development Regulations (LDRs). Additionally, the development review procedures shall comply with Wellington Code of Ordinances and Florida Statutes, Chapters 163 (Community Planning), 166 (Municipalities), 171 (Annexation), 380 (Land and Water Management). 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.1.2. - Decision-making bodies. 
A.  Wellington's Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, defines the role and authority of Wellington committees, boards and Council. Public meetings and/or public hearings shall comply with the Code of Ordinances and Sec. 5.2.3 of this Article. 
B.  Administrative reviews, approvals or denials shall be the responsibility of the Planning, Zoning, and Building (PZB) Director, or designee. 
C.  The Development Review Manager (DM) is responsible for processing development applications that are administrative or require public meetings and/or hearings. Table 5.1.2-1 provides the types of development application, required review entities, and the decision-making body. The respective decision-making bodies may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a development application. 
Table 5.1.2-1
Development Application Approvals 
A = Approval 
R = Recommendation/Certification 
*All Equestrian applications shall be reviewed by the Equestrian Preserve Committee as they are a recommending body to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. All non-equestrian applications would proceed to PZAB when applicable. 
**Requires two (2) reading by Village Council for final adoption. Application Type Administrative (PZB Director or DM) *Equestrian Preserve Committee Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board Architectural Review Board Village Council Annexation R R R A Comprehensive Plan Map and/or Text Amendments** R R R A Zoning Map and/or Text Amendments** R R R A Master Plan/Amendments R R R A Minor Master Plan Amendment A Site Plan or Subdivision Plan/Amendment A Minor Site Plan or Subdivision Amendment A Architectural Review Applications R A Conditional Use and/or Amendment R R R A Minor Conditional Use Amendment A Variance R R A Administrative Variance A Vacation/Abandonment R A Amendment to Conditions of Approval R The decision-making body that originally approved the development order shall consider applications to amend conditions of approval. Interpretation of the Code A Zoning Confirmation A Unity of Title/Control or Release A Tree Removal Permit A Special Use Permit A Equestrian Permit A Seasonal Permits that exceed 30 event days within a 6 month period (equestrian and non-equestrian) R A Seasonal Permit renewal A Extended Hours Special Permit A Reasonable Accommodation A  
Notes: Any applicant who wishes to appeal a determination of a decision-making body shall do as provided in Section 5.2.4.D. or if applicable Section 5.3.11 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
CHAPTER 2. - APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 5.2.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide general submittal requirements, review criteria, process, determinations and time limitations for all development applications as identified in Chapter 1, Table 5.1.2-1. This chapter also provides information pertaining to results, appeals, suspensions and/or revocation of development orders. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.2.2. - Application initiation. 
A.  A Development Review Manual shall been adopted by the Village Council. All applicable information in this manual complies with Florida Statutes. The manual is available on-line and a hard copy is located with the Planning and Zoning Division. This manual provides the types of applications, the required documents to supplement the applications, the specific criteria that shall justify application consideration, and other helpful references such as the fee schedule, process flowcharts, etc. 
B.  All development applications submitted by a property owner, interested party or agent shall be submitted on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Division. Staff shall be required to complete the application and provide all necessary documentation required for consideration for all applications initiated by staff. 
C.  All applications that require public meeting/hearings and all Site Plans/amendments shall be required to schedule a pre-application meeting with the DM prior to the in-take meeting. The DM will determine if other department representatives should be in attendance in the pre-application meeting based on the type of application. 
1.  A pre-application summary shall be prepared by the DM and be provided to the applicant within five (5) business days setting forth the results, concerns, and general process required. 
2.  The pre-application summary is valid for six (6) months. If the applicant does not submit the applications, at an in-take meeting, related to the pre-application summary within the validation period, a new pre-application meeting is required. 
D.  All applications that require public meeting/hearings and all Site Plans/amendments shall be required to schedule an in-take meeting in order to submit the applications. Multiple applications may be submitted at the same meeting. An application shall be deemed sufficient or insufficient by the DM at the in-take meeting. If the application is not sufficient for submittal, it will be returned to the applicant, in its entirety, for corrections and a new in-take meeting will be required. Sufficiency shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Properly executed applications. 
2.  Application and escrow fees (changes to the plans or application exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the initial submittal, resubmittals, and/or postponements may require additional fees). 
3.  All applicable items on the check list provided with each application. 
4.  The supplemental documents requested on the checklist must be specific to the project and must meet the criteria as provided in the Development Review Manual. 
5.  Certified or stamped mailings (if required). 
E.  Notice of all development applications shall be posted on Wellington's website within five (5) working days of the in-take meeting where the application was deemed sufficient for review. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.2.3. - Review criteria and process. 
A.  Annexations and contractions shall comply with the criteria and eligibility set forth in Chapter 171, Florida Statutes and all applicable Palm Beach County requirements. The annexation criteria can also be found in the Development Review Manual. 
B.  All other development applications shall comply with the following: 
1.  The proposed development/activity is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, including land use, density and intensity. 
2.  The proposed development/activity results in a logical, timely and orderly development patterns. 
3.  The proposed development/activity is compatible with surrounding land uses, zoning and existing development. 
4.  The proposed development/activity complies with all other applicable requirements of the LDRs. 
5.  The proposed development/activity complies with the applicable criteria of the Development Review Manual based on application type. 
C.  Administrative Applications and Applications that Require Public Meetings/Hearings: 
1.  The Development Review Manual classifies each application as follows: 
a.  Administrative: 
i.  Type A1 Applications: Administrative applications are those that can be approved, with or without conditions, or denied by the PZB Director, or designee. 
ii.  Type A2 Applications: Administrative applications are those that require approval from the PZB Director or the DM, such as site plans and site plan amendments. 
b.  Applications that Require Public Meetings/Hearings: 
i.  Type B Applications: Applications that require administrative certification that the application(s) meet all requirements to move forward for public meeting or hearing by a Board or Committee. 
ii.  Type C Applications: Applications that require administrative certification and review/recommendation from a Board or Committee prior to a public hearing by Village Council. 
2.  Public Meeting or Hearing Notice Requirements: 
a.  All items scheduled for review by the EPC or ARB shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hour prior to the meeting on the Village Website. 
b.  Development applications that proceed to PZAB and/or Council shall be subject to statutory notice requirements and the requirements below: 
i.  Legal Notice shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
ii.  Notice of hearing shall be mailed (certified), a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the hearing, to all owners of real property located within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject site. The applicant shall use the names and addresses from the latest published ad valorem tax records of the County property appraiser. If the area within five hundred (500) feet is owned by the applicant the required notice boundary shall be extended to include these parcels. Governmental jurisdictions within one (1) mile of the property shall also be notified. Notice shall include a description of the proposal, the date, time and place of the hearing, a location map indicating the subject site, nearby streets and a statement that interested parties may appear and be heard regarding the matter. 
iii.  The applicant shall post notice signs, provided by the Planning and Zoning Division, and in accordance with the following: 
a.  Posted a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days in advance of any public hearing. 
b.  One (1) sign for every five hundred (500) feet of frontage along a public or private street. 
c.  Shall be no more than twenty-five (25) feet from the street. 
d.  Shall be in full view to the public. Where there is no frontage on a public street, one (1) sign shall be posted on the nearest public street indicating the direction and distance to the subject land. 
e.  The applicant shall provide an affidavit including pictures of posted signs within three (3) working days of posting. 
f.  The signs shall be removed by the applicant within seven (7) calendar days after the final hearing. 
D.  Public Hearing Proceeding and Records: 
1.  Public meeting/hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the adopted process as provided in the Public Meeting Handbook. 
2.  If it is determined the application is based on incomplete or inaccurate information or misstatements of fact, the application may be remanded back to a previous reviewing entity (e.g., the DM, EPC or PZAB). 
3.  The decision-making body conducting the public hearing may on its own motion, or at the request of an applicant or staff, continue the hearing or meeting to a fixed time and place. An applicant shall have the right to request and be granted one (1) thirty-day continuance. Subsequent continuances shall be granted at the discretion of the decision-making body conducting the hearing. Any request for a continuance shall be submitted in writing at least five (5) working days prior to the hearing or the applicant shall be required to attend the hearing to make the request. Additional fees may be required. 
4.  If substantive changes are made to the request within ten (10) working days prior to a public meeting or hearing, the item will incur an automatic continuance and may be remanded back to the previous decision-making body. 
5.  An applicant shall have the right to withdraw an application at any time prior to the final action by the decision-making body. Requests for withdrawal, received in writing by the PZB Director five (5) working days prior to the meeting, will be granted without prejudice as a matter of right and subject to forfeiture of all application fees; thereafter, requests may be granted with or without prejudice. 
6.  For Type B and C applications that request a minor amendment to the approved development order, but exceed the minor administrative amendment criteria, the applicant may request an expedited review of the change. An expedited review means the applicant may qualify to take the amendment directly to the decision-making body and not be required to go back to a committee or board that provided a recommendation. Expedited reviews shall meet all required legal ad, mailing, and posting requirements that apply. Applications that modify project boundaries, increase density and/or intensity, or increase project traffic generation are not eligible for expedited review. 
7.  Records. 
a.  Records of public hearings shall be kept in accordance with Florida Statute 286.011. 
b.  The record of oral proceedings, including testimony and statements of opinion, the minutes of the DM, EPC, PZAB and Council as applicable, applications, exhibits and papers submitted in any proceeding before the decision-making body, the staff report and recommendation of the Wellington official or staff responsible for making the recommendation, and the final vote of the decision making body shall constitute the record. 
c.  It is the responsibility of any person appealing a decision of any decision-making body conducting a public meeting or hearing pursuant to these LDRs to provide a record of all necessary evidence to support the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.2.4. - Results, time limitations, revocations, suspensions, and appeals of development orders. 
A.  Results: 
1.  Decision-making bodies shall comply with the Code of Ordinances, Florida Statutes, the LDRs and the Development Review Manual when specific actions or criteria are required based on the type of application. Additionally, the following shall apply: 
a.  When a development application is denied with prejudice at a public hearing, an application for all, or in part, of the subject site shall not be considered for a period of one (1) calendar year, except for a Future Land Use Map amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, which shall not be considered for two (2) calendar years, from the date of the denial unless the subsequent application involves: 
i.  A change in proposed use; 
ii.  A twenty-five (25) percent or greater increase or decrease in the proposed density or intensity; 
iii.  A majority of the decision-making body determined the denial was based on a material mistake of fact of the proposed application; or 
b.  If an application is deemed sufficient and submitted for review, but then becomes inactive for ninety (90) calendar days, the DM shall have the authority to administratively withdrawal the applications unless an extension is requested prior to the expiration of the 90-day period. An extension fee may be applicable. 
2.  Type A1 Administrative Applications shall be reviewed and a decision shall be made within ten (10) working days of a sufficient application. The final decision shall be provided to the applicant within five (5) working days of the decision. 
3.  Applicants that obtain an approval of a Type A2, B and/or C Application shall submit two (2) sets of plans and one (1) Mylar for stamping, along with a georeferenced AutoCAD or GIS file. The plans must match what was approved by the decisions-making body and include all conditions of approval. If the plans are required to change in order to implement or illustrate a condition of approval, the DM may stamp the rectified plan. Any changes beyond what is considered to be the rectified plan shall be considered an Amendment and shall require a new application in accordance with this article. 
4.  If there is evidence that a development order application or presentation contained misrepresentation, fraud, deceit or a deliberate error of omission, the PZB Director shall initiate a re-hearing of the decision-making body and may result in the proposed application be remanded back to the beginning of the development review process. 
B.  Time Limitations: 
1.  Development orders shall comply with the time limitations and requirements of Table 5.2.4-1 unless: 
a.  The PZB Director grants an administrative extension for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) months. If a surety bond, escrow deposit, or letter of credit was not originally required, one may be required as a determining factor in granting the extension. Only one administrative extension is permitted and shall be considered based on the following: 
i.  Attempts by the applicant to complete the unfulfilled conditions of approval; 
ii.  Changed circumstances that affected the applicant's ability to fulfill conditions of approval; or 
iii.  Circumstances that are not self-imposed by the applicant. 
b.  Amendments to a development order granted by the respective decision-making body may provide new date certain conditions of approval that supersede the previous development order. 
c.  If a state of emergency is declared by the State of Florida, an applicant may be entitled to an extension of a development order, in full or in part, pursuant to Florida Statutes 252.363(1)(a). 
d.  All development orders that include a specified phasing plan, which provides the sequence and timing of each phase, may only be eligible for an extension on certain phases and partial completion of the overall development. 
e.  The following development orders are exempt from the time limitations set forth in this article: 
i.  Village initiated development orders. 
ii.  Rezoning of a single residential parcel that does not exceed the corresponding density permitted within the Future Land Use Map designation of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Table 5.2.4-1
Time Limitations for Development Orders 
Development Order Maximum Number of Phases Required 
Commencement 
Action Maximum Time to Commence Development Maximum Length Time 
Extension Action Upon 
Failure to 
Comply Master Plan/Planned Development 3 Commence Development 3 years 1 year Council Review Site/Subdivision Plan 2 Commence Development 2 years 1 year All undeveloped phases are null and void Conditional Use 2 Commence Development or Initiate Use 2 years 1 year Council Review Variance 1 Commence Development 2 years 1 year PZAB Review  
Notes: 
(1) "Commence development" means initiation of physical improvements, but does not include platting, demolition, land clearing or filling. 
(2) The maximum time to commence development starts at final certification or effective date of a resolution. 
C.  Abandonment, Suspension or Revocations: 
1.  Abandonment of a development order may occur based on one or more of the following: 
a.  A new development order is issued that replaces the existing development order. 
b.  The property owner(s) provide a written request, or the DM requests, to abandon a development order to the PZB Director. The property owner(s)/DM must demonstrate that no improvements have commenced. 
2.  Suspension of a Development Order 
a.  Suspension of a development order will occur if a code case was initiated on the subject property by the Code Compliance Division and is found to be in violation of code provisions by the Special Magistrate. The suspension shall take effect immediately after the 30-day appeal period of the Special Magistrate's order has expired. No new development applications shall be processed for the subject site unless the proposed development application is required to rectify the code case, then the PZB Director may authorize the DM to process the request. 
b.  Suspension of a development order will occur if there is a violation of a condition of approval. A violation of a development order is considered a violation of the code. The PZB Director shall have the option to report the violation to Code Compliance or to set a hearing with the respective decision-making body to impose corrective action. 
c.  A suspension of a development order, as indicated above, shall be documented and recorded with the Palm Beach County Clerk of Courts. The document shall indicate the reason for the suspension and must express that no new development orders shall be processed until the suspension is removed. A document removing the suspension shall be recorded once all violations are rectified. The property owner may be required to pay the recordation and processing fees. 
d.  A suspension may be waived if: 
i.  The property owner is a government agency. 
ii.  The violation was not self-imposed and due to a government-caused delay. 
iii.  Litigation prevents or delays compliance. Documentation of active litigation may be required. 
3.  Revocation of a Development Order 
a.  Type A1 development orders: The PZB director shall have the right to revoke development orders if a property owner violates the conditions of approval. 
b.  Type A2, B and C development orders: If a property owner fails to comply with conditions of approval, the PZB Director shall set a hearing with the original final decision-making body, for consideration of revocation of the development order. The DM shall notify the property owner of the date, time and reason for the hearing. The decision-making body shall consider the same review criteria of the development order as the original approval and as provided for in the Development Review Manual. 
c.  The hearing process for a revocation of Type A2, B and C development orders shall comply with the following: 
i.  Legal Notice shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
ii.  The hearing shall be scheduled to occur within ninety (90) calendar days of notification to the property owner that consideration for revocation has occurred. 
iii.  If the decision-making body revokes a development order, any future development shall require a new development application. 
iv.  If the decision-making body does not revoke the development order, it will remain valid and may have newly imposed conditions of approval determined by the body. 
D.  Appeals: 
1.  Standing to file an appeal of a development review decision shall be limited to the property owner, contract purchaser, authorized agent of the owner/purchaser or those property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property or as otherwise provided by Florida Statutes. 
2.  A recommendation by staff, committee, or board acting in their advisory capacity is not a final decision and is not appealable. 
3.  Any person aggrieved by a final decision included in this article shall exhaust all administrative remedies available prior to applying to the courts for judicial relief. 
4.  Appeals from any affected party or governmental entity on annexations or contractions shall be processed in accordance with Florida Statute 171.081. 
5.  Administrative Appeals: 
a.  The PZB Director shall hear appeals of any decision of the DM, unless otherwise listed in Table 5.2.4-2. The appeal shall be submitted to the Director within thirty (30) calendar days of the issuance of a DM's decision. The Director's decision on the appeal may be further appealed to the PZAB within thirty (30) calendar days of rendering of such decision. 
b.  If the Director is the decision-making authority for an administrative development application, any appeal shall be heard by the PZAB in accordance with the appeal process in Section 5.2.4.D.6 of this article. 
6.  Appeals to a Committee, Board or Council: 
a.  Table 5.2.4-2 provides the decision-making bodies and the type of appeal they are tasked with hearing. 
b.  Such appeals shall follow the procedures below: 
i.  Appeals shall be filed on forms prescribed by the PZB Director within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision. 
ii.  A hearing before the PZAB shall be scheduled no later than forty-five (45) calendar days following receipt of the written appeal unless the PZB Director and the applicant mutually agree to an extension of this time period. 
iii.  The PZAB shall give the Appellants and other interested parties a reasonable opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing the Board shall render its determination. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify the decision or determination being appealed. The interpretation or decision in question shall be presumed to be correct and the applicant shall have the burden to demonstrate errors. The Board shall not reject or modify the Director's interpretation/decision if it is supported by competent substantial evidence. The determination shall be issued in written form with a copy sent to Appellants. 
iv.  Following exhaustion of all administrative remedies, parties to an appeal heard before the PZAB may seek appropriate judicial relief. 
v.  For an appeal of a decision by the PZAB pertaining to an archaeological certificate to dig, pursuant to Article 7, within thirty (30) calendar days of a written decision by the PZAB an aggrieved party may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with a filing fee established by the Wellington Council with the Wellington Clerk and the PZB Department. The notice of appeal shall state the decision that is being appealed, the grounds for the appeal and a brief summary of the relief that is sought. Within forty-five (45) calendar days of the filing of the appeal or the first Wellington Council meeting that is scheduled, whichever is later in time, the Council shall conduct a public hearing at which time they may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the PZAB. The applicant shall be notified (by certified mail/return receipt requested) of the date, time and place of such hearing. At this hearing the party shall set forth the alleged inconsistencies or non-conformities with procedures or criteria set forth in these LDRs. However, no new material or evidence shall be presented to or considered by the Council. The decision of the Council shall be in writing and a copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the appealing party. 
vi.  Appeals to the ARB shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. A hearing shall be scheduled no later than forty-five (45) calendar days following receipt of the written appeal unless the PZB Director and the applicant mutually agree on a date certain hearing. 
vii.  Any interested party aggrieved by a decision of the PZB Director pertaining to Sec. 7.5 Tree Protection and/or tree removal may be appealed to the Tree Board by filing a written appeal with the PZB Department within ten (10) calendar days of the decision of the department. A hearing shall be scheduled no later than forty-five (45) calendar days following receipt of the written appeal unless the parties mutually agree to an extension. 
Table 5.2.4-2
Decision-making Bodies for Appeals 
Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board Architectural 
Review Board Tree Board Council Special Permits Administrative denial of a building materials or design Decision or condition of approval by the PZB Director regarding vegetation removal Decision by PZAB regarding an archaeological certificate to dig Equestrian Permits Seasonal Permits (new and renewals) Extended Hours Permits Excavation Permits Interpretations of the Code Administrative Conditions of Approval Denial of Administrative Time Extension  
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
CHAPTER 3. - APPLICATION REGULATIONS BY TYPE 

Sec. 5.3.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide procedural and statutory standards for the various types of development applications. The Development Review Manual, adopted by Village Council, provides further details for each application type, submittal requirements, formatting, review criteria, fee schedule, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.2. - Annexation or contraction. 
A.  Annexations and contractions shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 171, Florida Statutes and shall be approved/denied by Ordinance. 
B.  Voluntary Annexations shall require approval by the Palm Beach County Board of County Commissioners prior to final action by the Village Council. 
C.  The Justification Statement submitted with the annexations or contraction application shall include required information as provided for in the Development Review Manual under Type C applications. 
D.  The adoption of an annexation or contraction request only results in the changed municipal boundary. The approval does not provide entitlements, an amendment to the Future Land Use Map designation or Zoning designation. The subject property existing land use and zoning remains in effect until subsequent development orders are approved by the designated decision-making body. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.3. - Comprehensive Plan Map/text Amendments. 
A.  Comprehensive Plan Map/text amendments shall comply with Chapter 163, Florida Statutes and shall adhere to the submittal and review requirements of the State Land Planning Agency. 
B.  To modify the Future Land Use Map or other map in the Comprehensive Plan, the applicant shall comply with the Type C submittal requirements and process as provided for in the Development Review Manual. 
C.  The provisions in Wellington Charter, and/or Comprehensive Plan, shall determine if a majority or super-majority vote of Council is required based on the type of request and shall be approved/denied by Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.4. - Zoning Map/text amendments. 
    Zoning Map and/or text amendments shall comply with the Type C submittal requirements and process of the Development Review Manual and shall be approved/denied by Ordinance. Additionally the following shall apply: 
A.  In order to modify the Official Zoning Map the applicant must: 
1.  Justify the request is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map designation; and 
2.  Provide evidence that justifies the request based on the required criteria for consideration as provided for in the Development Review Manual. 
B.  In order to modify the text of the LDRs the applicant must provide the exact proposed text changes in strike-through and underline format and justify the request based on the required criteria for consideration as provided for in the Development Review Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.5. - Master Plan/amendments. 
    Master plans and amendments to existing master plans shall comply with the Type C submittal requirements and process of the Development Review Manual and shall be done by Resolution. Additionally the following shall apply: 
A.  No permits for development shall be issued prior to the approval of the master plan/amendment and the corresponding site plan/amendment or subdivision plan(s). 
B.  A conceptual site plan or subdivision plan is required as part of the application for a master plan/amendment. 
C.  If the project is intended to be constructed in phases, the applicant must submit a phasing plan as part of the required documents. This is necessary to ensure appropriate development patterns and to apply time limitations as set forth in Section 5.2.4 related to site plans/subdivision plans. 
D.  Master plans are required for all Planned Developments and may be required for multiple parcels that are intended to function as a single project but are not a designated Planned Development. 
E.  Master plan amendments shall be reviewed by Village Council as a Type C application unless the modifications to the master plan qualify as a minor amendment pursuant to the Development Review Manual (no increase in density and/or intensity), then an administrative approval, approval with conditions, or denial may be granted in accordance with a Type A2 application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.6. - Site Plan or Subdivision Plans/amendments. 
    Site plans or subdivision plans are required for residential developments consisting of three or more dwelling units, commercial, industrial, and private recreational developments prior to eligibility for the issuance of engineering and/or building permits. 
A.  Site plans or subdivision plans shall be processed in accordance with a Type A2 application as provided in the Development Review Manual. 
B.  Minor site plan or subdivision plan amendments (no increase in density and/or intensity) shall be processed in accordance with a Type A1 application as provided in the Development Review Manual. Minor amendments include, but are not limited to, change in sign location, minor modifications to parking areas, reduction in building footprint, addition of decorative canopies, etc. 
C.  A site plan or subdivision plan shall be required prior to platting and/or obtaining land development or building permits, unless otherwise stated in Article 8 of the LDRs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.7. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses are those uses that are generally compatible with the Future Land Use Map and Zoning designations, but may require additional conditions to ensure mitigation of impacts to adjacent properties. Uses that require a conditional use approval are identified in the Use Regulations of Article 6 and the following shall apply: 
A.  A conditional use is a Type C application. 
B.  A term "compatibility determination" means conditional use for purposes of this code. 
C.  A conditional use may not commence until all other required development orders and permits are secured in accordance with the LDRs. 
D.  Minor amendments to a conditional use shall be processed as a Type A2 application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.8. - Variance. 
    A variance is required when a deviation from the bulk regulations is necessary to allow the development of a property when a peculiar condition and the literal enforcement of the regulations would result in an undue hardship for the property owner. 
A.  A variance shall be processed as a Type B application in accordance with the Development Review Manual. 
B.  PZAB is the decision-making body to consider this request, except for administrative variances as set forth in section 5.3.8.F of this article. 
C.  Bulk regulations include, but are not limited to, setbacks, FAR, building coverage, minimum landscape requirements, etc. 
D.  A variance on minimum thresholds for uses and structures, such as lot size, are not permitted. 
E.  A use variance is not permitted. 
F.  Administrative variances granted by the PZB Director shall be processed as a Type A1 application and shall be considered as follows: 
1.  An enlargement, expansion or rebuilding of a single-family nonconforming use pursuant to Article 1 on one (1) occasion provided the extent of the improvement does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the floor area of the individual structure or ten (10) percent of the improvement value of the structure whichever is less. 
2.  Allowance for an additional fifteen (15) percent total square footage of a barn as permitted in Sec 6.10 of the LDRs. 
3.  A structural encroachment into a setback of no more than fifteen (15) percent of the setback if the structural encroachment does not encroach on easement, right-of-way or is on a zero lot line side. 
4.  An administrative variance to accommodate the preservation of existing native tree(s) pursuant to Article 7.5, Tree Protection as follows: 
a.  Up to fifteen (15) percent of a required setback. 
b.  Up to fifteen (15) percent of the required parking spaces. 
c.  This section may not be combined with any other section which allows reductions in setbacks or parking. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.9. - Special use permits, equestrian permits and seasonal permits. 
A.  Special Use Permits are required for temporary uses and/or activities that are generally compatible with the land use and zoning but require individual review based on location, duration and/or intensity. 
B.  Equestrian Permits are required for temporary equestrian related uses and/or activities that are generally compatible with the land use and zoning but require individual review based on location, duration and intensity. 
C.  Special Use and Equestrian Permits shall be reviewed and processed as Type A1 applications and in accordance with the Development Review Manual. Uses that require a Special Use or Equestrian Use Permit are identified in the Use Regulations of Article 6. Additionally, these applications shall be reviewed Palm Beach County Sheriffs Office and Palm Beach County Fire Rescue. 
D.  Seasonal Permits are Special Use or Equestrian Permits that exceed thirty (30) event days within a 6-month period. They shall be processed as a Type A1 application and in accordance with the Development Review Manual; however they shall require Council approval for the initial request. All seasonal permits that are identical to the Council approved permit shall be renewed administratively by the DM. Any modification to the Council approved permit shall be required to seek Council approval as a new request. Equestrian Permits for temporary stabling tents, not associated with events or construction of a barn that exceed thirty (30) days, are exempt from Council approval and shall be reviewed administratively. 
E.  The applicant shall comply with all code of ordinances, the LDRs, and the Conditions of Approval of the permit. Failure to abide may jeopardize future permits and/or result in code enforcement action with possible fines or immediate revocation of the permit. Revocation shall be determined by the decision-making body that issued the permit. 
F.  Duration: 
1.  A Special Use Permit and Equestrian Permits shall be issued based on the number of days and type of request within a twelve (12) month period on the same property, or as otherwise stated in another section of the LDRs. 
2.  Seasonal Permits shall not exceed six (6) months within a twelve (12) month period on the same property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.10. - Extended hours of operation permit. 
    Any commercial establishment within three hundred (300) feet of residential homes within residential PUD shall request a permit to operate outside of the normal hours of operation as provided for in the Code of Ordinances. This request requires the following: 
A.  Extended hours of operation shall be processed as a Type A1 application, shall be reviewed Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office and Palm Beach County Fire Rescue, and shall be signed by the PZAB Director, or designee, and the Village Manager prior to issuance. 
B.  Any violator of the Extended Hours of Operation Permit shall be notified of the violation and scheduled for the next available meeting of the Special Magistrate. A determination shall be made to maintain, modify or revoke the permit and may be subject to fees, fines, or limitations on future development orders. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 5.3.11. - Reasonable accommodation. 
    Sec. 5.3.11.1. Purpose and general provisions. 
A.  This chapter addresses requests for reasonable accommodation to the Villages ordinances, rules, policies, and procedures for persons with disabilities and facilities serving them as provided by the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act (42 U.S.C. 3601, et seq.) ("FHA") and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. Section 12131 et seq.) ("ADA"). 
B.  The following general provisions shall be applicable: 
1.  The Village shall display a notice in the Village's public notice bulletin board (and shall maintain copies available for review in the Village clerk's office advising the public disabled individuals (and qualifying entities) may request reasonable accommodation as provided herein. 
2.  A disabled individual may apply for a reasonable accommodation on his/her own behalf or may be represented at all stages of the reasonable accommodation process by a person designated in writing by the disabled individual. 
3.  The Village shall provide assistance and accommodation as is required pursuant to FHA and ADA in connection with a disabled person's request for reasonable accommodation, including, without limitation, assistance with reading application questions, responding to questions, completing the necessary forms, filing an appeal, and appearing at a hearing to ensure the process is accessible. 
    Sec. 5.3.11.2. Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, a "disabled" individual or person is an individual that qualifies as disabled and/or handicapped under the FHA and/or ADA. Any person who is disabled (or qualifying entities) may request a reasonable accommodation with respect to the Village's land use or zoning laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures as provided by the FHA and the ADA pursuant to the procedures set out in this chapter. 
    Sec. 5.3.11.3. Procedure. 
A.  A request by an applicant for reasonable accommodation shall be made in writing by completion of a reasonable accommodation request form. The form shall be maintained by (and shall be submitted to) the Planning, Zoning and Building Department. 
B.  The PZB Director, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. The PZB Director, or designee, shall issue a written determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may, in accordance with federal law: 
1.  Grant the accommodation request; 
2.  Grant a portion of the request and deny a portion of the request, and/or impose conditions upon the grant of the request; or 
3.  Deny the request, in accordance with federal law. 
Any such denial shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefor. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal. The notice of determination shall be sent to the requesting party (i.e. the disabled individual or his/her representative) by certified mail, return receipt requested. Notice shall be deemed complete when deposited in the U.S. Mail. If reasonably necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, PZB Director, or designee, may, prior to the end of said 45-day period, request additional information from the requesting party, specifying in sufficient detail what information is required. The requesting party shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the request for additional information to provide the requested information. In the event a request for additional information is made, the 45-day period to issue a written determination shall no longer be applicable, and the PZB Director, or designee, shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the additional information. If the requesting party fails to provide the requested additional information within said 15-day period, the Planning Director, or designee, shall issue a written notice advising that the requesting party has failed to timely submit the additional information, and therefore the request for reasonable accommodation shall be deemed abandoned and/or withdrawn and no further action by the Village with regard to said reasonable accommodation request shall be required. 
C.  In determining whether the reasonable accommodation request shall be granted or denied, the requesting party shall be required to establish that they are protected under the FHA and/or ADA by demonstrating that they are handicapped or disabled, as defined in the FHA and/or ADA. Although the definition of disability is subject to judicial interpretation, for purposes of this section the disabled individual must show: 
1.  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities; and 
2.  A record of having such impairment; or 
3.  That they are regarded as having such impairment. 
The requesting party will have to further demonstrate that the proposed accommodations being sought are reasonable and necessary to afford handicapped/disabled persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy the subject property. The foregoing (as interpreted by the courts) shall be the basis for a decision upon a reasonable accommodation request made by the PZB Director, or designee, or by the Village Manager in the event of an appeal. 
D.  While an application for reasonable accommodation, or appeal of a determination of same, is pending before the Village, the Village will not enforce the subject zoning ordinance, rules, policies, and procedures against the applicant. 
    Sec. 5.3.11.4. Appeal. 
A.  The requesting party may appeal the decision of the PZB Director or his/her designee. The appeal shall be submitted in writing no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the decision of the PZB Director or his/her designee. All appeals shall include a statement containing sufficient detail of the grounds for the appeal. Appeals shall be to the Village Manager who shall render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) calendar days after an appeal has been filed. 
    Sec. 5.3.11.5. Fee. 
    There shall be no fee imposed by the Village in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under this section or an appeal of a determination, and the Village shall have no obligation to pay a requesting party's (or an appealing party's, as applicable) attorneys' fees or costs in connection with a request or an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1(Exh. A), 9-26-2017) 
Article 6 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
CHAPTER 1. - DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 

Sec. 6.1.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    In order to ensure that all development in the Village of Wellington is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, it is necessary and proper to recognize certain districts established in the Village of Wellington LDR to ensure that each use is compatible with surrounding uses, served by adequate public facilities, and sensitive to natural and coastal resources. Each district has its own purpose and has permitted uses, conditional uses, special uses and other regulations that control the use of land in each district. All development within each district shall be consistent with the purposes stated in this article. 
Sec. 6.1.2. - Zoning districts established. 
    In order to carry out and implement the Comprehensive Plan, the following districts are hereby established as Village of Wellington zoning districts: 
A.  RSER, Rural Services District 
B.  AR, Agricultural Residential District 
C.  CRS, Country Residential District 
D.  RE, Residential Estate District 
E.  RTS, Residential Transitional Suburban District 
F.  RS, Single-Family Residential District 
G.  RM, Multifamily Residential (Medium Density) District 
H.  RH, Multifamily Residential (High Density) District 
I.  CN, Neighborhood Commercial District 
J.  CC, Community Commercial District 
K.  CRE, Commercial Recreation District 
L.  IL, Light Industrial District 
M.  CF, Community Facilities 
N.  PUD, Residential Planned Unit Development District 
O.  MUPD, Multiple Use Planned Development District 
P.  PIPD, Planned Industrial Park Development District 
Q.  EOD, Equestrian Overlay District 
R.  PBLR, Palm Beach Little Ranches Overlay District 
[Ord. No. 2003-22; October 28, 2003; Section 6.1.2] 
CHAPTER 2. - ZONING DISTRICT PURPOSES 

Sec. 6.2.1. - RSER, Rural Services District. 
    The purpose and intent of the RSER district is to provide for the clustering of service uses intended to serve predominantly rural residential communities. To receive the RSER district designation, lands shall lie within one-half mile of the intersection of two (2) existing arterials, excluding easement type roads in the Rural Service Area. The RSER district is consistent with the Residential "A" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the RSER district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.2. - AR, Agricultural Residential District. 
    The purpose and intent of the AR district is to protect and enhance the rural lifestyle and quality of life of residents in areas designated rural residential, to protect watersheds and water supplies, wilderness and scenic areas, conservation and wildlife areas, and to permit a variety of uses that require non-urban locations but do not operate to the detriment of adjoining lands devoted to rural and residential purposes. The AR district is consistent with the Residential "A" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the AR district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.3. - CRS, Country Residential District. 
    The purpose and intent of the CRS district is to provide for a primarily rural residential environment that is also conducive to the keeping of horses and livestock, to protect watersheds and water supplies, wilderness and scenic areas, and conservation and wildlife areas, and to permit a limited number of activities that require non-urban locations but do not operate to the detriment of adjoining lands devoted to rural and residential purposes. The CRS district is consistent with the Residential "A" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the CRS district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.4. - RE, Residential Estate District. 
    The purpose and intent of the RE district is to provide a transition between the agricultural and conservation areas and the more urban residential communities, and to create a residential environment wherein natural constraints applicable to development can be recognized and protected in a manner compatible with the needs of residents. The RE district is consistent with the Residential "B" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the RE district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.5. - RTS, Residential Transitional Suburban District. 
    The purpose and intent of the RTS district is to provide lands for low intensity single-family development at or near the fringe of urban development. The provision of active recreational facilities within the privacy of an individual lot and the preservation of natural site features is encouraged in the RTS district to minimize the impact of such development upon the community. The RTS district is consistent with the Residential "C" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the RTS district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.6. - RS, Single-Family Residential District. 
    The purpose and intent of the RS district is to recognize the need to provide areas for moderately high density single-family dwelling units. The RS district is consistent with the Residential "E" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in a RS District shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.7. - RM, Multifamily Residential (Medium Density) District. 
    The purpose and intent of the RM district is intended primarily for the development of multiple family dwelling units and affordable housing. The RM district is consistent with the Residential "F" and "G" future land uses designations in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the RM district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.8. - RH, Multifamily Residential (High Density) District. 
    The purpose and intent of the RH district is intended primarily for the development of concentrated residential densities and affordable housing. The RH district is consistent with the Residential "H" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the RH district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.9. - CN, Neighborhood Commercial District. 
    The purpose and intent of the CN district is to provide a limited commercial facility of a convenience nature, serving residential neighborhoods within a one-half (1/2) mile radius, located on a local, collector or an arterial road, with a total lot area of not less than one (1) acre. The CN district is consistent with the Neighborhood Commercial future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the CN district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.10. - CC, Community Commercial District. 
    The purpose and intent of the CC district is to provide a commercial facility of a community nature that serves residential neighborhoods within a three (3) to five (5) mile radius, located on a collector or an arterial road, with a total lot area of not less than one (1) acre, that is planned and developed as an integral unit. The CC district is consistent with the Community Commercial future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the CC district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.11. - CRE, Commercial Recreation District. 
    The purpose and intent of the CRE district is to provide lands for major commercial recreation uses that are either publicly or privately operated, that require large amounts of land and have major effects on adjacent uses. The CRE district is consistent with the Commercial Recreation land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Gaming, pari-mutual wagering, off-track betting, events or activities held or broadcast for similar purposes shall be prohibited in CRE districts. Uses in the CC district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.12. - IL, Light Industrial District. 
    The purpose and intent of the IL district is to provide sufficient lands in appropriate locations for certain types of business, light manufacturing, or processing uses likely to cause undesirable effects upon nearby or adjacent residential or commercial lands. The IL district is consistent with the Industrial future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the IL District shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.13. - CF, Community Facilities District. 
    The purpose and intent of the CF district is to provide a coordinated land planning approach to the sale, rent, lease, purchase, management, or alteration of lands designated for institutional development. Notwithstanding those public uses permitted elsewhere in this Code, the CF district is primarily concerned with, although not limited to, the enlightened planning of parks and recreation areas, public buildings and facilities, and other capital improvements of a distinctly significant nature. The CF district is consistent with all land use categories and in particular the Institutional / Public Facilities / Utilities category of the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the CF district shall be as provided in Table 6.4-1, subject to the supplementary use standards contained in the LDR. 
Sec. 6.2.14. - PUD, Residential Planned Unit Development District. 
    The purpose of the PUD district is to offer a residential development alternative, which allows an opportunity for a limited amount of commercial uses and corresponds to a range of residential land use categories on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Atlas. The intent of the PUD is to promote the design of largely residential living environments, which provide enlightened and imaginative approaches to community planning and shelter design. These approaches include but are not limited to: 
A.  The preservation of natural features and scenic areas; 
B.  The integration and connection of land uses with perimeter landscape areas, which provide vegetation, buffering, and circulation areas; 
C.  The creation of a continuous non-vehicular circulation system; 
D.  The establishment of civic, commercial and recreation land uses; 
E.  The reduction of land consumption by roads; and, 
F.  The provision for flexible property development regulations to promote innovative and quality site design. 
Sec. 6.2.15. - MUPD, Multiple Use Planned Development District. 
    The purpose of the MUPD district is twofold: (1) to promote the design of unified, multiple use developments for land which has a rural residential 10, commercial industrial, or commercial recreation designation on the Land Use Atlas (see Table 6.8-1, Planned Development District Densities and Corresponding Land Use Categories); and (2) to provide for the efficient use of land by the integration of multiple uses within a single development. 
    The intent of the MUPD is to provide for the development of multiple nonresidential uses with enlightened and imaginative approaches to community planning, including but not limited to: 
A.  Flexibility. Allowing flexibility of certain property development regulations. 
B.  Property development regulations. Applying certain property development regulations to the entire MUPD rather than individual lots, such as but not limited to: 
1.  access 
2.  parking 
3.  lot size and dimensions 
4.  lot frontage 
5.  landscaping 
C.  Architectural compatibility. Designing for architectural compatibility between land uses for buildings and signage. 
Sec. 6.2.16. - PIPD, Planned Industrial Park Development District. 
    The purpose of a PIPD is to offer an industrial development alternative which provides employment opportunities and encourages internal automobile trip capture by offering justifiable amounts of commercial and residential uses. 
    The intent of the PIPD is to promote the design of planned industrial developments, which provide enlightened and imaginative approaches to community planning and site design. These approaches include but are not limited: 
A.  the preservation of natural features, scenic areas and native vegetation; 
B.  the promotion of efficient and economical industrial land use districts; 
C.  the encouragement of industrial linkages by process, product, or service; 
D.  the provision of on-site essential services for industries, employees, and clients; 
E.  the protection of nearby existing and future nonindustrial land uses and activities; 
F.  the arrangement of buildings and land use intensities, as they relate to surrounding land uses to minimize and mitigate negative impacts; 
G.  the location of the PIPD near convenient access to transportation facilities such as interstate highways, major trucking routes, shipping and/or railroad lines; and, 
H.  the encouragement of industrial expansion to Village's economic base through new investment. 
Sec. 6.2.17. - EOZD, Equestrian Overlay Zoning District. 
    The purpose and intent of the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District (EOZD) is to protect and enhance the Equestrian Preservation Areas of Wellington, as created by the Comprehensive Plan; to preserve, maintain and enhance the equestrian community associated with the Village of Wellington; to preserve, maintain and enhance the rural lifestyle associated with the equestrian community; to identify and encourage types of land uses that are supportive of the equestrian and rural character of the Equestrian Preservation Areas; and to preserve, maintain and enhance development patterns which are consistent with the overall character of the equestrian community. The EOD is consistent with all future land use designations in the Land Use Element in the Wellington Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the [EOZD] shall be as provided in the zoning regulations for that district, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 1, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.2.18. - PBLR, Palm Beach Little Ranches Overlay District. 
    The purpose and intent of the PBLR overlay district is to establish land development regulations that implement the community vision and values established in the Village charter and the "Equestrian Element" of the Village of Wellington's Comprehensive Plan; to preserve the rural character and lifestyle of the Palm Beach Little Ranches community, and to provide guidelines for the future; and to preserve and maintain the existing residential and equestrian development patterns in the neighborhood. The PBLR district is consistent with the Residential "B" future land use designation in the Land Use Element of the Wellington Comprehensive Plan. Uses in the PBLR district shall be as provided in the zoning regulations for that district, subject to the supplementary standards contained in the LDR. 
(Ord. No. 2003-22; October 28, 2003; Sec. 6.2) 
CHAPTER 3. - ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 6.3.1. - Establishment of Official Zoning Map. 
    The location and boundaries of the districts established in this article shall be set forth on the Official Zoning Map of The Village of Wellington, which is incorporated herein by reference into this article as if fully described and set forth herein. A copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be located at all times for inspection by the general public during regular business hours in the offices of the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, § 3, 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 6.3.2. - Amendment to the Official Zoning Map. 
    If pursuant to the terms of this Code, amendments are made to the Official Zoning Map; such amendments shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the Planning & Zoning Manager within working days after the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, § 3, 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 6.3.3. - Replacement of Official Zoning Map. 
    In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and addition, the Village Council shall adopt a new Official Zoning Map that shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. 
    The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting and clerical errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or subsequent amendments thereto without a duly noticed public hearing pursuant to the procedures and standards of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-19, § 3, 11-13-2007) 
CHAPTER 4. - USE REGULATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 6.4.1. - General. 
    Uses permitted by right, permitted subject to Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan, as a Special use or as a Conditional use in each district shall be determined from the Use Regulations Schedule (Table 6.4-1). Additional use regulations for the Planned Development districts are specified in Section 6.8 (Planned Development District Regulations). 
Sec. 6.4.2. - Use classification. 
    The list of use classifications included in the Use Regulations Schedule (Table 6.4-1) is intended to classify uses on the basis of common functional characteristics and land use compatibility. Other uses not specifically listed in the Use Regulations Schedule, but exhibiting similar characteristics to a listed use shall be so classified by the interpretation of the Director of Community Services pursuant to the procedures and standards of Art. 2, Interpretation. 
Sec. 6.4.3. - Use regulations schedule. 
    The Use Regulations Schedule contained in Table 6.4-1 shall be interpreted as follows. 
A.  Permitted by right. Uses identified in a particular district column with a 'P' are "permitted by right" and shall be permitted in such district, subject to such supplementary use standards as may be indicated in the "Note" column and subject to the other requirements of this Code. Uses identified with a "P" may be subject to Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan review if specifically required by other provisions of this Code. Prior to receipt of a Certificate of Occupancy, all required permits from affected regulatory agencies must be obtained and the use must operate in accordance with those permits. 
B.  Site plan/final subdivision plan. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "D" are "permitted" subject to Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan review" and shall be permitted in such district only if a Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan is submitted and compliance with the provisions of this Code for the use by the Development Review Committee in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 5.6, Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan, subject to such supplementary use standards as may be indicated in the "Note" column of the Use Regulations Schedule tables of Sections 6.4 and 6.8, and the other standards of this Code. Prior to receipt of a Certificate of Occupancy, all required permits from affected regulatory agencies must be obtained and the use must operate in accordance with those permits. 
C.  Special use. Uses identified in a particular district column with an "S" are "special uses" and shall be permitted in such district only if they meet the supplementary use standards indicated in the "Note" column for the use and are approved by the Planning & Zoning Director in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 5.5 (Special Permit Uses), and subject to the other standards of this Code. Prior to receipt of a Certificate of Occupancy, all required permits from affected regulatory agencies must be obtained and the use must operate in accordance with those permits. 
D.  Conditional use. Uses identified in a particular district column with a "C" are "conditional uses" and shall be permitted in such district only if they are approved by the Village Council in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 5.4.4 (Conditional uses), subject to such supplementary use standards as may be indicated in the "Note" column, and the other standards of this Code. Prior to receipt of a Certificate of Occupancy, all required permits from affected regulatory agencies must be obtained and the use must operate in accordance with those permits. 
E.  Prohibited uses. Uses not identified in a particular district column as permitted by right, as a Conditional use, or a Special use, are not allowed in such district unless otherwise expressly permitted under this Code. 
F.  Supplementary use standards. A number in the "Note" column refers to supplementary use standards applicable to a particular use in one (1) or more of the districts in which such use is allowed. For Planned Developments, the term district means the land use category. The referenced standards appear in Section 6.4. (Supplementary use standards). For example, note 53 refers to Section 6.4.4. 53. 
G.  District Specific Regulations. Within certain zoning districts, special standards apply. Reference should be made to Section 6.5 to determine if a use is subject to additional regulations. 
Table 6.4-1 
Use Regulations Schedule 
Use Type ZONING DISTRICTS 
<blank> = Not Permitted; P = Permitted; S = Special Use; D = DRC; 
C = Conditional Use N 
O 
T 
E 
S 
§6.4.4 Residential Commercial Industrial/ 
Public A 
R R 
S 
E 
R C 
r 
S R 
E R 
T 
S R 
S R 
M R 
H C 
N C 
C C 
r 
E I 
L C 
F Accessory Dwelling S S S S S S S 1 Agriculture, bona fide P P C C C C C C C C C C C 6 Agricultural food processing Agricultural related manufacturing, light Agricultural research/development D P 3 Agricultural sales & service C 4 Agricultural stand S S S 106 Agricultural transshipment D 5 Air curtain incinerator, permanent C C 7 Air curtain incinerator, temporary S C C C C C C C C C C S 8 Air Stripper remedial S S S P 9 Airplane landing strip, accessory C C 10 Airport C C 10 Amusements, temporary or special events S S S S S S S 12 Arena, auditorium or stadium C C D 13 Assembly, nonprofit institutional C C C C C C C P P 15 Assembly, nonprofit membership C C P 15 Auction, enclosed C C 16 Auction, outdoor C C 16 Automotive paint or body shop P 17 Automotive service station C C 18 Aviculture P 19 Bed and Breakfast S S S S S S S S 20 Broadcasting studio C P Building supplies C C D Campground D P 21 Car wash and auto detailing P 23 Catering service P P P P Cemetery C C C C C C C 24 Chipping and mulching C C D 25 Church or place of worship C C C C C C C C C C C 26 College or university C C C C P Communication panels, antennas, commercial C D C C/S C/S C/S D D/S 27 Communication tower, commercial C C C S S S D/S D 27 Community vegetable garden P D D D 28 Composting facility C D D 29 Congregate living facility, type 1 P P P P P P P 30 Congregate living facility, type 2 C C C C C C 30 Congregate living facility, type 3 C P P C C 30 Contractor's storage yard D D 31 Convenience store C C 32 Convenience store with gas sales C C 33 Data Information Processing P Day Camp D Day care center, general C C C C C C C C C C D C D 34 Day care center, limited C C C C C C C C C D D D D 34 Day labor employment service D 35 Dispatching office P 36 Dog day-care P Electrical power facility C C C C C C C C C C C P 38 Entertainment, Adult P P P P 2 Entertainment, Indoor C C C D D 39 Entertainment, Outdoor C C C D D 40 Equestrian arena, commercial C C C C C C C C C C P C D 41 Estate kitchen P P P P P P P 42 Excavation, Agricultural D D 43 Excavation, type 1A P P P P P P P 43 Excavation, type 1B D D D D D D D 43 Excavation, type II D D D D D D D D D D D D D 43 Excavation, type III C C C 43 Excavation type IIIA C C C 43 Excavation type IIIB C C C 43 Farm Residence 44 Farm worker quarters S 45 Farmer's Market D D P Farrier P P P P Financial institution D C 46 Fitness center C C P P P 47 Flea market, open C P 49 Freestanding kiosk S S S Fruit and vegetable market C D P P P 50 Funeral home or crematory C D 51 Garage sale P P P P P P P P 52 Gas and fuel, wholesale C P Golf course C C C C C C C D D C 53 Government services C C C C C C C C D D D P P 54 Green market C P Grooms quarters P P P P P P P P P P P 55 Groves/row crops P D C C C C C C C P 56 Guest cottage P P P P P P P 57 Heliport or helipad C C C C C D D P 11 Home Occupation P P P P P P P 60 Hospital or medical center C P 62 Hotel, motel, boarding & rooming house C C D 61 Kennel, commercial C C 63 Kennel, private P P P D D D D 64 Laboratory, industrial research C P Landscape installation service C C C P 65 Landscape maintenance service C C C P 65 Laundry services C D 66 Livestock raising P C C C C C C C C C C 67 Lounge, cocktail C C 68 Machine or welding shop P 69 Manufacturing and processing P Medical office or dental clinic C C P 71 Medical or dental laboratory P P Mobile home dwelling S S 73 Monument sales, retail P Motion picture production studio C P 74 Multifamily P P P 75 Nursery, retail C D C C C C C C P P C 77 Nursery, wholesale C P C P P P 78 Nursing or convalescent facility C C C C C 79 Office, business or professional C P P P 80 Packing plant C C C C D D 81 Park, passive D P D D D D D D D P P P P 82 Park, public C D C C C C C C C C P 83 Parking garage, commercial P 84 Parking lot, commercial C P P P 84 Personal services P P 85 Potting Soil Manufacturing C D 86 Printing and copying services P P P Recycling center C C P P Recycling collection station S S S S S 87 Recycling drop off bin S S S S S S 88 Recycling plant C C 89 Repair and maintenance, general C P 90 Repair services, limited C P P P 91 Restaurant, fast food C C 92 Restaurant, high turnover sit-down D D 93 Restaurant, quality D P P P 93 Restaurant, specialty P P P 94 Retail sales, automotive accessories and parts P P 95 Retail sales, general P P 95 Retail sales, mobile or temporary S S S 96 School, primary or secondary C C C C C C C C C C C 98 Security or caretaker quarters S S S S S S S S S S S S S 99 Self-service storage C D 100 Shade House P P P P P P P P P P P 101 Single-family P P P P P P 102 Solid waste transfer station C C C C C C C C C C C 103 Stable, equestrian type two D D D D D D D D D 104 Stable, equestrian type one P P P P P P P P P 105 Storage, indoor agricultural P D D D D D D D P P P 107 Storage, outdoor agricultural P D C C C C C C C C P 107 Sugar mill or refinery 108 Theater, Indoor C C D D Theater, Drive-in P 109 Townhouse D D D 110 Utility, minor D C D D D D D D D D D D D 111 Vehicle inspection center C P P Vehicle sales and rental C C 112 Veterinary Clinic C C C C P C 114 Vocational School C C C C C 115 Warehousing P 116 Water or wastewater treatment plant C C C C C C C C C C C D P 117 Wholesaling, general P 118 Zero lot line home D D D 119 Zoo C C D P 120  
P = Permitted 
S = Special use 
D = Permitted Subject to DRC Site Plan Approval 
C = Conditional Use (Village Council Approval) A blank cell in the chart means Not Permitted 
Supplemental Use Regulations Contained in Section 6.4.4  
Table 6.4-2 
Thresholds for Projects Requiring 
Development Review Committee (DRC) Approval 
Zoning District Maximum Number of 
S.F. or Units CN 5,000 sf IL 20,000 sf CF 25,000 sf/20 du  
Projects requiring Development Review Committee (DRC) Approval: 
•  Projects requiring DRC site plan certification prior to submittal of a building permit application. Pursuant to the procedures of Article 5, DRC site plan certification is required for projects as follows: 
•  Any proposed development with a "D" in Table 6.4-1, Use Regulation Schedule; 
•  Development which received conditional use or planned development district approval; 
•  Any amendment to a previously approved site plan; and 
•  New construction that creates, meets or exceeds the maximum Intensity Thresholds as shown in Table 6.4-2. 
•  Projects requiring Subdivision plan certification prior to submission to the land Development Division for Plat or other approval required by Article 8 of this Code. Pursuant to the procedures of Article 5, Subdivision plan certification is required for all subdivision of land for which a plat waiver has not been granted pursuant to Article 8. 
Table 6.4-3 
Thresholds for Projects Requiring Village Council's Approval 
Zoning Districts Maximum Number of 
S.F. or Units Maximum 
Acreage CN 20,000 sf 5 ac IL 100,000 sf 30 ac CF 100,000 sf 20 ac SA 50,000 sf 20 ac  
NOTES: 
All new construction of residential, commercial, or industrial development that meets, exceeds, or creates development in excess of either the acreage requirement or maximum number square footage or units in Table 6.4-3 shall be reviewed for approval as a planned development district and shall receive approval, approval with conditions, or denial pursuant to the procedures and standards of Section 6.8. 
Land area devoted to retention pursuant to the requirements of the C-51 drainage basin or land area devoted to vegetation preservation pursuant to the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance shall not be counted toward the maximum acreage thresholds. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, §§ 2, 3(Att. B), 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 6.4.4. - Supplementary use standards. 
    This section contains supplementary standards for specific uses. In the case of conflict with district or other regulations of this Code, the more restrictive requirement shall apply, unless otherwise specifically provided or clearly intended. Where a variance from these standards is required to allow the use on site, such as a minimum lot size requirement, or meet a minimum required standard such as parking, the variance shall be obtained before the use application is placed on the agenda for Development Review Committee. Where a variance from these standards is requested to facilitate a desired site design and is not required to allow the use, the variance may be obtained at any time prior to certification of the final site or subdivision plan. 
1.  Accessory dwelling means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family dwelling, or in an accessory structure on the same lot as the principal single-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling is a complete, independent living facility equipped with a kitchen and with provisions for sanitation and sleeping. An accessory dwelling use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Approval. Applicant shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
b.  Occupancy. Occupancy of accessory dwelling shall be limited to a household that includes at least one (1) member who is physically disabled or elderly, or who meets the low-income standards specified in affordable housing as defined in Article 3. 
c.  Number of units. A maximum of one (1) dwelling may be permitted as an accessory use to a principal single-family dwelling unit. The accessory dwelling may be attached to the principal dwelling unit or may be freestanding. 
d.  Floor area. The accessory dwelling shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet gross floor area, except when located on a lot that is at least one (1) acre in size, in which case the dwelling shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area. An administrative variance of up to ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the accessory dwelling may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Director providing that all other zoning district and sub area regulations are met. 
e.  Number of bedrooms. No accessory dwelling shall contain more than one (1) bedroom. 
f.  Architecture. The accessory dwelling shall be constructed of materials substantially equivalent to either the principal dwelling unit or other permanent accessory structure on the lot, provided that such materials comply with all other applicable standards of the building code. 
g.  Compatibility. The accessory dwelling shall be compatible in character and subordinate in size to the principal dwelling unit. 
h.  Setbacks. The accessory dwelling shall comply with the minimum yard setbacks applicable to the principal single-family dwelling unit. 
i.  No separate ownership. The accessory dwelling shall remain accessory to and under the same ownership as the principal single-family dwelling unit, and shall not be subdivided or sold as a condominium. 
j.  Renewal of special permit. The special permit shall be renewed annually in accordance with Section 5.5.5.I. of this Code. 
2.  Adult entertainment. 
a.  Establishment. Any adult arcade, adult theater, adult bookstore/adult video store, adult motel, or adult dancing establishment; or any establishment or business operated for commercial gain where any employee, operator or owner exposes his/her specified anatomical area for viewing by patrons, including but not limited to: massage establishments whether or not licensed pursuant to Chapter 480, Fla. Stat., tanning salon, modeling studio, or lingerie studio 
b.  Exclusions. Excluded from this definition are any educational institutions where the exposure of the specified anatomical area is associated with a curriculum or program. 
c.  License. An establishment that possesses an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
An adult entertainment use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: A special permit for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued or denied within twenty-one (21) days of a determination of application sufficiency pursuant to the standards and procedures in Article 5 and the requirements of the Code. An aggrieved party has the right to immediately appeal a denial of application sufficiency for a special permit, denial of a special permit, or revocation or suspension of a permit by the filing of a petition for Writ of Certiorari in the Circuit Court in the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit of the State of Florida in accordance with the procedure and within the time provided by the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
i.  Purpose and intent. This section is intended to provide for the proper location of adult entertainment uses in order to protect the integrity of adjacent neighborhoods, educational uses, religious uses, parks and other commercial uses. Proper separation of adult entertainment uses prevents the creation of "skid-row" areas in The Village that results from the concentration of these uses and their patrons. It is the intent of this section to limit the secondary effects of adult entertainment uses. The standards in this section are intended to ensure that residential districts, religious uses, educational uses, parks and other commercial uses we located in areas free from the secondary effects of adult entertainment uses. The location of residential districts, religious uses, educational uses, parks and other commercial uses within viable, unblighted and desirable areas supports the preservation of property values and promotes the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
ii.  Specified anatomical areas means: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(i.)  Human genitals and pubic region; or 
(ii.)  The opening between the human buttocks, i.e., the anal cleft; or 
(iii.)  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple); this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed; or 
(iv.)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(b)  Specified sexual activities means: 
(i.)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulations, arousal or tumescence; 
(ii.)  Acts of human analingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or 
(iii.)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast; or 
(iv.)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1. through 2. 
iii.  Findings of fact. Based on the evidence and testimony presented at the public hearings before the Village Council and on the findings incorporated in the United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986). "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, City of Indianapolis, January, 1984, the Village Council hereby finds the following: 
(a)  Commercial uses exist or may exist within The Village where books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and/or other devices that depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and/or sold. 
(b)  Commercial uses exist or may exist within The Village: 
(c)  Where the superficial tissues of one person are manipulated, rubbed, stroked, kneaded, and/or tapped by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; 
(d)  Where dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, who, for any form of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area; or 
(e)  Where lap dancing occurs. 
(f)  This competitive commercial exploitation of such nudity and semi-nudity is adverse to the public's interest and the quality of life, tone of commerce, and the community environment in The Village. 
(g)  When the activities described in Section 6.0.2.c.(1) and 6.0.2.c.(2) above are presented in commercial uses, other activities that are illegal, immoral, or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and land. 
(h)  When the activities described in Section 6.0.2.c.(1) and 6.0.2.c.(2) above are present in commercial uses within The Village, they tend to blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower property values, promote crime, and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(i)  There is a direct relationship between the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas as described in Section 6.0.2.c.(2) above and an increase in criminal activities, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community, and the occurrence of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining land and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. These secondary effects are adverse to the public's interest and quality of life, the tone of commerce and the community environment in The Village. 
(j)  Based upon these findings, it is in the interest of the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of The Village that adult entertainment uses are regulated pursuant to the following standards: 
iv.  Nonconformity. 
(a)  Establishment of Nonconformity. Any adult entertainment use shall be deemed a nonconforming use and the standards of this section shall not apply if the adult entertainment use on November 28, 1988: 
(b)  Location. Was in operation as an adult entertainment use, was generally known and held out in the neighborhood and community as an adult entertainment establishment, and was open to the public as an adult entertainment establishment use; and 
(c)  Occupational license. Possessed a valid and current occupational license authorizing the general type of use which would correspond to the adult entertainment use being claimed as nonconforming on November 28, 1988; 
(d)  Adult entertainment license. Any establishment seeking to establish nonconforming status as an adult entertainment use under the terms of this Code, shall submit an application for an adult entertainment license pursuant to the Village Adult Entertainment Code. 
(e)  Standards for nonconformance. A nonconforming adult entertainment use as determined in Section 6.4.4.B.4 above shall be subject to the following supplementary standards, in addition to Art. 1.6 (Nonconformities). 
(i.)  Location. The adult entertainment use located within the distances set forth in. Section 6.4.4.B.4 shall not increase the gross floor area or square footage of the structure by more than ten (10) percent over a fifteen-year period, beginning November 28, 1988. 
(ii.)  Landscape strip. The adult entertainment use shall construct and install a landscape strip along any property line that abuts a residential district, within ninety (90) days of the date of issuance of the adult entertainment license by the occupational licensing department. 
(iii.)  Building permit. If a building permit for exterior structural renovation or remodeling or a paving or parking permit is issued for the adult entertainment use, the requirements of Section 7.3 (Landscaping and Buffering) shall apply to the entire site of the adult entertainment use. 
v.  Location. 
(a)  General. An adult entertainment use shall be located the following minimum distances from the following uses. 
(i.)  Another adult entertainment use: two thousand (2,000) feet. 
(ii.)  A church or place of worship: one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(iii.)  An educational institution: one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(iv.)  A public park: five hundred (500) feet. 
(v.)  A residential zoning district (which is designated as residential by any local Comprehensive Plan): five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  Measurement of distance. The distance set forth in this section shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the nearest point on the perimeter of the exterior wall or bay housing the proposed adult entertainment use to the nearest point on the property line of the relevant church or place of worship, educational institution, public park, residential zoning district. For the purpose of measuring the distance between adult entertainment uses, the distance shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the nearest point on the perimeter of the exterior wall or bay of the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment and the nearest point on the exterior wall or bay of another adult entertainment establishment. Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(c)  No variance. There shall be no variance to the locational standards of this section. 
(d)  Subsequent development within locational standards. The subsequent approval of a development order for a church or place of worship, elementary or secondary school, public park or residential district within the distances outlined in this section shall not change the status of the adult entertainment use to that of a nonconforming use. 
vi.  Screening. A landscape buffer strip shall be installed along any property line that abuts a residential district. 
vii.  Lighting. Outdoor low-intensity lighting shall be provided that illuminates the entire parking and vehicular use area. The lighting shall be installed on structures that do not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height from finished grade. 
Article 10 of the Code of Ordinances possesses additional requirements regarding Adult Entertainment. 
3.  Agricultural research and development means the use of land or building agriculture research and the cultivation of new agricultural products. Agricultural research and development shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  SA district. In the SA district an agricultural research and development facility shall have a fifty-foot buffer from residentially occupied or zoned property in addition to the required minimum setbacks. Agricultural research and development in the SA district may exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet, provided that the minimum yard setback standard shall be met, and in addition a three-foot setback shall be added for every ten (10) feet in height the structure is above thirty-five (35) feet. Agricultural research and development shall be a condition Type "A" in the RR10 land use designation in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
4.  Agricultural sales and service means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of farm tools and small implements, feed and grain, tack, animal care products, farm supplies and the like, excluding large implements, and including accessory food sales and machinery repair services. Agricultural sales and service uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  SA district. In the SA district, agricultural sales and service uses shall not be permitted on lands designated RR10 in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
i.  Storage. All storage areas for agricultural sales and service uses shall be enclosed or completely screened from view. Tractor trailers used for the transport of bona fide agricultural products used by the local agricultural community may be stored on the property. A maximum of five (5) tractor trailers may be stored outside if they are completely screened from view from streets and neighboring property. 
ii.  Grocery sales. Up to five (5) percent or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less, of the merchandise sales area of an agricultural sales and service use may be devoted to retail grocery sales, provided that the grocery display space is limited to one (1) discrete area of the establishment. Shelves, floor area, counter space and overhead display areas shall be included in the calculation of the grocery sales area. There shall be no exterior signage and no external evidence of the availability of grocery products for sale. 
iii.  Repair services. Service of small implements shall only be permitted in enclosed areas of an agricultural sales and service use that is completely screened from the roadway and adjacent lands. Repair activities shall occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
iv.  Sale of large Implements. Sale of large farm implements shall be permitted at an agricultural sales and service use only for an establishment existing on February 1, 1990, and located on a State maintained road. 
5.  Agricultural transshipment means packing, crating or shipping of agricultural products not grown or raised on site, and specifically excluding slaughterhouses and fish processing. In the SA district an agricultural transshipment facility shall have a fifty-foot buffer from residentially occupied or zoned property in addition to the required minimum setbacks. The use shall not be permitted on lands designated RR10 in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
6.  Agriculture. bona fide means any plot of land where the principal use is bona fide agricultural meaning the raising of crops inclusive of organic farming or raising of animals inclusive of aquaculture or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy products inclusive of agriculture, or a retail or wholesale nursery on an agricultural or commercial basis. Agricultural uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Determination. A determination as to whether the use of the land for agriculture is bona fide shall only be made where both [i] and [ii] below are met. Criteria listed in item 3[iii] below shall be used as guidelines in the determination. 
i.  Designation criteria. The property complies with the following standards: 
(a)  Continuous use. The use has been continuous; and 
(b)  Farming procedures. Farming procedures have been demonstrated by past action or documented plans to care sufficiently and adequately for the land in accordance with accepted commercial agricultural practices, including, but not limited to, fertilizing, liming, tilling, mowing, reforesting and other accepted agricultural practices; and 
(c)  Agricultural classification. The property has received a qualified agricultural classification pursuant to Section 193.461, Fla. Stat.; and 
ii.  Productivity standards. The productivity or proposed net return or production of the farm operation based on net or yield for the type of agricultural production on the site is comparable to the average net or yield for the type of agriculture in Florida. In making this determination at least four (4) of the following standards shall be met: 
(a)  Amount of land. The amount of land under cultivation or in agricultural use (including canal or drainage features) is greater than sixty (60) percent of the total parcel; 
(b)  Investment. Demonstration is made that there has been on-going investment in and maintenance of the agricultural land use or documented plans for investment in agricultural use of the land; 
(c)  Employees. There are typical seasonal or full-time employees for the agricultural operation; 
(d)  No nonagricultural development. There is no nonagricultural development (except accessory agricultural uses as defined in Section 6.4.4.4 and 6.4.4.5, or farm residences or farm workers quarters) on site. 
(e)  Demonstration. Demonstration is made that the land will be used for agricultural production for more than five (5) years. 
iii.  Additional guidelines. 
(a)  Size. The size of the land area, as it relates to a specific agricultural use is appropriate; 
(b)  Lease. Whether such land is under lease, and if so, the effective length, terms and conditions of the lease; 
(c)  Intent. The intent of the landowner to sell or convert the land for nonagricultural purposes; 
(d)  Proximity. The proximity of the property to existing urban metropolitan development; 
(e)  Productivity. The productivity of land in its present use; and 
(f)  Plan designation. The Comprehensive Land Use Plan Designation. 
b.  SA district. In an SA district located in an RR10 land use designation in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, citrus packing and grading plants, forage drying facilities and pre-cooling/packing plants shall be allowed only for existing farm operations. 
c.  AR district. In the AR district, dipping vats shall not be allowed unless approved as a Class "A" Conditional use. 
d.  AR district. In the AR district the following supplementary regulations shall apply. 
i.  Exotic animals. Exotic animal (imported or normative animal species) care for commercial breeding purposes shall be on a minimum lot size of five (5) acres. Pens, cages or structures associated with the exotic animal care use shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
ii.  Game animals. Game farms or game animal care for private or commercial purposes shall be regulated by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission (FGFWC). Minimum lot size for game animal care shall be five (5) acres. 
iii.  Structures. Structures, cages, or enclosures designed to contain dangerous animals or Class I animals as defined by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission, shall be approved subject to a Conditional Use Type "A." Pens, cages or structures associated with the game animal care use shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
e.  Accessory Agricultural use. Accessory agricultural uses customary to a bona fide agricultural activity but not considered bona fide agriculture and allowed to be located on the site may include but are not limited to "U-Pick-Em" operations, sale of on-site produced products, grading, packing and shipping of agricultural products, corrals, training facilities, dipping vats, farm production or processing of raw material equipment used exclusively from that farm operation and equipment storage shed. Also, migrant and farm labor quarters and camps and accessory equipment buildings and uses, all contained within a complex designated to serve residents only are accessory. Accessory uses shall be approved as site plan amendments subject to DRC review and may include water and wastewater plants, places of worship, postal facilities and recreational building. 
f.  Land application of Dewatered Domestic Wastewater Residuals. Class A or B Dewatered Domestic Wastewater Residuals (DDWR), as defined by Chapter 17-640. F.A.C. and Article 3 of this Code, may be applied to the land at bona fide agricultural operations in the AP, AGR and AR zoning districts as specified in Section 6.4.4.101. 
7.  Air curtain incinerator, permanent means the installation or use of a portable or stationary combustion device that is designed and used to burn trees and brush removed during land clearing by directing a plane of high-velocity, forced air through a manifold into a pit with vertical walls in such a manner as to maintain a curtain of air over the surface of the pit and a recirculating motion of air under the curtain. Permanent air curtain incinerator uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: If an air curtain incinerator facility also includes chipping and mulching or composting, adherence to the supplementary use conditions applicable to such uses shall also be required. 
a.  Setback from residential districts and uses. A permanent air curtain incinerator use shall be set back a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. The setback distance may be reduced to a minimum of three hundred (300) feet for a permanent air curtain incinerator use if it is determined that the associated debris, storage, traffic, and potential smoke and odor are not incompatible with the surrounding uses and the PBCPHU has determined that the smoke or odor does not have the potential to create a health threat or nuisance condition. 
b.  Health and environmental regulations. In addition to a permit from the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (FDER) and conformance with requirements of Chapter 17-2, F.A.C., a permanent air curtain incinerator use shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations and require a sign-off from the PBCPHU (within sixty (60) days of submittal of an application to FDER), the Solid Waste Authority (within sixty (60) days of zoning approval) and the Fire-Rescue Department. 
c.  Access. An access road for collection vehicles shall be provided to the entrance of the facility. Acceptable access does not include residential streets. 
d.  Storage. On site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and pile height shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Outdoor material storage piles shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. 
e.  Landscaping and buffering. A landscape strip shall be provided along property lines adjacent to residential zoning districts or uses. The standards shall be waived for any portion that is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. 
f.  Supplemental application requirements. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
i.  Site plan. A site plan illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, incinerator and storage piles; 
ii.  Hours of operations. A statement specifying the hours of operation; 
iii.  Waste. An explanation of the quantity of waste to be received expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day; and 
iv.  Letter of approval. The applicant shall provide a notarized letter of approval from the property owner verifying consent to use the property for an air curtain incinerator. 
g.  Accessory to nursery. An air curtain incinerator accessory to a wholesale greenhouse or nursery is permitted subject to Section 5.6 (Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan) and the following standards: 
i.  Yard trash. The facility shall receive no more than twenty (20) tons or one hundred twenty (120) cubic yards of yard trash for incineration per day. Yard trash is composed of vegetative matter resulting from landscape maintenance or landscape clearing operations and includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, trees and tree stumps. 
ii.  Letter of approval. A notarized letter of approval from the property owner shall be provided verifying consent to use the property for an air curtain incinerator. 
iii.  Site plan. A site plan shall be provided illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, incinerator and storage piles. 
iv.  Permit. A permit from the FDER shall be received prior to receiving approval for an amendment to the Future Land Use Map. 
v.  Setbacks. An air curtain incinerator shall be set back a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. The setback distance may be reduced to a minimum of two hundred (200) feet for an air curtain incinerator accessory to a wholesale nursery use if it is determined that the associated debris, storage, traffic, and potential smoke and odor are not incompatible with the surrounding uses and the PBCPHU has determined that the smoke or odor does not have the potential to create a health threat or nuisance condition. 
vi.  On site storage. On site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and pile height shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Outdoor material storage piles shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. 
vii.  Buffering. The accessory air curtain incinerator operation shall be subject to the compatibility requirements of Section 7.3. 
8.  Air curtain incinerator, temporary means the installation or use of a portable or stationary combustion device that is designed and used to burn trees and brush removed during land clearing by directing a plane of high-velocity, forced air through a manifold into a pit with vertical walls in such a manner as to maintain a curtain of air over the surface of the pit and a recirculating motion of air under the curtain. Temporary air curtain incinerator uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: If an air curtain incinerator facility also includes chipping and mulching or composting, adherence to the supplementary use conditions applicable to such uses shall be required. 
a.  Approval. Applicant shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
b.  Setback from residential districts and uses. A temporary air curtain incinerator use shall be set back a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. The setback distance may be reduced to a minimum of two hundred (200) feet for a temporary air curtain incinerator use if it is determined that the associated debris, storage, traffic, and potential smoke and odor are not incompatible with the surrounding uses and the PBCPHU has determined that the smoke or odor does not have the potential to create a health threat or nuisance condition. 
c.  Health and environmental regulations. A temporary air curtain incinerator use shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations of the FDER (including Chapter 17-2, F.A.C.), the PBCPHU, the Solid Waste Authority and the Fire-Rescue Department. 
d.  Permitting. The temporary air curtain incinerator shall require approval by the PBCPHU, the Solid Waste Authority, and the Fire-Rescue Department, and shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
e.  Duration. The use shall be permitted on the site, with a special permit approval, for a period of six (6) months or less. 
9.  Air Stripper Tower (Remedial System) means a temporary accessory petroleum contamination remedial system which treats contaminated groundwater from a site and treated groundwater is then reintroduced into the aquifer using an on-site recharge mechanism. A typical system includes air stripper towers or shallow tray aerator and infiltration gallery, groundwater recovery wells, and an aboveground centrifugal pump. A remedial system shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Permit. A special permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Division to allow air stripper towers within the required building setbacks for the period to be determined by the Department of Environmental Resources Management. The special permit application shall include the following: 
i.  Documents. Supporting documents from the Department of Environmental Protection and the Palm Beach County Department of Environmental Resources Management for the remedial system. 
ii.  Building permit application. Copies of Building Division application including necessary drawings and documents signed and sealed by a registered engineer ensuring the structural safety and stability of the "structure". 
b.  Property development regulations. All property development regulations, including setbacks, shall be met. If the applicant is unable to meet the property development regulations, in lieu of a variance, the Zoning Division shall be authorized to determine the location of the remedial system and set necessary conditions for landscaping and screening. 
c.  Variance. If the applicant does not agree with the recommendations and conditions for locating and buffering the remedial system, then an application for a variance must be submitted and approved. 
d.  Duration. The length of time a remedial system may remain on site shall be determined by the Department of Environmental Resources. 
10.  Airplane, landing strip, accessory. 
a.  AR district. In the AR districts, only airplane landing strips, airplane hangars and helipads accessory to a bona fide agricultural use shall be permitted. 
b.  Minimum required landing area. Accessory airplane landing strips shall comply with the minimum required dimensions listed in the FDOT Chapter 14-60, F.A.C. 
c.  Minimum area. Rural airplane landing strips and hangars accessory to agricultural use shall be located on parcels containing a minimum of twenty (20) acres. 
d.  Setbacks. No structure or navigation aid shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any property line. In addition, there shall be a one hundred-foot setback between the edge of the runway primary surface area as defined by the FDOT Chapter 14-60, F.A.C., and the property line, unless the landing strip facility is a major recreation facility located within a PUD or subdivision. In such cases, there shall be a fifty-foot setback between the edge of the runway primary surface area and any residential structure. 
e.  Building height. Requirement for a variance for a structure to exceed the height limit for the district in which the use is located shall be waived if the additional height is required by Federal law or the Fla. Stat. 
f.  Fencing and screening. Where deemed necessary to protect the general public, safety fences up to a height of six (6) feet shall be required. Additionally, screening of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity shall be required if determined necessary to protect neighboring property from potential loss of use or diminishment of land value. 
11.  Helipad. Helipads shall be permitted by the Village based upon the recommendations of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board after a public hearing and the approval by the Village Council after a public hearing. The following supplementary use standards shall apply to the operation of helicopters and helipads: 
a.  Compliance with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) findings and recommendations contained within its Airspace Determination for the proposed helipad. 
b.  Compliance with the State of Florida, Department of Transportation (FDOT) findings and recommendations contained within the Site Approval Order and State License. 
c.  Helicopter landings and takeoffs at authorized locations only. No person owning, piloting, or operating a helicopter shall land such aircraft, permit same to be landed, or permit such aircraft to takeoff in the Village except at an approved helipad location, unless specifically exempt from the provisions contained in this Ordinance. No more than three (3) takeoffs may take place on any single helipad within any twenty-four-hour period. 
d.  Permitted locations. In addition to the regulations of the zoning district in which the facility is to be located, helipads shall meet the following locational standards: 
i.  A helipad shall not be located within two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet of another helipad as measured from helipad to helipad. 
e.  Use regulation. 
i.  Helipads shall comply with FAA Advisory Circular No. 150/5390-2A dated January 20, 1994, as it may be amended from time to time as required by the FAA. 
ii.  Use of helipads shall be accessory to a primary and specified use, such as an individual business, or incidental to a primary residential use. 
iii.  No takeoffs or landings may occur between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
iv.  No auxiliary facilities such as fueling or maintenance shall be permitted. 
v.  Helipads accessory to uses in AR-RR and AR-USA districts shall be located on parcels under single ownerships containing a minimum of sixty (60) acres. Helipads accessory to uses in the AR-RR and AR-USA districts shall be located no less than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest property line. 
vi.  All helicopters operating from helipads in the Village shall comply with the FDOT Site Approval Order and State License. 
vii.  The landing site shall be paved and shall be marked with those symbols required and approved by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
viii.  Screening. The helipad area shall be screened and buffered to a height of three (3) feet from adjoining non-commercial and non-industrial property. 
ix.  Dust control. The ground around the perimeter of the helipad area shall be sodded or paved with a dustfree surface for a sufficient distance to prevent the dissemination of dust and dirt during takeoff and landing. 
x.  No helicopter shall be operated in an elevation less than five hundred (500) feet over a school, park, or playground over the Village of Wellington. 
f.  Permit Required. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any helipad without first obtaining a permit thereof from Village Council. 
g.  Permit application. An application for a permit to operate a helipad shall be filed with the PZ&B Director on the forms provided by the Village. The application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information. 
i.  Name and address of the applicant. 
ii.  A site plan showing the location and narrative description of the proposed helipad use. 
iii.  A statement of the proposed intensity of the use. 
iv.  A diagram indicating anticipated flight paths of arriving and departing helicopters. 
v.  The following shall be delivered after conditional use approval has been obtained from the Village; provided, however, the Applicant shall not receive its conditional use permit until such time as the Planning, Zoning and Building Director has determined that the following items are in substantial compliance with the information provided by the Applicant prior to the Village's conditional use approval: 
(a)  Copy of findings and recommendations contained within the FAA Airspace Determination. 
(b)  Copy of findings and recommendations contained within the FDOT Site Approval Order. Subsequent to Village action if approved, the applicant shall submit a copy of the FDOT license for the helipad. 
h.  Factors of consideration. In considering applications for the helipad permits, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board and the Village Council shall consider the effect of the proposed use on existing and future dwellings on the vicinity; the proposed location; screening and landscaping; noise; and the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. Any such request may be granted upon or conditioned upon the faithful adherence to and fulfillment of such conditions and restrictions as shall be determined to be necessary for the protection of the surrounding areas and general welfare of the community. 
i.  Transfer of permit application. No application for a helipad permit may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the consent of the Village Council. 
j.  Permit revocation. Failure to comply with the terms set forth in this division shall be considered sufficient grounds for revocation of any permit granted for operation under this division by the Village Council. 
k.  Any existing airplane landing strip use which was permitted pursuant to a valid development order prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use. Such uses are deemed to be lawful existing uses and are deemed to be in conformity with these regulations, and may be allowed to continue and to expand as a lawfully existing use. 
l.  Exemption. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to helicopters: (1) operated by the United States, or by any other governmental law enforcement agencies; (2) used solely in conjunction with a construction project undertaken pursuant to the performance of a state contract; (3) used by mosquito control or emergency services, not to include areas where permanent facilities are installed, such as hospital landing sites; (4) making eighteen or fewer takeoffs and landings on the same property per year on a non-regular basis in the AR-RR and AR-USA districts or on residential lots sixty (60) acres or larger in size in the Urban Service Area. 
12.  Amusements, temporary or Special event means an activity which includes the provision of rides, amusements, food, games, crafts or performances outside of permanent structures. Typical uses include carnivals, circuses, auctions, and tent revivals. A temporary commercial use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Approval. Applicant shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
b.  Duration. The temporary commercial use shall not be permitted for a period exceeding seven (7) consecutive calendar days, except that one (1) administrative extension of time shall be issued upon request that shall not exceed an additional seven (7) calendar days. If the use is proposed to exceed fourteen (14) days, approval of a Class "A" Conditional use pursuant to Section 5.4.6. shall be required. 
c.  Setbacks. All buildings. mobile homes, trailers, vehicles, tents, mechanical devices, carnival rides or animals related to a commercial or amusement type use shall comply with the minimum setbacks of the district and shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from a right-of-way and two hundred (200) feet from any property line adjacent to a residential district. Carnival rides shall be setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any right-of-way. 
d.  Frontage. The minimum frontage on the land when the temporary commercial amusement use is located shall be five hundred (500) feet on a public road. 
e.  Access. The primary access for the temporary commercial amusement use shall be from an arterial road and shall not cause traffic to flow through nearby residential areas. Back-out parking directly onto a public street shall be prohibited. 
f.  Events per year. Except for auctions, and regional recreational attractions, there shall be no more than two (2) such temporary commercial amusement use events for a property in any one (1) year. Auctions shall be permitted to operate four (4) times per year subject to all other code requirements. 
g.  Performance standards. All temporary amusements shall be subject to performance standards relating to noise and lighting according to Section 7.8. 
h.  Locational requirements. 
i.  Location. Temporary commercial amusement permits shall not be issued for the same dates for two (2) or more events unless they are located more than one-half (1/2) mile from each other. 
ii.  Frontage. Temporary commercial amusements shall not be permitted where the frontage of the subject property abuts a right-of-way under major construction, such as a road widening project 
i.  Compliance. If a special permit for a temporary amusement is found in violation of any provision of the term of the permit or of this Code, the Planning & Zoning Director may withhold future special permits from the applicant for a period of eighteen (18) months. 
13.  Arena, auditorium or stadium means an open, or partially or fully enclosed facility primarily used or intended for commercial spectator sports or entertainment. Typical uses include convention and exhibition halls, sports arenas, jai alai frontons, amphitheaters and race tracks. All arena, auditorium or stadium uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for arena, auditorium or stadium uses shall be no less than five (5) acres. 
b.  Frontage. The minimum required frontage on a public street for arena, auditorium or stadium uses at the primary point of access shall be a minimum of four hundred (400) feet in length. 
c.  Access. All points of vehicular access for arena, auditorium or stadium uses shall be from an arterial road. The access points shall be located to minimize vehicular traffic to and through local streets in residential neighborhoods 
d.  Fencing and screening. Safety fences up to a height of six (6) feet shall be required, if determined appropriate, to protect the general health, safety and welfare. Landscape screens of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity shall also be required if it is determined they are necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and to protect neighboring land values. The operation is subject to compatibility requirements of Section 7.3. However, an alternative type four (4) landscape strip is required along property lines adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
14.  Art Studio means the workshop of a professional artist, sculptor, photographer, or other craftsperson. An art studio shall comply with the following supplementary use standards. 
a.  Approval. Art studios shall be established only after obtaining approval of a Class A Conditional Use petition by the Village Council. 
b.  Lot Size. Art studios shall be located on lots with a minimum size of two (2) acres. 
c.  Accessory Use. Art studios shall be permitted only as accessory uses and shall be subordinate in size to the principle residential structure or agricultural use of the property within the AR, Agricultural Residential zoning district. If the use is conducted within an accessory structure, the structure must be compatible with and ultimately enhance the appearance and value of the subject and surrounding properties. 
d.  Yard Setbacks. Art studios, if conducted within an accessory structure, shall meet the minimum yard setback standards applicable to accessory structures within the AR, Agricultural Residential zoning district except as may be otherwise approved through the review and approval of the Class A Conditional Use application by the Village Council. 
e.  Outdoor Activities. All activities associated with the use of the property as an Art Studio shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except for display of artifacts created within the Studio which may be displayed outdoor on site if incorporated within an approved landscape plan and displayed in a manner that will not detract from the appearance and value of the subject and surrounding properties. 
15.  Assembly, nonprofit, institutional and membership means a site or facility, open to the public, owned or operated by a not-for-profit organization for social, educational or recreational purposes. Typical uses include museums, cultural centers, recreational facilities, botanical gardens or nonresidential community services such as soup kitchens and medical services. Both institutional and membership nonprofit assembly uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. The use shall be located on a collector, a local commercial street or street of higher classification. 
b.  AR and CF Districts. In the AR and CF districts, a nonprofit assembly use shall have a one hundred-foot buffer from residentially occupied or zoned property in addition to the required minimum setbacks. 
16.  Auction means an establishment engaged in the public sale of goods to the highest bidder, with all or a portion of the activity and display of merchandise occurring outside of an enclosed building. An auction use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Duration. The auction use shall not be permitted for a period exceeding seven (7) consecutive calendar days. If the use is proposed to exceed seven (7) days, approval of a Class "A" Conditional use pursuant to Section 5.4.F shall be required. 
b.  Landowner consent. The landowner on which the auction shall be held shall consent to the auction and agree to return the land to an orderly and sanitary condition. 
c.  Access. The primary access from an auction use shall be from an arterial road and shall not cause traffic to flow through nearby residential areas. Back-out parking directly onto a public street shall be prohibited. 
17.  Automotive paint and body shop means an establishment engaged in the painting, repainting, or retouching of motor vehicles, or performance of major external repairs of a non-mechanical nature. An automotive paint and body shop use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
18.  Automotive service station means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other motor fuels, which may include accessory activities such as the sale of accessories or supplies, the lubrication of motor vehicles, the minor adjustment or minor repair of motor vehicles, or the sale of convenience food items. An automotive service station use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location criteria. Automotive service stations and related uses and facilities with gasoline sales create intensities which may permanently and substantially alter the character of an area. Prior to approving a conditional use for an automotive service station or other facility with gasoline pumps, the Village Council shall make a finding that the use is appropriately located. In making the determination that the use is appropriately located, the Village Council shall consider the following guidelines in their review: 
i.  Movement. Proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation and turning movements; 
ii.  Buffering. Adequate buffering from residential areas; 
iii.  Intersection criteria. Application of the Major Intersection Criteria as defined in Section 7.8.C; 
iv.  Access. Provision of adequate access. 
v.  Vicinity. Number of other fueling stations in the vicinity to safeguard against potential harm from explosion. 
b.  Enclosed repair activities. All accessory repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed structure. No outside storage of disassembled vehicles, or parts thereof, shall be permitted on site. 
c.  No vehicle testing on residential streets. Vehicles shall not be tested off-site on residential streets. 
d.  Water recycling. Any accessory automatic car wash facility shall utilize a water recycling system. 
e.  Loudspeakers. No outdoor speaker or public address systems, which are audible off-site, shall be permitted. 
f.  In the IL District. In the IL District, gasoline sales shall be accessory to vehicle repair activities, and convenience store sales area shall be limited to five hundred (500) square feet. 
19.  Aviculture means the breeding, raising and care of birds. Aviculture shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Minimum Lot size. For avicultural uses with more than fifty (50) but less than two hundred (200) birds, the minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. For avicultural uses with more than two hundred (200) birds, the minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres. 
19.1.  Bio Informatics: Refers to the collection, classification, storage, and analysis of biochemical and biological information using computers especially as applied to molecular genetics and genomics. 
19.2.  Bio Science, Light: Operations at this level includes uses that cluster for potential collaborative business ventures. These include, but are not limited to biology and chemistry labs, engineering laboratories, animal facilities, engineering laboratories, development laboratories, support labs, computational research and bioinformatics labs that require only small amounts of trucking or noise producing outdoor support areas. Facilities that contain "wet labs", defined as laboratories handling biological materials, can often fit into this category, if such uses have low biohazard levels. 
20.  Bed and Breakfast means an owner-occupied single-family dwelling that offers lodging for paying guests and which serves breakfast to these guests. It is the intent of this Code that the owner-operator of a Bed and Breakfast establishment within the Village of Wellington reside on-site on a fulltime basis. To ensure compliance with the foregoing intent, the Village will require as part of the approval process the submission of an affidavit by the applicant, on a form to be provided by the Planning and Zoning Department, attesting that he/she/it is the owner-operator of the Bed and Breakfast. A corporate owner will be required to designate an individual with at least a twenty-five percent (25%) ownership interest in the corporate entity as the individual who will be the owner-operator of the Bed and Breakfast. A Bed and Breakfast use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Bed and Breakfast establishments shall be required to obtain Development Review Committee approval. 
b.  The owner-operator shall reside on the premises fulltime and shall provide a written affidavit qualifying the owner-operator. The failure of the owner-operator to reside fulltime on the premises during operational hours of the Bed and Breakfast shall result in revocation of the development approval. All subsequent owners, purchasers or successors in interest shall comply with the provisions of this code in order to continue to operate a Bed and Breakfast on the premises. 
c.  The establishment shall not exceed five (5) bedrooms for paying quests on properties less than five (5) acres, and shall not exceed eight (8) bedrooms for paying guests on properties five (5) acres or greater. 
d.  The minimum lot size for an establishment shall be at least two acres. Any combination of lots to achieve the minimum lot size shall be accomplished by a replat of the affected properties. 
e.  A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall be required to connect to public water and sewer systems where public water and sewer is available. Proposed private well and septic/drainfield systems will be reviewed by the Village Engineer and PBC Health Department should public water and sewer not be available. 
f.  Each Bed and Breakfast establishment shall have a separation requirement of one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) linear feet, measured from the closest property line of each establishment. Vehicular access for patrons shall not be more than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) linear feet from a collector or arterial street. 
g.  A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall not contain rental dwelling units. 
h.  The proposed use of the property shall not adversely affect the immediate neighborhood or create noise, light or traffic conditions detrimental to the neighboring residents. 
i.  Only exterior alterations necessary to assure safety of the structure, enhance the compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood or modifications necessary to be in compliance with ADA requirements limited to one bedroom, one bathroom and all common areas shall be made for the purpose of providing a Bed and Breakfast establishment. 
j.  Meal service shall be limited to guests and shall include only breakfasts and wine and cheese functions. 
k.  The owner-operator shall keep a current guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests. 
l.  The building shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
m.  One (1) sign for the establishment may be installed to indicate the establishment name, address and logo. The sign shall have a maximum width two (2) feet, maximum height two (2) feet and a maximum four (4) square feet sign area. Any proposed lighting for the signage shall be limited to uplighting. No signage shall be self-lit or include neon lighting. 
n.  The establishment must be located as part of and attached to the principal single family residential dwelling on the property and the portion of the dwelling utilized for the establishment shall comply with all setbacks for the principal structure. 
o.  Each establishment shall provide at a minimum, two (2) spaces for the establishment plus one (1) space for each bedroom for rent. Parking areas may consist of paving, grass, gravel or other materials, subject to the Village Engineer's approval. 
p.  Guests shall be limited to a length of stay that does not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. 
21.  Campground means a plot of ground established as a commercial campsite for recreational use and not as living quarters. A campground use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Minimum lot area. A campground use shall have a minimum lot area of at least five (5) acres or the minimum required by the district, whichever is greater. 
b.  Fencing and screening. A landscape screen of at least seventy-five (75) percent opaqueness shall be required around a recreation facility use if it is deemed necessary to protect neighboring property from potential loss of use or diminishment of land value. The operation is subject to compatibility requirements of Section 7.3. However, an alternative type four (4) landscape strip is required along property lines adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
c.  Setbacks. No campground use shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. 
22.  Camping cabin means an accessory use for recreational vehicle parks which consists of a cabin used for sleeping. A camping cabin shall comply with the following supplementary use regulations. 
a.  Structure. The cabin shall comply with all structural regulations of the Village of Wellington Building Code. 
b.  Duration. No person shall be permitted to reside in any camping cabin for more than thirty (30) consecutive days and not more than sixty (60) days in any one-year period. 
c.  Setbacks. Camping cabins shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of the park and shall meet the setbacks required of the recreational vehicles. 
d.  Location. A camping cabin may be located on a recreational vehicle pod in lieu of a recreational vehicle. 
e.  Size. A camping cabin shall be no more than four hundred square feet including outside porch area. 
f.  Amenities. A camping cabin may contain electrical outlets, heating and air conditioning units and fans but cooking facilities and plumbing are prohibited. 
g.  Permit. A tiedown permit must be obtained from the building department. 
h.  Occupancy. A minimum of fifty (50) square feet under roof shall be provided for each occupant of the cabin. 
i.  Limitation. A maximum of ten (10) percent of the total approved and developed lots may be converted to cabin use. 
23.  Car wash or auto detailing means an establishment primarily engaged in the washing or detailing of motor vehicles, which may use production line methods with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and which may employ some hand labor. Detailing includes hand washing and waxing, window tinting, striping, and interior cleaning. Car wash and auto detailing uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. 
i.  IL district. In the IL district, a car wash or auto detailing use shall be permitted by right if limited to hand washing/waxing. 
b.  Accessory to service station. An automatic car wash shall be considered an accessory use to an automotive service station use when it is located on the same lot, and shall be governed by the use and property development regulations applicable to the service station use. 
c.  Water recycling. The car wash facility shall utilize a water recycling system. 
d.  Loudspeakers. No outdoor speaker or public address systems, which are audible off-site, shall be permitted. 
24.  Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for human burial, including a chapel mausoleum or columbarium. A cemetery use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Site area. In accordance with the requirements of Chapter. 497.027, Fla. Stat., a cemetery shall be located on a site with a minimum contiguous area of fifteen (15) acres. 
b.  Water supply and sewage disposal. Potable water supply and sewage disposal systems for a cemetery use shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the PBCPHU 
25.  Chipping and mulching means an establishment using a permanent facility designed to cut tree limbs, brush or construction debris into small pieces for use as mulch. A chipping and mulching use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Setback from residential districts and uses. A chipping or grinding machine shall be set back minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use if it is determined that the associated debris, storage, noise, dust and traffic are not incompatible with the surrounding uses. Outdoor material storage piles shall be so back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential zoning district or use 
b.  Permits required. The operation shall receive and maintain a permit with the Solid Waste Authority within sixty (60) days of approval of the amendment to the Future Land Use Map. A chipping and mulching facility use is subject to all applicable regulations of the Solid Waste Authority and FDER. 
c.  Odor and dust reduction. A chipping and mulching facility use shall be designed and operated to restrict objectionable odor and dust from entering adjacent properties. 
d.  Access. An access road for collection vehicles shall be provided to the entrance of the facility. Acceptable access does not include local streets. Access shall be restricted to specific entrances with gates that can be locked and that carry official notice that only authorized persons are allowed on the site. 
e.  Storage. On-site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and the pile height of storage material shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. 
f.  Landscaping and buffering. The operation shall be subject to the compatibility requirements of Section 7.3. The standards shall be waived for any portion of the required landscape buffer that is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. 
g.  Chipping and grinding hours. Hours of operation of chipping and grinding machine are limited to 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday if adjacent to residential zoned property. 
h.  Supplemental application requirements. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
i.  Site plan. A site plan illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, chipper and storage piles; and 
ii.  Hours of operation. A statement specifying the hours of operation; 
iii.  Waste. An explanation of the quantity of waste to be received expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day; 
iv.  Letter of approval. A notarized letter of approval shall be provided from the property owner verifying consent to use the property for chipping and mulching; and 
v.  Dust control. A plan to address dust control in traffic, storage and processing areas. Dust control measures may include: additional setbacks, full or partial enclosure of chipper or grinder and watering or enclosing mulch piles. 
i.  Accessory to nursery. Chipping and mulching shall be permitted as an accessory use to a wholesale greenhouse or nursery, subject to Article 5, Development Review Committee and the following standards: 
i.  Letter of approval. A notarized letter of approval shall be provided from the property owner verifying consent to use the property for chipping and mulching. 
ii.  Site plan. A site plan shall be provided illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, chipper and storage piles. 
iii.  Limitations. The facility shall be limited to the processing of yard trash, and no more than twenty (20) tons or one hundred twenty (120) cubic yards of yard trash or composting material shall be received per day. Yard trash is composed of vegetative matter resulting from landscape maintenance or landscape clearing operations and includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, trees and tree stumps. 
iv.  Dust control. A chipping and mulching facility use shall be designed and operated to restrict dust from entering adjacent properties. 
v.  Setbacks. A chipping or grinding machine shall be set back a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. A chipping or grinding machine shall only be operated during weekdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
vi.  Storage. On-site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and pile height of storage material shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. Outdoor material storage piles shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district 
vii.  Buffering. The accessory chipping and mulching operation shall be subject to compatibility requirements of Section 7.3. 
j.  Fire Prevention. Chipping and mulching facilities shall be located within ten (10) miles of a full service fire station or have and maintain on-site fire fighting equipment acceptable to the Palm Beach County Fire Marshall. 
26.  Church or place of worship means a premises or site used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious services or established place of worship, retreat site, camp, convent, seminary or similar facilities owned or operated by a tax exempt religious group for religious activities. A church or place of worship shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Temporary sales. Temporary sales events, such as rummage or bake sales, shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the Temporary Retail Sales standards of Section 6.4.4 and Section 5.5 (Special Use Permits). 
b.  CN district. In the CN district, a church or place of worship not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area shall be a permitted use, subject to site plan certification approved by the DRC and pursuant to Section 5.6 (Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan). 
c.  Institutional land use plan classification. In the institutional land use plan classification accessory affordable housing shall be permitted subject to Class "A" conditional use. Such use shall be requested only by a nonprofit organization or community based group. This type of residential development would be under the direct supervision of a sponsoring nonprofit organization or community based group. Such housing shall be provided at below market rental and not for resale. 
d.  Location. All places of worship which include a rectory, shall front on a collector or arterial street. All places of worship which include a day care, school, academy, congregate living facility, cemetery, community center or other similar accessory facilities shall front on an arterial or collector street and in no case shall be located on residential or local streets. 
e.  PUD Planned Development. A church or place of worship shall be allowed in residential areas of existing PUD Special Exceptions as a requested use. 
27.  Wireless Communications Towers and Antennas. 
a.  Intent. The regulations and requirements of this section are intended to regulate the placement, construction and modification of wireless communications towers and related wireless communications facilities in order to protect the health safety and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless communications marketplace in the Village of Wellington; and 
i.  to minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
ii.  to encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and compatible uses; 
iii.  to provide for the appropriate location and development of wireless communications antennas within the Village, to the extent possible, to minimize potential adverse impacts on the community; 
iv.  to minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless communications towers and related wireless communications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques utilizing current and future technologies; 
v.  to promote and encourage shared use/co-location of towers and antenna support structures; 
vi.  to maintain and preserve the existing residential character of the Village of Wellington and its neighborhoods and to preserve property values therein; 
vii.  to promote the public safety and to avoid risk of damage to adjacent properties by ensuring that wireless communications towers and related wireless communications facilities are properly designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed; 
viii.  to ensure that wireless communications towers and related wireless communications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses; 
ix.  to ensure that wireless communications facilities comply with radio frequency emissions standards as promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
b.  Definitions. For the purposes of this Section the following definitions shall apply: 
    Accessory use means a permitted use that is customarily associated with the principle use and clearly incidental to the principle use and is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to and serves only the principle use. 
    Antenna means device for transmitting, receiving or transmitting and receiving signals. 
    Antenna support structure means any building or structure used or useable for one or more antennae. The term support structure does not include towers. 
    Co-location means the use of a single support structure and/or site by more than one wireless communications provider. 
    Conditional Use means those uses that are generally compatible with the other uses permitted in a district, but that require individual review of their location, design, configuration, intensity and density of use, structures, and may require the imposition of conditions pertinent thereto in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location pursuant to Articles 5 and 6 of the Village of Wellington Land Development Regulations. 
    Conditional Use A means those uses that are authorized as Class "A" conditional uses in Table 6.4-1, Use Regulations Schedule. Each proposed Class "A" conditional use shall be evaluated by the Development Review Committee, Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board and Village Council for compliance with the applicable standards set forth in the Village of Wellington Land Development Regulations. 
    Equipment cabinet or shelter means a structure located near a wireless communications facility that contains electronics, back-up power generators and/or other on-site supporting equipment necessary for the operation of the facility. 
    FPL corridor means a dedicated Florida Power & Light Co. power transmission line easement or right-of-way no less than two hundred (200) feet wide in total. 
    Guyed tower means a wireless communications tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Land use designation means as adopted on the Village's interim future Land Use map or future Land Use map when adopted. Future land use designation shall be controlling for the application of all regulations contained herein. 
    Microwave dish antenna means a disk-like antenna used to send or receive wireless communications signals between terminal locations. 
    Monopole tower means a wireless communications tower consisting of a single pole or spire supported by a permanent foundation, constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Panel antenna means an array of antennas designed to direct, transmit or receive radio signals from a particular direction. 
    Pico cell means a low-power cell whose coverage area extends three hundred (300) to five hundred (500) yards. 
    Provider, when used with reference to a system means a person or entity that provides service over a wireless communications facility, whether or not the provider owns the facility. A person that leases a portion of a wireless communications facility shall be treated as a provider to purposes of this ordinance. 
    Self-support/lattice tower means a structure requiring no guy wires for support. 
    Special Permit Use means those uses that are generally compatible with other uses permitted in a district, but that require individual review of their location, design, configuration and intensity and density of use, building and structures and may require the imposition of conditions pertinent thereto in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. A Special Permit requires Development Review Committee approval as per Section 5.5 of the Village of Wellington Land Development Regulations. 
    Stealth or camouflaged tower or facility means any wireless communications tower or facility that is designed to incorporate into and be compatible with existing or proposed uses of the site. Examples of stealth facilities include, but are not limited to: architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and wireless communications towers designed to look like light poles, power poles, trees, flag poles, clocks, steeples or bell towers and of the same height and the same nature emulated. 
    Utility pole-mounted facility means a wireless communications antenna facility comprised of pico cell(s) attached to or upon an electric transmission or distribution pole, street light, traffic signal, or similar facility located within a public right-of-way or utility easement. The facility shall include any associated equipment shelters regardless of where they are located with respect to the mount. 
    Village means the Village of Wellington and any and all departments, agencies and divisions thereof. 
    Village Council means the duly elected Mayor and Council members of the Village of Wellington. 
    Village Manager means the Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee. 
    Whip antenna means an omnidirectional antenna used to transmit or receive radio signals. 
    Wireless communications facility means a facility that is used to provide one or more wireless communications services, including, without limitation, arrays, antennas and associated facilities used to transmit wireless communications signals. This term does not include over-the-air reception devices that deliver or receive broadcast signals, devices that provide direct-to-home satellite services ("DBS") or devices that provide multichannel multipoint distribution services ("MMDS") as defined and regulated by 47 C.F.R. § 1.4000, as amended. 
    Wireless communications services means the transmission of information by electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), or other communications signals, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself. This term includes, but is not limited to wireless services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and commercial mobile services as defined by 47 U.S.C. 332 (d), as amended. 
    Wireless communications tower means a guyed, monopole or self-support/lattice tower, or extension thereto, constructed as a freestanding structure, supporting one or more antennas used in the provision of wireless communications services. 
c.  Applicability. The requirements of this ordinance apply to the extent provided herein to all new, existing, replacement, re-located or expanded and/or modified existing towers and wireless communications facilities, except where specifically indicated. The requirements of this ordinance apply throughout the Village. It is the express intent of the Village to impose all regulations of this ordinance to all land within the Village, whether publicly or privately held, including, without limitation, private property, Village property, state-owned rights-of-way and/or property, church property, utility property and school property. 
i.  Non-essential Services. Wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities will be regulated and permitted pursuant to this ordinance and not regulated and permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
d.  Existing Wireless Communications Towers. 
i.  Except where otherwise noted, existing towers shall not be rendered non-conforming uses by this section. The Village encourages the use of these existing towers for purposes of co-locating additional antennas. Towers located or to be located at the following sites in the Village shall be treated as existing wireless communications towers and facilities: 
(a)  the stealth flag pole wireless communications tower and facilities located or to be located on the Palm Bach Polo Club grounds on the non-residential site designated as Parcel #NR 30 on the Village of Wellington Interim Future Land Use map; and 
(b)  any and all towers erected and in use on or before March 1, 1997. These towers shall be considered conforming uses with respect to this ordinance and the Village shall allow co-location on these facilities subject to the requirements of Section (h)(3) so long as they are not expanded in height and utilize the most visually unobtrusive equipment that is technologically feasible. 
ii.  The wireless communications tower located at the Village municipal complex (designated as Parcel #NR 4 on the Village of Wellington Interim Future Land Use map) is rendered a non-conforming use by this ordinance and shall be dismantled and removed from the site within 90 days after the effective date of this ordinance. 
iii.  Owners of existing towers shall be required to comply with the procedures set forth in Section k ("Construction of New Towers") to replace or re-located an existing tower. 
iv.  Owners of existing towers shall be required to comply with the procedures set forth in Section (k)(1)(b), and (c)(i-v), ("Construction of New Towers") to co-locate an antenna on an existing tower. 
v.  Increases in height of an existing tower or conversion of an existing tower to a stealth camouflage or other design shall be treated as a new tower and subject to all requirements of this ordinance. 
vi.  Owners of existing towers shall be required to comply with the requirements set forth in Section g(2) ("Annual Registration") and Section h ("General Requirements"). 
e.  Tower or Utility Pole-Mounted Wireless Communications Facilities. 
i.  Application Process. 
(a)  An application to locate or re-located a wireless communications facility must be in writing and shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
(i.)  The information required in this ordinance and a fee as adopted by the Village Council; 
(ii.)  The inventory of existing sites required in Section h(4) of this ordinance; 
(iii.)  Copies of the licenses or franchises required to be filed with the Village pursuant to Section h(7); 
(iv.)  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed wireless communications facility, on-site land uses and zoning, elevation and stealth design drawings of the proposed wireless communications facility and tower or utility pole mount, topography, a current survey, landscape plans, and any other information deemed by the Village to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance; 
(v.)  A certification that the applicant will comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the provisions of this ordinance; and 
(vi.)  A certification that the site described in the application is located on a tower (if applicable) and the owner/operator agrees to the co-location of its facility. 
(b)  An application for permit to locate or relocate a wireless communications facility that proposes to co-locate said facility on an already constructed tower or utility pole-mount and that satisfies the requirements set forth in Section e(1) of this ordinance, shall receive expedited treatment in the review process. 
(c)  So as to further expedite the permitting process and to promote the efficient use of existing sites, the Village encourages the users of towers and other antenna support structures to submit a single application for approval of multiple users on a single existing site. Applications for approval at multiple user sites shall be given priority in the review process. 
The fee to be submitted with a multiple user application shall be the fee described in e(1)(a)(i) multiplied by the number of users listed in such application. 
ii.  Standards for Utility Pole-Mounted Facilities. 
(a)  Utility pole-mounted wireless communications pico cell facilities shall only be permitted in public rights-of-way that are at least one hundred (100) feet in width. To the greatest practical extent, utility pole-mounted wireless communications facilities shall be sited where they are concealed from public view by other objects such as trees or buildings. 
(b)  When it is necessary to site the facility in public view, to the greatest practical extent it shall be designed to limit visual impact on surrounding land uses. 
(c)  The height of a utility pole-mounted facility shall not exceed two (2) feet above the pole structure. 
(d)  Equipment shelters associated with utility pole-mounted wireless communications facilities which are located within the public right-of-way shall be of a scale and design that make them no more visually obtrusive than other types of utility equipment boxes normally located within the right-of-way and shall be located in a manner and location approved by the Village Engineer. To the greatest practical extent, equipment shelters associated with utility pole-mounted facilities which are located outside of the public right-of-way shall be concealed from public view or shall be architecturally designed or buffered to be compatible from surrounding land uses, except that such shelters located in residential zoned areas must be screened from the view of residents and pedestrians. 
(e)  Equipment shelters associated with utility pole-mounted wireless communications facilities which are located outside the public right-of-way shall meet the setback requirements for accessory structures for the zoning districts in which the equipment shelters are located. 
(f)  Generators associated with equipment shelters must meet with the requirements of the Village's noise ordinance. 
f.  Wireless Communications Facilities on Buildings and Rooftops. 
i.  Application Process. 
(a)  An application to locate or relocate a wireless communications facility must be in writing and shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
(i.)  The information required in this ordinance and a fee as adopted by Village Council; 
(ii.)  The inventory of existing sites required in Section h(4) of this ordinance; 
(iii.)  Copies of the licenses or franchises required to be filed with the Village pursuant to Section h(7). 
(iv.)  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed wireless communications facility, on-site land uses and zoning, elevation and stealth design drawings of the proposed wireless communications facility and the rooftop and building, topography, a current survey, landscape plans, and any other information deemed by the Village to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance; 
(v.)  A certification that the applicant will comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the provisions of this ordinance; and 
(b)  An application for permit to locate or relocate an wireless communications facility that proposes to co-locate said facility on a rooftop or building and that satisfies the requirements set forth in Section f(1) of this ordinance, shall receive expedited treatment in the review process. 
(c)  So as to further expedite the permitting process and to promote the efficient use of existing sites, the Village encourages the users of antenna support structures on rooftops and buildings to submit a single application for approval of multiple users on a single existing site. Applications for approval at multiple user sites shall be given priority in the review process. The fee to be submitted with a multiple user application shall be the fee described in f(1)(a)(i) multiplied by the number of users listed in such application. 
ii.  Minimum Standards. All wireless communications facilities to be located on a building or rooftop shall be subject to the following minimum standards: 
(a)  Wireless communications facilities shall only be permitted on non-residential buildings that are at least two (2) stories or twenty-four (24) feet in height. 
(b)  If an equipment building associated with the wireless communications facility is located on the roof of the building, the equipment building shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, four hundred (400) square feet in area nor occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area. 
(c)  Antennas and related equipment buildings shall be located or screened so that the wireless communications facility is not visible from adjacent properties. The Village must approve the stealth or camouflage design before a permit can be granted. 
iii.  Antenna Dimensions. 
(a)  Omni-Directional (whip) antennas and their supports must not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height and twelve (12) inches in diameter and must be constructed of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building. 
(b)  Directional or Panel antennas and their supports must not exceed eight (8) feet in height or two (2) feet in width and must be constructed of materials and coloration which achieves maximum compatibility and minimum visibility. 
(c)  Satellite and microwave dish antennas located in the Commercial, Commercial Recreation and the Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities Land Use Plan Designations/Zoning Districts may not exceed two meters in diameter. 
g.  Annual Registration Requirement for Wireless Communications Facilities and Wireless Communications Towers. 
i.  Wireless Communications Facilities. 
(a)  To enable the Village to keep accurate, up-to-date records of the location of wireless communications facilities within Village limits, on an annual basis, no later than February 1 of each year, the owner/operator shall submit documentation to the Village's Planning, Zoning & Building Department providing: 
(i.)  Certification in writing that the wireless communications facility conforms to the requirements, in effect at the time of construction of the facility, of the Standard Building Code and all other construction standards set forth by the Village's Code, federal and state law by filing, a sworn and certified statement by an engineer to that effect. The wireless communications facility owner/operator may be required by the Village to submit more frequent certification should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the wireless communications facility is jeopardized. The Village reserves the right upon reasonable notice to the owner/operator of the wireless communications facility to conduct inspections for the purpose of determining whether the wireless communications facility complies with the Standard Building Code and all other construction standards provided by local, state or federal laws; 
(ii.)  The name, addresses and telephone number of any new owner, if there has been a change of ownership of the wireless communications facility. 
(b)  Annual payment of a registration fee as adopted by the Village Council for each wireless communications facility located within the Village shall be submitted to the Village's Planning, Zoning & Building Department at the time of submission of the documentation required above. 
ii.  Wireless Communications Towers. 
(a)  To enable the Village to keep accurate, up-to-date records of the placement of wireless communications towers and facilities within Village limits, on an annual basis, no later than February 1 of each year, the owner/operator of the tower shall submit documentation to the Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department providing: 
(i.)  Certification in writing that the tower is structurally sound and conforms to the requirements of the Standard Building Code and all other construction standards set forth by the Village's Code, federal and state law by filing, a sworn and certified statement by an engineer to that effect. The tower owner may be required by the Village to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized; 
(ii.)  The number of providers located on the tower; 
(iii.)  The type and use of any antennae located on the tower; 
(iv.)  The name, address and telephone number of all antenna operators located on the tower and of any new owner of the tower, if there has been a change of ownership of the tower. 
(b)  An annual payment of a registration fee as adopted by the Village for all towers located within the Village shall be submitted to the Village's Planning, Zoning & Building Department at the time of submission of the documentation as required in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) above. 
h.  General Requirements. The following conditions apply to all wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities in the Village. 
i.  Duration of Special Permits. The duration of a permit for a wireless communications tower or a wireless communications facility shall be established by the Village at the time that an application is approved. The length that a permit shall remain in effect shall not be less than one (1) year subject to compliance with this ordinance. 
ii.  Assignment and subleasing. No facility, site or permit may be sold, transferred or assigned without prior notification to the Village. No sublease shall be entered into by any provider until the sub lessee has obtained a permit for the subject facility or site. No potential provider shall be allowed to argue that a permit should be issued for an assigned or subleased facility or site on the basis of any expense incurred in related to the facility or site. 
iii.  Exterior Finish and Stealth Requirement. Except where otherwise permitted by this ordinance or where superseded by the requirements of other Village, state, or federal regulatory agencies possessing jurisdiction over wireless communications towers, antennae and associated facilities, all wireless communications towers, antennae and facilities within the Village limits shall be stealth facilities camouflaged to blend into the surrounding environment using stealth technology in a design and manner pre-approved by the Village. 
iv.  Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for a wireless communications facility or tower site shall provide to the Village an inventory of its existing towers, wireless communications facilities or sites for wireless communications facilities or towers, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Village or within two miles of the Village limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each wireless communications facility or tower. Each applicant shall also provide the Village with a composite propagation study which illustrates graphically existing and proposed coverage in industry-accepted median received signal ranges. 
v.  Aesthetics. Wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Signs. No commercial signs or advertising shall be allowed on a wireless communications tower or a wireless communications facility. 
(b)  Lighting. No signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on a wireless communications tower or a wireless communications facility, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least obtrusiveness to the surrounding community. 
(c)  Graffiti. Any graffiti or other unauthorized inscribed materials shall be removed promptly or otherwise covered in a manner substantially similar to, and consistent, with the original exterior finish. The Village may provide the tower owner and/or operator written notice to remove or cover the graffiti within a specific period of time or as required by other appropriate sections of the Village of Wellington Land Development Regulations as presently existing or as may be periodically amended. In the event the graffiti has not been removed or painted over by the owner and/or operator within the specified time period, the Village shall have the right to remove or paint over the graffiti or other inscribed materials. In the event the Village has to remove or paint over the graffiti, then the owner and/or operator of the tower or associated equipment building or structure on which the graffiti existed, shall be responsible for all costs incurred. 
vi.  Federal, State or Local Requirements. All wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities must meet or exceed the standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless communications towers and facilities. If such standards and regulations change, then the owners of the towers and wireless communications facilities subject to such standards and regulations must bring such towers and facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to maintain or bring wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be subject to enforcement through the Village's Code enforcement procedures. Penalties for violation include fines of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation and removal of the tower of wireless communications facility at the owner's expense. 
vii.  Licenses or Franchise. Owners of wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities must certify that all licenses and/or franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communications system using a tower in the Village have been obtained and shall file a copy of all such licenses and/or franchises with the Village. An owner of a wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility must notify the Village in writing within 48 hours of any revocation or failure to renew any such license or franchise. 
viii.  Discontinued Use. In the event the use of a wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility is discontinued, the owner and/or operator shall provide written notice to the Village of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
ix.  Abandoned Tower or Antenna. The Village may require removal of any abandoned or unused wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility by the tower owner within thirty (30) days after notice from the Village of abandonment. A wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility shall be considered abandoned if use has been discontinued for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(a)  Removal by Village. Where a wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility is abandoned but not removed within the specified time frame, the Village may remove the facility or remove or demolish the tower and place a lien on the property following the procedures (but not the criteria) for a demolition of an unsafe building/structure of the Village's housing code. 
(b)  Towers utilized for other purposes. Where a tower is utilized for other purposes, including but not limited to light standards and power poles, hall not be considered abandoned. 
(c)  Restoration of area. Where a wireless communications tower or facility is removed by an owner, said owner shall restore the area to as good a condition as prior to the placement of the tower or facility, unless otherwise instructed by the Village. 
(d)  Surety or Letter of Credit for removal. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, surety or letter of credit shall be submitted by the property owner(s) or tower operator(s) to ensure the removal of abandoned wireless communications towers. The surety or letter of credit shall be utilized to cover the cost of removal and disposal of abandoned towers and shall consist of the following: 
(i.)  submission of an estimate from a certified structural engineer indicating the cost to remove and dispose of the tower; and 
(ii.)  either, a surety or a letter of credit, equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost to remove and dispose of the tower. The form of the surety or the letter of credit shall be subject to approval by the Director of the Planning, Zoning & Building Department and the Village Attorney 
x.  FCC Emissions Standards. At all times, owners and/or operators of wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities shall comply with the radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal Communications Commission, and provide an annual statement from an independent FCC and qualified engineer demonstrating compliance with these requirements. This statement shall be based at a minimum upon the following: 
(a)  Testing required. All existing and future wireless communications facilities shall be tested, not less frequently than annually, to determine if the radio frequency emissions from such facilities are in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. Facilities that are in existence on the effective date of the ordinance shall be tested within three months after the effective date of the ordinance and annually thereafter as provided herein. 
(b)  Regulations. All existing and future wireless communications service providers shall perform the testing required by this ordinance. Procedures shall include supplying necessary testing equipment, which has current certification from an independent testing laboratory, and shall include operating the equipment. 
(c)  Revocation of permit. Any existing or future wireless communications facility which does not comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations shall be removed at the owner's expense upon failure to bring the facility into compliance after thirty (30) days' written notice. 
(d)  Costs. All testing and analysis of test results shall be at the cost of the wireless communications service provider conducting the test. 
The Village reserves the right to conduct random radio frequency emissions inspections. The cost for such random inspections shall be paid from the wireless communications annual registration fees, unless an owner and/or operator is found to be in non-compliance with FCC RF emissions standards, whereupon the non-compliant owner and/or operator shall reimburse the Village in full for the cost of the inspection. 
xi.  Maintenance. All wireless communications facilities, wireless communications towers and other antenna support structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair, and, maintained in stealth condition if originally required. The same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person, and shall retain original characteristics. All maintenance or construction on a tower, wireless communications facility or antenna support structure shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. The Village shall notify the wireless communications service provider in writing regarding any specific maintenance required under this section. The wireless communications service provider shall make all necessary repairs within thirty (30) days of such notification. Failure to effect noticed repairs within thirty (30) days may result in revocation of permit and/or removal of tower, wireless communications facilities and antenna support structures. 
xii.  Review. The Village shall process all applications for wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities in a timely manner and in accordance with established procedures. The reason for the denial of any application filed in accordance with this provision shall be set forth in writing. 
xiii.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer may take appeals to the Village's Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board as an appeal of an administrative decision. A notice of appeal stating the grounds thereof shall be filed with the Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department. 
xiv.  Revocation. A material breach of any terms and conditions of permit issued for a wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility under this section, or other material violations of this section, may result in the revocation, by the Village of the right to operate, utilize or maintain the particular tower or wireless communications facility within the Village following written notification of the violation to the owner or operator, and after failure to cure or otherwise correct said violation within thirty (30) days. A violation of this Code shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to the Village's code enforcement procedures. Penalties for violation include fines of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation and removal of the tower of wireless communications facility at the owner's expense. 
xv.  Emergency. Village reserves the right to enter upon and disconnect, dismantle or otherwise remove any wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility should same become an immediate hazard to the safety of persons or property due to emergency circumstances, as determined by the Building Official or his designee, such as natural or manmade disasters or accidents, when the owner of any such facilities is not available to immediately remedy the hazard. The Village shall notify any said owner of any such action within twenty-four (24) hours. The owner and/or operator shall reimburse the Village for the costs incurred by the Village for action taken pursuant to this section of the ordinance. 
xvi.  Equipment on site. No mobile or immobile equipment or materials of any nature shall be stored or parked on the site of the wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility, unless used in direct support of a wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility or used for repairs to the wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility currently underway. 
xvii.  Inspections. The Village reserves the right upon reasonable notice to the owner/operator of a wireless communications tower or other antenna support structure, including utility poles and rooftops, to conduct inspections for the purpose of determining whether the tower or other support structure and/or related equipment building complies with the Standard Building Code and all other construction standards provided by local, state or federal law and to conduct radiation measurements to determine whether all antenna and transmitting equipment are operating within FCC requirements. 
xviii.  Security. 
(a)  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the wireless communications tower or any accessory structures, "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and shall be spaced no more than twenty (20) feet apart, or on each fence frontage. 
(b)  "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and shall be spaced no more than twenty (20) feet apart. 
(c)  The letters for the "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER" and "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be at least six (6) inches in height. The two warning signs may be combined into one (1) sign. The warning signs shall be installed at least 4.5 feet above the finished grade of the fence. 
xix.  Advances in Technology. All wireless communications service providers shall use and apply any readily available advances in technology that lessen the negative aesthetic effects of wireless communications facilities to the residential communities with the Village. Every five (5) years, the Village may review existing structures and compare visual impact with available technologies in the industry for the purpose of removal, relocation or alteration of these structures in keeping with the general intent of this ordinance. Such removal, relocation or alteration may be required by the Village pursuant to its zoning power and authority. 
i.  Required Land Use Plan Designation Zoning. The Village hereby adopts a Wireless Communications Tower Zoning Map (designated as Table 6.4-5) which shall generally conform to the requirements in this section. In the event of a conflict between the Wireless Communications Tower Zoning Map and this Ordinance, the Ordinance shall control. The following applies to all towers, including re-located or expanded and/or altered existing towers, but not to existing towers: 
i.  Wireless communications towers less than two hundred (200) feet in height shall be a Special Permit Use in the Industrial (IL) Land Use Plan Designation/Zoning District and on publicly owned parcels greater than one hundred (100) acres in size (Waste Water Treatment Plant), or as a replacement for an existing tower at the Water Treatment Plant. 
ii.  Wireless communications towers one hundred (100) feet in height or less located in the FPL power transmission corridors shall be a Special Permit Use. Towers greater than one hundred (100) feet in height within a FPL corridor shall require a Conditional Use A. No towers shall be permitted within the FPL corridor where such corridor abuts residential property of one (1) acres or less. 
iii.  Wireless communications towers less than two hundred (200) feet in height in the Residential A Land Use Plan Designation/Agricultural Residential Zoning District shall require a Conditional Use A. 
iv.  Wireless communications stealth towers sixty (60) feet or less in height in the Commercial, Commercial Recreation, Park and the Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities Land Use Plan Designations/Zoning Districts shall be a Special Permit Use. 
v.  Wireless communications towers sixty-one (61) to one hundred twenty (120) feet in height and non-stealth towers of any height in the Commercial, Commercial Recreation, Park and the Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities Land Use Plan Designations/Zoning Districts on parcels ten (10) acres or greater shall require a Conditional Use A. Towers greater than sixty-one (61) feet tall shall not be allowed on parcels less than ten (10) acres in size. 
vi.  Wireless communications towers shall not be a permitted use on School Sites Land Use Plan Designations/Zoning Districts. 
vii.  Wireless communications towers shall not be a permitted use in the Residential Land Use Plan Designations/Zoning Districts except as otherwise noted herein. 
viii.  Utility pole-mounted facilities shall be permitted as accessory uses in all Land Use Plan Designations/Zoning Districts and shall be a Special Permit Use. 
j.  Village-Owned Property. On property owned by the Village, the Village shall authorize the application and use of Village property for the location of wireless communications towers and/or wireless communications facilities after the applicant executes a lease agreement acceptable to the Village. The Village shall have no obligation whatsoever to execute such lease even if the applicant can meet the criteria set forth in this ordinance. 
k.  Construction of New Towers. 
i.  Application Process. 
(a)  The use of existing structures as antenna mounts shall be preferred to the construction of new ground-mounted facilities. To be eligible to construct a new tower within the Village limits, the applicant must establish to the satisfaction of the Village that applicant is unable to provide the service sought by the applicant from available sites, including co-locations within the Village and in neighboring jurisdictions; and the applicant must demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village that no other suitable existing tower or other support structure is available, including utility poles; and that no reasonable alternative technology exists that can accommodate the applicant's wireless communications facility due to one (1) or more of the following factors: 
(i.)  The structure provides insufficient height to allow the applicant's facility to function reasonably in parity with similar facilities; 
(ii.)  The structure provides insufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment; 
(iii.)  The structure provides insufficient space to allow the applicant's antenna to function effectively and reasonably in parity with similar equipment; 
(iv.)  Use of the structure would result in electromagnetic interference that cannot reasonably be corrected; 
(v.)  The structure is unavailable for lease under a reasonable leasing agreement. 
(vi.)  Use of the structure would create a greater visual impact on surrounding land uses than the proposed alternative or otherwise would be less in keeping with the goals, objectives, intent, preferences, purposes, criteria or standards of this ordinance and land development regulations; 
(vii.)  Other limiting factors. 
(b)  The applicant must submit any technical information requested by the Village or its designated engineering consultant as part of the review and evaluation process. 
(c)  An application to develop a tower must be in writing and contain at a minimum the following information: 
(i.)  The information required by this ordinance, along with the fee established for a conditional use as specified by the Village of Wellington Land Development Regulations; 
(ii.)  The inventory of existing sites required in Section h(4) of this ordinance; 
(iii.)  Copies of the licenses or franchises required to be filed with the Village pursuant to Section h(7); 
(iv.)  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, topography, and any other information deemed by the Village to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance; 
(v.)  A certification that the applicant will comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the provisions of this ordinance; 
(vi.)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or other antenna support structures within an area equal to one hundred percent (100) of the search ring for the wireless communications facility proposed by the applicant; 
(vii.)  Written documentation in the form of an affidavit that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful efforts for permission to install or collocate the applicant's wireless communications facilities on all existing towers or other antenna support structures located within an area equal to one hundred percent (100) of the search ring for the proposed site of the wireless communications facility; 
(viii.)  Written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower or wireless communications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another tower or an antenna support structure located within the Village and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the proposed wireless communications service, together with a composite propagation study which illustrates graphically existing and proposed coverage in industry-accepted median received signal ranges. 
(ix.)  A written statement from an engineer that the construction and placement of the tower will comply with FCC radiation standards for interference and safety and will produce no significant signal interference with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. 
ii.  Conditions of approval for wireless communications towers. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
(i.)  Wireless communications towers less than two hundred (200) feet in height in the Light Industrial (IL) Land Use Plan Designation/Zoning District and on publicly owned parcels greater than one hundred (100) acres in size (Waste Water Treatment Plant) shall comply with the setbacks of the Zoning District. 
(ii.)  Wireless communications towers one hundred (100) feet in height or less located in the FPL power transmission corridors shall be separated no less than one hundred (100) feet from any residentially zoned property. Towers one hundred (100) feet in height or greater within a Florida Power & Light corridor shall be separated from residentially zoned parcels one foot horizontally for each one foot vertical. 
(iii.)  Wireless communications towers less than two hundred (200) feet in height in the Residential A Land Use Designation/Agricultural Residential Zoning District shall be setback two (2) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertical. 
(iv.)  Wireless communications towers sixty (60) feet or less in height in the Commercial, Commercial Recreation, Park and the Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities Land use Designations/Zoning Districts shall be separated from any residentially zoned property by four hundred (400) feet or shall otherwise meet setback requirements of the zone. 
(v.)  Wireless communications towers sixty-one (61) feet in height or greater in the Commercial, Commercial Recreation, Park and the Institutional/ Public Facilities/Utilities Land Use Designations/Zoning Districts shall be separated from any residentially zoned property by six hundred (600) feet or shall otherwise meet the setback requirements of the zone. 
(vi.)  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
(vii.)  Separation requirements for wireless communications towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of any surrounding residential property. 
(b)  Structural requirements. All tower designs must be certified by an engineer specializing in tower structures and licensed to practice in the State of Florida. The certification must state the tower design is structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the Village's Building Code, the Standard Building Code, and any other standards outlined in this Ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Height. Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this article shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad and any other wireless communications facilities attached thereto. However, any lightening rod located at the top of a tower is excluded from such height measurement. Tower height shall be measured from grade as defined in this chapter. This section shall not apply if the facility is incorporated into a steeple, bell tower, or similar architectural feature of a church, school or institution, subject to height limitations of the County Airport Zoning Regulations. The height requirements may not apply if the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Village that the applicant is required by Federal Communications Commission rules to operate the antenna at a specific height. The maximum height shall be as follows: 
(i.)  Two hundred (200) feet in height in the Light Industrial (IL) Land Use Plan Designation/Zoning District and on publicly owned parcels greater than one hundred (100) acres in size (Waste Water Treatment Plan) or as a replacement tower at the Water Treatment Plant. 
(ii.)  120 feet in height in the FPL power transmission corridors. 
(iii.)  200 feet in height in the Residential A Land Use Plan Designation/ Agricultural Residential Zoning District. 
(iv.)  One hundred twenty (120) feet in height in the Commercial, Commercial Recreation and the Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities Land Use Plan Designations/ Zoning Districts (except as otherwise noted). 
(v.)  Towers shall not be a permitted use in residential zoning districts. 
(d)  Requirements for separation between towers. 
(i.)  Except for roof-mounted facilities, the minimum tower separation distance shall be calculated and applied irrespective of Village and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
(ii.)  Measurement of tower separation distances for the purpose of compliance with this article shall be measured from the base of a tower to the base of the existing or approved tower. 
(iii.)  Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing towers or towers previously approved but not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to this article: 
MINIMUM TOWER SEPARATION DISTANCE 
(No separation on IL zoned sites) 
Height of 
Existing Tower Height of 
Proposed Tower Minimum 
Separation Less than 50' Less than 50' 100' 50'-100' 200' 101'-150' 400' 151'-200' 800' 50'-100' Less than 50' 100' 50'-100' 400' 101'-150' 600' 151'-200' 800' 101'-150' Less than 50' 100' 50'-100' 400' 101'-150' 600' 151'-200' 800' 151'-200' Less than 50' 100' 50'-100' 600' 101'-150' 800' 151'-200' 1000'  
* For the purpose of this subsection, the separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. 
(e)  Co-Location. 
(i.)  Any owner of a wireless communications tower shall permit other wireless communications providers to install or co-located antennae or facilities on such towers, if available space and structural capacity exists; said co-location shall be subject to mutually agreeable terms and conditions negotiated between the parties. Co-location requirements shall not apply to towers erected within the FPL corridor as Stealth Towers designed to look like power transmission poles or tower structures. All new towers shall be constructed with excess capacity for co-location as follows: 
Height (in feet) Number of users to support Less than 80 One user 80 to 120 Two users 120 or greater Three users  
(ii.)  Standards for Shared Use/Co-Location. This section is designed to foster shared use of wireless communications towers and their accessory support facilities. 
•  Co-Location. All wireless communications towers, except where otherwise provided herein, shall be constructed to accommodate a minimum of two (2) providers. 
•  Site area. The site or leased footprint shall contain sufficient square footage to accommodate the equipment/mechanical facilities for all proposed providers based upon the structural capacity of the tower. 
•  Setbacks. If it is determined that the proposed tower cannot meet setback requirements due to increases in tower height to accommodate the collection of at least one additional service provider, minimum setback requirements may be reduced by a maximum of fifteen (15) feet, except from residential property lines. 
•  Review procedures. Prior to submittal of an application for approval of a proposed tower for Conditional Use, development order amendment, original DRC, or building permit review, all applicants for wireless communications towers shall comply with the procedures indicated below. An application for the appropriate review process must be submitted within one (1) year of the notice mailing date required by section e(ii)(3)(b). 
•  List. The Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department may add known wireless communications tower users to this list. This list shall remain valid for one calendar year. 
•  Notification. All wireless communications tower applicants shall provide notice by certified mail to all users on the list. The following information shall be included in the notice: description of the proposed tower; general location; longitude and latitude; general rate structure for leasing space, which shall be based on reasonable local charges; proposed height; a phone number to locate the applicant or agent for the wireless communications tower; and a shared use application form. 
•  A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department. The notices shall invite potential wireless communications tower users to apply for space on the proposed tower. 
•  Shared Use Application. Potential wireless communications tower users shall respond to the notice within twenty (20) days of receipt of certified mailing. Response shall be submitted utilizing a shared use of application form. A completed shared use application form shall be sent to the owner of the proposed wireless communications tower or authorized agent. The tower applicant shall not be responsible for a lack of response or responses received after the twenty-day period. The Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department shall provide the shared use application form. 
•  Feasibility. The feasibility of each shared use request shall be evaluated by the applicant. The evaluation shall document the feasibility of shared use between the proposed wireless communications tower owner and a potential lessee or sharer. Factors to be considered when evaluating the feasibility of shared use include but are not limited to: structural capacity, radio frequency (RF) interference, geographic service area requirements, mechanical or electrical incompatibilities, inability or ability to locate equipment on approved and unbuilt wireless communications towers, cost (if fees and costs for sharing would exceed the cost of the new communication tower amortized over a twenty-five-year period), FCC limitations that would preclude shared use, and other applicable code requirements. 
•  Rejection or dispute. If the applicant rejects one or more request(s) for shared use and if potential tower lessees dispute the rejection(s) for shared use, the following procedure shall occur within ten (10) working days after the shared use response deadline. 
•  Submittal. Applicant shall submit two (2) copies of the following to the Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department: a brief evaluation of each rejected response; all design data for the proposed wireless communications tower; and, an explanation indicating the structural improvements necessary to facilitate the requests that are rejected due to structural limitations, paid for by the tower space lessee. 
•  Consultant. The Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department shall forward copies of all applications for share use and the applicant's evaluation of each rejected request to a communications consultant. The consultant shall be selected by and retained at the discretion of the Village and paid by the applicant who is refusing to allow co-location from an interested service provider. 
•  Evaluation. Within ten (10) working days of receiving the shared use responses that were rejected by the applicant and disputed by the potential tower space issues, the consultant shall review and prepare an evaluation. Two (2) copies of the consultant's evaluations shall be sent to the Village. One (1) copy of the evaluation shall be made an official part of the wireless communications tower application and one copy of the evaluation shall be forwarded to the applicant by the Village Planning, Zoning & Building Department The consultant's report shall be advisory, and made part of the staff report, and considered in reviewing the wireless communications tower application. 
•  Acceptance with no dispute. If the applicant did not reject any requests for shared use or if rejected requests for tower space are not disputed by any potential tower lessee(s), consultant review is not necessary. 
(f)  Landscaping: minimum requirements. Wireless communications facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from surrounding property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. Existing mature growth, not including exotics, and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. All areas disturbed during project construction shall be replanted with vegetation. The owner of the tower is responsible for all landscaping obligations and costs. 
(g)  Tower design and type. 
(i.)  All wireless communications towers shall be of the monopole or stealth type. Self-supporting or guyed lattice towers shall only be permitted as replacement of like facilities. 
(ii.)  Utility pole-mounted facilities or extensions on utility poles to accommodate the mounting of wireless communications antennas shall be of the monopole type. 
(iii.)  Antennas shall be of the uni-cell variety whenever feasible or mounted internal to the tower structure. 
(iv.)  Stealth or camouflaged design shall be required in all Commercial, Commercial Recreation, Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities Land Use Designations or zoned areas. 
(h)  The development of a tower upon any parcel of land within the Village shall be subject to the following additional restrictions. 
(i.)  All new monopole towers of eighty (80) feet in height shall be designed and built to accommodate at least two (2) wireless communications providers. 
(ii.)  All existing lattice towers that are replaced or modified shall be designed and built to accommodate at least three wireless communications providers. 
(i)  Visual impact standards. To assess the compatibility with and impact of a proposed wireless communications tower site on adjacent properties, an applicant seeking to construct a wireless communications tower may be required to submit a visual impact analysis. The requirements of this subsection shall be required for any application to construct a tower greater than sixty (60) feet in height. The applicant may request a review of a proposed wireless communications tower location, prior to submission of an application to determine whether or not a visual impact analysis will be required. The applicant shall be advised of the requirement to submit a visual impact analysis by the Planning & Zoning Director within ten (10) working days following the application submission deadline date. 
(i.)  A visual impact analysis may be required under the following circumstances for all sites requiring a Conditional Use A approval. 
(ii.)  The applicant shall utilize digital imaging technology to prepare the analysis in a manner acceptable to the Village and provide the following information: 
•  The location of the proposed wireless communications tower illustrated upon an aerial photograph at a scale of not more than one inch equals three hundred (300) feet (1" = 300'). All adjacent zoning districts within a three thousand-foot radius from all property lines of the proposed wireless communications tower site shall be indicated. 
•  A line of site analysis which shall include the following information: 
•  certification that the proposed wireless communications tower meets or exceeds standards contained in the subsection; 
•  identification of all significant existing natural and manmade features adjacent to proposed wireless communications tower site and identification of features which may provide buffering and screening for adjacent properties and public rights-of-way; 
•  identification of at least three (3) specific points within a two thousand-foot radius of the proposed wireless communications tower location, subject to approval by the Planning & Zoning Director, for conducting the visual impact analysis; 
•  copies of all calculation and a description of the methodology used in selecting the points of view and collection of data submitted in the analysis; 
•  graphic illustration of the visual impact of the proposed wireless communications tower, at a scale that does not exceed five (5) degrees of horizontal distance, presented from the specific identified points; 
•  identification of all screening and buffering materials under the permanent control of the applicant (only screening and buffering materials located within the boundaries of the proposed site shall be considered for the visual impact analysis); 
•  identification of all screening and buffering materials that are not under the permanent control of the applicant but are considered of a permanent nature due to ownership or use patterns, such as a public park, vegetation preserve, required development buffer, etc.; 
•  screening and buffering materials considered in the visual impact analysis shall not be removed by future development on this site; 
•  screening and buffering materials considered in the visual impact analysis shall be replaced if they die; 
•  prohibited plant species, pursuant to Section 7.3 of the Land Development Regulations, shall not be considered in the visual impact analysis; 
•  any additional information that may be required by the Planning & Zoning Director to fully review and evaluate the potential impact of the proposed wireless communications tower. 
(j)  Calculation Of Time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this Ordinance or any franchise, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of duration time. 
(k)  No Recourse Against The Village. Every permit shall provide that, without limiting such immunities as the Village or other persons may have under applicable law, a permittee shall have not monetary recourse whatsoever against the Village or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this Ordinance or because of the enforcement of this Ordinance or the Village's exercise of its authority pursuant to this Ordinance, a permit, or other applicable law, unless the same shall be caused by criminal acts or by willful or gross negligence. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign immunity in accordance with Florida Statute 768.28. 
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS 
Land Use Plan 
Category Zoning Setback Or 
Separation Separation 
Tower to Tower Maximum 
Height Stealth Or 
Camouflaged Industrial and Public Parcels 100 acres + 200' <Special 
Permit Comply with Zoning District setbacks None 200' No FPL Corridors >200' wide which do not abut residentially zoned 
property with 1 acre 
lots or smaller 100' <Special 
Permit 
100'> Conditional Use A 100' or 
>100', one foot 
horizontally for 
each one vertical foot 600' maximum 120' Yes Residential A Conditional Use A 2' horizontal, 
1' vertical 1,000' maximum 200' No Commercial/ 
Commercial Recreation/ 
Park/ 
Institutional/ 
Public Facilities/ 
Utilities 
>10 acres 60'< Special Permit Use 
61'> Conditional Use A 60'<, 400' from 
residential 
61'>, 600 from 
residential, or meet 
setback of the zone 600' maximum 120' Yes Non-residential rooftop Special Permit Setbacks of the 
District N/A 25' Yes Residential B - H Not allowed N/A N/A N/A N/A Utility Pole Mounted Permitted as a 
Special Permit 
Use N/A N/A Height of Pole Yes  
28.  Community vegetable garden means a plot of land used as a vegetable garden intended to be cultivated and harvested by a group of residents of the surrounding area. The community vegetable garden shall be the primary use of the land. A community vegetable garden shall comply the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Maximum lot size. The maximum size of the community vegetable garden shall not exceed two (2) acres. 
b.  Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be limited to a four hundred (400) square feet. 
c.  Setbacks. The Community Vegetable Garden and accessory activities shall maintain a setback of five (5) feet from all property lines adjacent to residentially zoned land. Accessory structures shall meet the setbacks of the district. 
d.  Use. Retail or wholesale sale of vegetables or other agricultural products is prohibited. 
e.  Equipment. Use of heavy equipment shall be prohibited. 
f.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of Natural Resource Protection Regulations, Section 7.4 of this Code. A setback of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetlands. 
g.  Spraying. Aerial application of fertilizer or pesticides shall be prohibited. 
h.  Parking. A minimum of four (4) parking Spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section 7.2, Off-street Parking Standards, of this Code. Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 
i.  Loading. All loading and unloading activities shall be restricted the site and shall not encroach into any setbacks. 
j.  Storage. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited. Storage of all accessory equipment or products shall be contained within the accessory structure. 
29.  Composting facility means a facility that is designed and used for transforming, through biological decomposition, food, yard wastes and other organic material into soil or fertilizer. This use does not include backyard composting bins serving individual families. A composting facility use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: If a composting facility includes chipping or grinding, adherence to chipping and mulching standards in this section is required. 
a.  Minimum lot size. A composting facility use shall be located on a lot with a minimum area of five (5) acres. 
b.  Setback from residential districts and uses. Outdoor material storage piles shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. 
c.  Health and Environmental Regulations. A composting facility shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the FDER (including Chapter 17-701, F.A.C), the PBCPHU, and the Solid Waste Authority. 
d.  Odor and dust reduction. A composting facility use shall be designed and operated to restrict objectionable odor and dust from entering adjacent properties. 
e.  Access. An access road for collection vehicles shall be provided to the entrance of the facility. Acceptable access does not include local streets. Access shall be restricted to specific entrances with gates that can be locked and that carry official notice that only authorized persons are allowed on the site. 
f.  Storage. On-site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and pile height of storage material shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. 
g.  Landscaping and buffering. The operation is subject to the compatibility requirements of Section 7.3. The standards shall be waived for any portion of the required landscape buffer that is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. 
h.  Supplemental application requirements. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
i.  Site plan. A site plan illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings and storage piles; 
ii.  Hours of operation. A statement specifying the hours of operation; 
iii.  Waste. An explanation of the quantity of waste to be received expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day; and 
iv.  Letter of approval. The applicant shall provide a notarized letter of approval from the property owner verifying consent to use the property for composting. 
i.  Accessory to nursery. Composting accessory to a wholesale greenhouse or nursery is permitted subject to Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan review pursuant to Section 5.6 (Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan) and the following supplementary standards: 
i.  Trash. The facility shall receive no more than twenty (20) tons or one hundred twenty (120) cubic yards of yard trash or chipping material per day. The yard trash is composed of vegetative matter resulting from landscape maintenance or landscape clearing operations and includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, grass clippings, palm fronds, trees and tree stumps. 
ii.  Letter of approval. A notarized letter of approval is provided from the property owner verifying consent to use the property for composting. 
iii.  Site plan. A site plan shall be provided illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings and storage piles. 
iv.  Odor/dust control. A composting facility use shall be designed and operated to restrict objectionable odor and dust from entering adjacent properties. 
v.  Storage. On-site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and pile height of storage material shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. Outdoor material storage piles shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district. 
30.  Congregate living facility means a residential land use consisting of any building or section thereof, residence, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or any other residential structure, whether or not operated for profit, which undertakes, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, care, housing, food service, and one (1) or more personal services for persons not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. In addition, the term shall include rehabilitative home care development service housing, senior housing and adult congregate living facilities for the physically impaired, mentally retarded, developmentally disabled persons, or persons sixty (60) years of age or older. The term shall not mean "nursing home," "intermediate care facility," or similar facility which provides medical care and support services to persons not capable of independent living. For the purposes of Art. 10, Impact Fees the term shall include adult foster home, nursing home, adult congregate living facility, and adult day care center, as defined by Chapter 400, Florida Statutes. A congregate living facility use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all congregate living facilities within Wellington and to the requirements of Article 5 and 6. These standards shall prevail over less restrictive standards applicable to such facilities imposed by the Zoning Code or otherwise by law. All CLFs for residents other than housing for children, aged persons, physically disabled persons, developmentally disabled persons, as defined in Section 393.0631(b), Florida Statutes, non-dangerously mentally ill persons, as defined in Section 394.455(3), Florida Statutes, safe house shelters, or maternity homes excluding birthing centers and clinics shall be subject to the requirements of Article 5 and 6. Except as otherwise provided, all CLF's, Type 2, 3 and 4, requires a conditional use approval by Council. 
b.  Permissible occupancy. 
i.  Type 1. The maximum occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 1 shall be no more than six (6) residents, excluding staff. 
ii.  Type 2. The maximum occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 2: 
(a)  Type 2 (A). Shall be more than six (6) but no more than fourteen (14) residents, excluding staff. 
(b)  Type 2 (B). Shall be more than fourteen (14) but no more than twenty- one (21) residents, excluding staff. A congregate living facility, Type 2 (B), shall be only for senior housing subject to a finding of compatibility with the surrounding residential neighborhood by Wellington Council, whose determination shall be based, in addition to the criteria contained in Section 5.4.5, Class "A" Conditional Use, on this ordinance and the following factors: 
1.  Compliance with the minimum essential facilities regulations contained in the Florida Building Code, 2010 Edition, as amended, Chapter 4, Special Detailed Requirements Based on Use and Occupancy, as determined by the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) through licensing and inspections; and 
2.  Compliance with the following minimum square footage standards: 
Space Minimum Standards Single Occupancy Room 90 square feet Double Occupancy Room 130 square feet Bathroom 1 full bathroom per 3 persons Common Area (Interior) 50 square feet per resident  
3.  Minimum staff standards: 
(i)  Four (4) staff (as required by ACHA for residents care) on duty 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(ii)  Two (2) staff (as required by ACHA for residents care) on duty 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
4.  One designated single occupancy room shall be available for residents requiring short term additional care. 
5.  Conformance of the residential structure's exterior to the architecture, massing, height and style of surrounding residences. 
iii.  Type 3. The maximum occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 3 shall be determined by multiplying the maximum number of dwelling units that are permitted on the land by the density allowed by the Comprehensive Land Use Plan category or, in the case of a nonresidential district, by the alternative density specified in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, by two point eight seven (2.87), which represents the average household size of all occupied dwelling units in The Wellington per the 2010 U.S. Census, as amended. Maximum permitted occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 3, located in a Planned Development district shall be governed by the applicable Comprehensive Land Use Plan category and the gross density of the district, and shall be specified on the approved development order for the Planned Development. 
iv.  Type 4. The maximum occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 4 shall be determined by multiplying the maximum number of dwelling units that are permitted on the land by the density allowed by the Comprehensive Land Use Plan category or, in the case of a nonresidential district, by the alternative density specified in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, by two point eight seven (2.87), which represents the average household size of all occupied dwelling units in The Wellington per the 2010 U.S. Census, as amended. Maximum permitted occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 4, located in a Planned Development district shall be governed by the applicable Comprehensive Land Use Plan category and the gross density of the district, and shall be specified on the approved development order for the Planned Development. 
TABLE 6.4-5 
Maximum Permissible Occupancy in Type 3 Congregate Living Facilities 
Maximum Occupancy (Residents per Acre) Land Use Plan 
Category 
(Residential) Zoning District In a Standard 
Zoning District In a Planned 
Development RR10 AR PROHIBITED .24 RR20 AR PROHIBITED .12  
For the purpose of this section, the required minimum acreage of a Planned Development in Table 6.8-4 shall be reduced by fifty percent (50). 
v.  Occupancy bonus through Planned Development. 
(a)  General. To the extent that the maximum occupancy for a congregate living facility, Type 3 and 4, would be higher in a Planned Development district than in a standard residential district, the difference shall be considered an occupancy bonus. Such an occupancy bonus shall be granted with approval of the Planned Development District only according to the following standards: 
(i.)  Increase. An increase in the maximum permitted occupancy of a congregate living facility, Type 3 and 4, shall be permitted if at least two of the following circumstances exist. 
Commercial use. The land has been designated for commercial use in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, or is in an approved commercial pod in a Planned Development district. 
Density. The land is designated for MR5 density or greater in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan; and 
Consistency. The proposed congregate living facility, Type 3 and 4, is consistent with the intent of this section, this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(ii.)  Density. A twenty-five (25) percent increase in the density of a congregate living facility, Type 4, shall be permitted if at least two (2) or more of the following circumstances exists: 
Provide a variety of care for residents, such as Independent Living, Assisted Living, Alzheimer's Care, or Early Dementia Care. 
Within one (1) mile of: Hospital or Medical Center. 
Within three (3) miles of: Full service professional fire-rescue station. 
Within one (1) mile of: Retail Sales, general; or a regional mall; 
Within one (1) mile of a park, public. 
Offers internal retail; office space; or learning areas for daily activities or lessons on life and social skills. 
Offers internal recreation facilities. 
(iii.)  Occupancy bonus. An occupancy bonus shall not be considered an entitlement. No bonus shall be granted except as an express request in an application for a Planned Development District and may be declined or reduced if it is determined that additional occupancy is not consistent with the general character of surrounding development, or if the effects of additional occupancy have not been adequately addressed through appropriate site design. 
(b)  No double counting density in planned developments. The gross area of a pod dedicated to a congregate living facility on a Planned Development District Plan shall be deducted from the gross area of the planned development for the purpose of calculating the maximum density of conventional residential development. 
c.  Location. For the purposes of the required separation, measurements shall be made from structure to structure, except where the separation required is between a structure and a district boundary, in which case, the separation is measured from structure to district boundary. 
i.  A congregate living facility, Type 1, 2(A), 3 and 4, shall not be located within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of another congregate living facility; and 
ii.  A congregate living facility, Type 1 shall be located wherever a single-family dwelling unit is a permitted use. 
iii.  Location of Type 2, 3 and 4. 
(a)  Districts. 
1.  Type 2(A) shall be permitted in the RM and RH districts as a permitted use, provided that it is not located within a radius of twelve hundred (1,200) feet of another congregate living facility, Type 2 and five hundred (500) feet from a single-family residential district, unless approved as a conditional/requested use by Council. 
2.  Type 2(B) shall be: 
a.  Prohibited in single-family residential districts; 
b.  Prohibited within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of a single-family residential district unless approved by Council; 
c.  Prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of a Type 1, 2(A), 3, or 4 congregate living facility; and 
d.  There shall be no more than four (4) Type 2(B) congregate living facilities within a 1/2 mile radius. 
(b)  Access. 
1.  Type 2(B), shall be located within a quarter (1/4) road mile of a collector or arterial roadway to ensure minimal access is required for emergency vehicles. 
2.  Type 3 and 4 shall have primary access to a collector or arterial roadway, provided that a Type 3 and Type 4 facility having twenty-five (25) residents or less may be located on a local street. 
(c)  Location. 
1.  Types 2(A) and 3, shall be located within five (5) road miles of a full service professional fire-rescue station. 
2.  Type 2(B), shall be located within one and one-half (1.5) road miles of a full service professional fire-rescue station and three (3) road miles of a full service medical Hospital to reduce the time required for emergency response. 
3.  Type 4, shall be located within three (3) miles of a full service professional fire-rescue station. 
d.  Water and sewer facilities. Potable water supply and sewage disposal systems shall be provided for congregate living facility, Types 2, 3 and Type 4, in accordance with the requirements of the PBCPHU. 
e.  Design and compatibility. Each congregate living facility, Type 2, 3 and 4, shall: 
i.  Be physically designed to conform to and be compatible with the general architectural character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be developed; and 
ii.  Comply with all regulations regarding handicapped access pursuant to State law. 
iii.  Type 2 (B) shall: 
(a)  Utilize reduced parking to restrict the number of vehicles parked at the senior housing residence thereby maintaining a residential appearance. The parking of resident's personal vehicles shall be prohibited on-site at the facility. Parking reduction methods shall include the use of shuttle vans, staggering of providers/guest visitations, carpooling of employees or other effective means of limiting the number of vehicles parked at the residence. On-site parking spaces shall be reviewed pursuant to Article 7, this ordinance and the minimum requirements below. 
Minimum On-Site Parking User Parking Required Resident Prohibited Employee (Per Shift) 1 space per employee Visitor/Guest 1 space per 7 residents  
(b)  A six (6) foot opaque fence shall be provided to ensure the security and privacy of the residents. The fence shall not be located within the required front setback. 
f.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area standards of the district in which the congregate living facility is located shall apply, except that in no case shall the lot size be less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a congregate living facility Type 2 (A) or less than eleven thousand five hundred (11,500) square feet for a congregate living facility Type 2 (B) or less than one (1) acre for a congregate living facility, Types 3 and 4. 
g.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a congregate living facility shall comply with the regulations of the district in which it is located, and in addition shall not exceed seven (7) stories in the RM and RH districts. 
h.  Reserve parking area. For congregate living facility, Types 2 and 3, adequate provision shall be made to reserve sufficient lot area to meet future parking standards if the facility is converted to other uses. Protected vegetation in this reserve parking area shall be maintained as provided in Section 7.5 (Tree Protection). The boundaries of the reserve parking area shall be identified. 
i.  Drop-off area. Congregate living facilities, Types 2, 3 and 4, shall establish a safe drop-off area for group transportation, such as vans or similar vehicles. 
j.  Cooking facilities. Each congregate living facility shall provide and continuously maintain central facilities for daily food dispensing and consumption. Food preparation shall be prohibited in sleeping areas or in individual quarters in congregate living facilities, Types 1 and 2. Individual kitchen facilities may be provided in the living quarters of a congregate living facility, Types 3 and 4. 
k.  Maximum occupancy of sleeping areas. The maximum number of persons in each sleeping area shall be determined by applying the space standards of the State of Florida Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA), as amended. 
l.  Signage. 
i.  On premises. Signage for congregate living facilities, Types 1 and 2, shall be limited to one (1) on-premises sign no more than one (1) square foot in size. No other on premises or off premises sign shall be permitted on site. 
ii.  Identification sign. Signage for congregate living facilities; 
(a)  Type 3, shall be limited to one (1) double or single-face on premises identification sign no more than thirty-two (32) square feet in size for each face. 
(b)  Type 4, shall be limited to one (1) double or single-face on premises identification sign no more than thirty-two (32) square feet in size for each face, at each entrance. 
(c)  Type 4, shall be limited to one (1) corner sign, if located at an intersection of a collector or arterial roadway(s), no more than sixty (60) square feet in size for each face. 
iii.  Standards. A congregate living facility, Types 3 and 4, shall have entrance gates and informational signage that meets the standards of Section 7.14 (Signage). 
m.  Accessory and associated land uses. 
i.  Types 1 and 2 (A). Congregate living facilities, Types 1 and 2 (A), may have those accessory uses customarily incidental to a single-family dwelling unit and permitted home occupations. 
ii.  Types 2 (B), 3 and 4. A congregate living facility, Types 2 (B), 3 and 4, may have: 
(a)  Accessory use. Those accessory uses customarily accessory to a multi family dwelling unit; and 
(b)  Non-commercial uses. Those noncommercial uses customarily incidental to a congregate living facility, such as a common dining room, a central kitchen, a nursing station, a medical examining room, a chapel, a library, and offices necessary to manage the congregate living facility. 
n.  Accessory commercial land uses. A limited amount of commercial uses may be developed as permitted accessory uses in a congregate living facility, Type 3 and 4. Such uses shall be limited to retail and congregate living personal service uses designed to serve exclusively the residents of the facility, such as a barber or beauty shop, small convenience retail sales and banking services. No more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the facility shall be dedicated to such commercial uses. There shall be no exterior signage or other indication of the existence of these commercial uses that may attract nonresidents. 
o.  Conversion to conventional dwelling units. 
i.  Structure. Prior to conversion to conventional dwelling units, a structure designed to accommodate a congregate living facility shall, if necessary, be structurally modified to comply with the standards of this Code. 
ii.  Restrictions. No development orders for a Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan for a congregate living facility, Type 2, 3 and 4, shall be approved until a declaration of restrictions in a form approved by Wellington Attorney has been recorded to run with the land records maintained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Palm Beach County. This declaration of restrictions shall expressly provide that: (1) the conversion of the premises to conventional dwelling units is prohibited except in compliance with this section; and (2) if permitted, conversion will not result in an increase in the number of "quarters" and residents permitted on the site unless the converted development has obtained a development order for a Planned Development District. If that development order has not been granted, the converted development will have to comply with the density permitted in the district; and (3) the total number of permitted residents may be determined by referring to the approved master or site development plan on file with the Planning and Zoning Division. 
p.  Conversion to other uses. Congregate living facilities that are converted to other uses, including other residential uses, shall comply with all standards in effect at the time of application for building permits for the new use. 
31.  Contractor's storage yard means storage and accessory office performed by building trade and service contractors on lots other than construction sites. A contractor's storage yard use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Office permitted. An accessory office shall be permitted. 
b.  Screening. When located in the IL district, outdoor activities and storage shall be completely screened from view from adjacent property and public streets. All storage shall be effectively screened from view by on-site walls, fences or buildings. Such screening shall be designed and installed to ensure that no part of a storage area can be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent lots. In no case shall the height of materials, stored in outdoor areas exceed twenty (20) feet or the height of the principal building on the lot, whichever is greater. For a storage-yard contiguous to property in a residential district, and opaque fence/wall a minimum eight (8) feet in height shall be placed along the inside border or the required landscape strip The purpose of the fence/wall inside the landscaped strip is to protect the landscape strip from the intensive activity of the storage yard and to supplement the landscape strip as a buffer. 
c.  Activities. No major repairs of vehicles or equipment, and no manufacturing or processing shall occur on the site. 
32.  Convenience store means an establishment, not exceeding three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of gross floor area, serving a limited market area and engaged in the retail sale or rental, from the premises, of food, beverages, and other frequently or recurrently needed items for household use, excluding gasoline sales. A convenience store use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
33.  Convenience store with gas sales means an establishment, not exceeding three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of gross floor area, serving a limited market area and primarily engaged in the retail sale or rental, from the premises, of food, beverages, and other frequently or recurrently needed items for household use, including accessory gasoline sales. A convenience store with gas sales use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. A convenience store with gas sales use shall be subject to the Automotive service station location criteria of Section 6.4.4. 
b.  Parking. If a convenience store greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in gross floor area is associated with the service station, one-half (1/2) of the additional parking spaces shall be located adjacent to the store. 
c.  Handicapped parking. In all cases, required handicapped spaces shall be located adjacent to the store. 
34.  Day care center, limited or general. Day care center, general, means an establishment, licensed by the Department of Health, which provides daytime or nighttime care, protection for 21 or more children or adults for a period of less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis. 
a.  Day care center, limited, means an establishment, licensed by the Department of Health, which provides daytime care, protection and supervision for six to 20 children or three to 20 adults for a period of less, than 13, hours per day on a regular basis. Limited day care centers do not provide nighttime care. 
b.  Industrial land use category or land use zone. Child day care centers located in a development with a designation on the Comprehensive Plan of Industrial or within a Planned Development industrial land use zone shall be designed principally to serve employees on the same site or a contiguous site. No other types of day care center facilities shall be permitted in an industrial land use category or in a Planned Development industrial land use zone. 
c.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be at least 6,000 square feet or the minimum required by the district in which the day care center is located, whichever is greater. 
d.  Minimum floor area. 
i.  Child day care centers. For a child day care center of 40 children or less, the minimum usable floor area, exclusive of any area devoted to the kitchen, office, storage and toilet facilities, shall be 1,500 square feet. An additional 35 square feet of floor area shall be provided for each child in a child day care center that is proposed to accommodate more than 40 children. 
ii.  Adult day care centers. For an adult day care center of 20 persons or less, the minimum usable floor area, exclusive of any space devoted to the kitchen, office, storage, and toilet facilities shall be 1,500 square feet or more. An additional 75 square feet of floor area, or the amount required by the PBCPHU, shall be provided for each person in an adult day care center that is proposed to accommodate more than 20 persons. 
e.  Outdoor activity areas. 
i.  General. 
(a)  Location. An outdoor activity area shall be provided on the same lot as the day care center. It shall not be located in the required front yard or adjacent to any outdoor storage area of any existing adjacent use. 
(b)  Shade trees. A minimum of one, 12 feet tall native canopy tree shall be provided or preserved per 750 square feet of outdoor activity area provided. All trees required by this condition shall be within the interior of the outdoor activity area. 
(c)  Fencing. A six feet high fence or wall shall surround the outdoor activity area. Where the provisions of this subsection conflict with Section 6.6.A.2 (Fences, walls, hedges and utility poles), the provisions of this subsection shall prevail. 
(d)  Perimeter landscaping. Landscaping along the perimeter of the outdoor activity area shall include 14 feet tall native canopy trees placed 20 feet on center, and 24 inch high hedge or shrub material placed 24 inches on center. This required landscaping material shall be located on the exterior side of the fence. 
ii.  Child day care centers. 
(a)  Outdoor Activity Area. 
1.  Children-Older than two years of age. A minimum of 1,500 square feet of outdoor activity area or 75 square feet of outdoor activity area for each child (based on licensed capacity), whichever produces the larger area, shall be provided except as provided in Section 34.e.iii. The outdoor activity area shall include a shaded area. The Palm Beach County Child Care Facilities Board may approve a reduction in the size of this area where the operator utilizes split shifts for its use. Under no circumstances shall the outdoor activity area be reduced to less than the area required to accommodate one-third ( 1/3 ) of the area required under this general standard. 
2.  Infants-Two years of age and younger. Where a child day care center is limited solely to the care of infants (two years of age and younger), the outdoor activity area provided shall be a minimum of 45 square feet per child. The Palm Beach County Child Care Facilities Board may approve a reduction in the size of this area where the operator utilizes split shifts for its use. Under no circumstances shall the outdoor activity area be reduced to less than would be required to accommodate one-half (1/2) of the area required under this general standard. 
3.  Location of outdoor play equipment. Stationary outdoor play equipment with a permanent foundation shall be located 25 feet from any residentially zoned or used property line, and 10 feet from any other property line. If applicable, the location of stationary play equipment shall be depicted on the site plan. Outdoor play equipment shall not be located in any required landscape area or easements. 
iii.  Adult day care center. There shall be provided a minimum of 1,000 square feet of outdoor activity area or 30 square feet of outdoor activity area per person for an adult day care center, whichever produces the larger area. The Council may approve a waiver of the minimum outdoor activity area requirement as a part of a conditional use approval based upon applicant's demonstration of need and the recommendations of the DRC and PZAB. 
f.  Loading and access. 
i.  Drop-off stalls. Loading and access shall be developed pursuant to Section 7.2. A sufficient number of drop-off stalls located out of the main travel way shall be provided. Drop-off stalls shall be a minimum 12 feet wide by 20 feet in length. 
ii.  Sidewalk access. A four feet wide walkway adjacent to the drop-off spaces and connecting to the day care entrance shall be provided. 
35.  Day labor employment service means an establishment engaged in providing temporary day labor services for the construction or industrial trades. A day labor employment service use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  No loitering. No outside waiting or loitering shall be permitted on the site. 
36.  Dispatching office means an establishment principally involved in providing services off-site to households and businesses using land-based communication. Typical uses include janitorial services, pest control services, taxi limousine, and ambulance services. A dispatching office use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards:. 
37.  Educational or instructional services means an establishment, for profit or not, open to the public and offering regularly scheduled educational or instructional classes. Typical uses include barber or beauty schools, religious classes or youth group assembly associated with a church or other place of worship, test-taking training centers and licensing training centers. 
a.  Location. The use shall be located on a collector or local commercial street, or street of higher classification. 
b.  Parking. Due to the intense parking demands associated with such uses, a parking plan and study shall be submitted in conjunction with the establishment of such uses to demonstrate adequate parking and on-site traffic design exists or is being proposed to accommodate the parking needs of the instructional use. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space for each student plus one space for each employee; except for youth group assembly which shall require .25 spaces per youth in attendance plus one space for each employee. 
Off-peak hour assembly uses shall be encouraged so as to free up parking on-site that would otherwise be occupied by other tenants in the center. Parking on adjacent pods or parcels may be permitted subject to approval by the Planning, Zoning & Building Department Director of a shared-parking agreement executed by the owner of the properties pursuant to Section 7.2.3.H of the LDR. 
38.  Electrical Power facility means a principal use of property for an electrical generation, or transmission voltage switching station. An electrical power facility use shall comply with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  Location. The location of the proposed electrical power facility shall be within reasonable proximity of the area to be served by the facility. 
b.  Setbacks, buffers, screening. If deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility with surrounding uses, adequate setbacks, screening and buffering around the perimeter of the proposed electrical power facility use shall be provided at the time the facility is constructed or when surrounding development occurs. The standards shall be waived if any of the required landscape buffer is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. Setbacks, screening and buffering may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
i.  Setbacks. Structures and their accessory uses (excluding poles) shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
ii.  Screening. Screening around the perimeter of the property on which the facility is located, consisting of a hedge, earthen berm, or fence which will present a solid visual screen at least six (6) feet in height within one (1) year of installation, or otherwise as presented in a Landscape Betterment Plan. 
iii.  Compliance with Code and other regulations. The proposed electrical power facility shall comply with all other requirements of this Code and all other relevant state and federal laws. 
39.  Entertainment, indoor means an establishment offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge and wholly enclosed in a building, excluding fitness centers and gun clubs. Typical uses include bowling alleys, bingo parlors, movie theaters, pool halls, billiard parlors and video game arcades. An indoor entertainment use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
40.  Entertainment, outdoor means an establishment offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open, excluding golf courses and public parks. Typical uses of an athletic nature include archer ranges, athletic fields, batting cages, golf driving ranges, and tennis courts. Other uses include go-cart tracks, miniature golf courses, jet skiing, swimming pools, tennis courts and wind surfing but excluding gun clubs. An outdoor entertainment use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. No outdoor entertainment facility use consisting of an outdoor wildlife preserve or attraction shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of an existing residential development or an area designated in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for residential development. 
b.  Access. Access to an outdoor entertainment use shall be from a hard surfaced, public road. The minimum required frontage on a public road to be used for the primary point of access shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Fencing and screening. Safety fences up to a height of ten (10) feet shall be required around a recreation facility if deemed necessary. A landscape screen of at least seventy-five (75) percent capacity shall be required around a recreation facility use if it is deemed necessary to protect neighboring property from potential loss of use or diminishment of land value. 
d.  Setbacks. No building, mobile home, trailer, vehicle, mechanical device, or outdoor area or facility of an outdoor entertainment use shall be located closer to the property line than as follows: 
Type of Use Minimum Setback Athletic Field 50 feet Other Recreation Area or Structure 100 feet  
41.  Equestrian arena, commercial means an establishment engaged in commercial spectator activities involving equestrian events, but excluding any establishment engaged in pari-mutual betting. An equestrian arena use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. An equestrian arena shall, at the minimum, be located on a collector street. 
b.  Setbacks. Riding and show rings shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. 
c.  Operating hours. Activity at the rings shall not occur prior to 7:00 a.m. nor continue later than 12:00 midnight. 
d.  Lighting. All lighting must be confined to the arena and shall not spill over to neighboring property. 
e.  Loudspeaker. Loudspeakers shall not be used after 11:00 p.m. 
f.  Urban Service Area. 
i.  Minimum lot size In the Urban Service Area, the minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres. 
ii.  Compatibility. The use shall assure that there is no incompatibility with surrounding land uses. In the event that an incompatibility exists, the petitioner shall satisfactorily mitigate the incompatibility prior to receiving conditional or DRC approval. The Village Council may impose conditions to the approval including but not limited to: controlling objectionable odors; fencing; sound limitations; inspections; reporting or monitoring; preservation areas; mitigation; and/or limits of operation. 
iii.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of Natural Resource Protection Regulations and Section 7.4 of this Code. A minimum setback (buffer) of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetland areas. 
42.  Estate kitchen means an accessory use which is physically integrated with the main residence. There shall not be the presence of a complete living environment associated with the estate kitchen. Lot size for the house with an estate kitchen shall be twice in size of the minimum lot size requirement. 
43.  Excavation, Type III means the mining, quarrying, developing of mines for exploration of nonmetallic minerals, except fuels or other extractive materials primarily for commercial purposes, including but not limited to treating, crushing, or processing the material or off-site disposition for fill. All excavation, Type III uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Type III. In all districts an excavation, Type III use shall be subject to Section 7.6 (Excavation). 
b.  Type I and II. All other excavation (Type I and Type II) is considered an accessory use. A Type II excavation which is required to obtain approval as a Type III due to the amount of fill removed, shall be permitted in all districts which allow Type II excavation, and shall conform to the provisions of Section 7.6 (Excavation). 
44.  Farm residence means a dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, located on a parcel of land used for a bona fide agricultural use and occupied by the owner or operator of the farm operation. A farm residence shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Principal dwelling unit. One (1) principal dwelling unit shall be permitted for each bona fide farm operation. 
b.  Accessory uses. Garages and swimming pools shall be permitted as accessory uses to bona fide farm residences. 
45.  Farm workers quarters means one (1) or more residential structures located on the site of a bona fide agricultural use and occupied by year-round farm workers employed by the owner of the farm. A farm workers quarters use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Density. A farm tenant quarters use accessory to a bona fide farm operation shall consist of a maximum of one (1) self-contained dwelling unit for each twenty-five (25) acres in addition to the area required for the principal farm residence. 
46.  Financial institution means an establishment engaged in deposit banking. Typical uses include commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions, including outdoor automated teller machine and drive-thru facilities. A financial institution use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a financial institution use shall not consist of more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of total floor area or have a drive-up teller unit. 
b.  Planned Development districts. In the Planned Development districts, a financial institution use shall not consist of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of total floor area or have more than three (3) drive-up teller units, unless it is approved as a Class A Conditional Use or Requested Use, whichever is applicable. 
47.  Fitness center means an enclosed building or structure generally containing multi-use facilities for conducting, including but not limited to, the following recreational activities: aerobic exercises, weight lifting, running, swimming, racquetball, handball, and squash. A fitness center may also include the following customary accessory activities as long as they are intended for the use of the members of the center and not for the general public: babysitting service, bathhouse, food service, and the serving of alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises. This use also includes dance studios and karate schools. Fitness center uses shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a fitness center use shall not occupy more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area, and shall not have outdoor activities. 
48.  Flea market, enclosed means retail sales within a building permanently enclosed by walls and roof in which floor space is rented to individual merchants to display and sell goods. An enclosed flea market use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Walls or partitions. Walls or partitions shall be allowed separating individual rental spaces from each other, provided that they are temporary in nature. 
49.  Flea market, open means an outdoor retail sales area in which parcels of land are rented to individual merchants to display and sell goods. An open flea market use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Sanitary facilities. Required sanitary facilities shall be maintained in a permanent structure on the premises. 
49.1.  Flex Space: Refers to a specified mix of office space with balance of space for such purposes as research and development, manufacturing, warehouse, storage and similar uses. 
50.  Fruit and vegetable market means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of fruits, vegetables, flowers, containerized house plants and other agricultural food products, such as jelly, jam, honey, and juice. The sale of grocery or convenience-type foods or products shall not be permitted. In addition to the property development regulations contained in this Code, all fruit and vegetable markets shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Size and configuration. For the purposes of this section, the square footage of the establishment shall include both the structure and all accessory areas devoted to display or storage. 
b.  Outdoor display and storage. Outdoor storage shall be subject to the provisions contained in Section 6.6.1.B of this Code. Outdoor display of only fresh fruits and vegetables are permitted, along the property's frontage, except within the required setbacks. 
c.  Uses. The use shall be limited to those uses identified above. No additional special permits shall be permitted in conjunction with the stand except for seasonal sales. Seasonal sales that require additional storage area may be permitted in accordance with Section 6.4.4.83 of this Code. No vending machines or other similar equipment shall be permitted on site. 
d.  Building construction. The fruit and vegetable market shall be contained in either an entirely enclosed or roofed open air structure. Motor vehicles, including vans, trucks, semi-trucks, mobile homes, travel trailers, and other permanent or temporary structures shall not be used for storage or display purposes. 
e.  Sanitation. Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with the laws of the Village, Palm Beach County and State of Florida, as applicable. 
f.  Site development standards. The property shall be developed in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Code, unless otherwise provided in subsection 6.4.4.50.h.v., below. 
g.  Residential buffers. Markets located on property adjacent to a residential zoning district shall install landscape compatibility buffer as defined in Section 7.3., for the length of the property line required to screen the market and accessory parking area. 
h.  AR/Rural district. In addition to the above standards, fruit and vegetable markets shall comply with the following: 
i.  Locational criteria. The stand and accessory area shall be: 
(a)  located on an arterial designated on the Village of Wellington Thoroughfare Plan; 
(b)  located at least five hundred (500) feet from adjacent existing residential uses. 
ii.  Lot size. The market shall be located on a legal lot of record. A minimum of one (1) acre shall be allocated to the exclusive use of the stand and accessory parking area. 
iii.  Setbacks. The structure and accessory area shall be setback at least fifty (50) feet from the front and side corner property lines. The rear and side interior setbacks shall meet the minimum standards of the district. 
iv.  Intensity in the AR zoning district. In the AR zoning district, the area devoted to the fruit and vegetable market shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
v.  Markets less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. In addition to the standards stated above, fruit and vegetable markets less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet (including both the structure and all accessory areas devoted to display or storage) in all zoning districts referenced above, may apply the following less restrictive development standards: 
(a)  Paving. The surface parking lot may be constructed of shellrock or other similar material. At a minimum, the following areas shall be paved in accordance with Section 7.2.3.L of this Code: 
(i.)  a paved driveway apron area, connecting the right-of-way to the site shall be subject to approval by the Village Engineer; and, 
(ii.)  handicap parking spaces and handicap access. 
(b)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required, in accordance with Section 7.3, as follows: 
(i.)  along all perimeters of the site abutting rights-of-way or residentially zoned property; 
(ii.)  the parking area exceeds the minimum parking requirement by more than 50 percent, then the site shall comply with the minimum tree planting and interior landscape requirements of Section 7.3. 
(c)  Vegetation. Existing vegetation shall be preserved in accordance with Natural Resource Protection Regulations of this Code. 
51.  Funeral home means an establishment engaged in preparing the human deceased for burial and arranging and managing funerals. A funeral home use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  IL district. In the IL district, a funeral home use shall be limited to an embalming service. A crematory facility must be approved through the State Department of Environmental Regulation. No public observances, sermons or funerals shall be held in the IL district. Disposal of wastewater from embalming operations shall be in accordance with the requirements of the PBCPHU or approval of disposal to public water or sewer shall be through the local utility. 
52.  Garage sale means the casual sale of household articles by occupants of private households. A garage sale use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Duration. An individual garage sale shall not exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
b.  Number. The number of garage sales shall be limited to two (2) per year per dwelling unit. 
53.  Golf course means a facility providing a private or public golf recreation area designed for executive or regulation play along with accessory golf support facilities, but excluding miniature golf. A golf course facility shall comply with following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Clubhouse facility. A golf course use may also include a clubhouse facility. The clubhouse is the control center for the golf course and its primary function is to serve as the place where golfers register daily, and pay fees for the use of the golf facility. The size of the clubhouse and the services it provides may vary with local conditions and intensity of use. The clubhouse facility must be indicated on the site plan during the approval process and must meet all concurrency standards, and standards of this Code including parking and landscaping. Services the golf clubhouse may provide include various combinations of the following: locker rooms, shower rooms, dining room, snack bar, lounge, manager's office, pro shop (where golf merchandise may be purchased), caddy and golf cart storage room, and recreation room reserved for special activities of clubhouse members. 
b.  Fencing. Fences, walls or hedges shall be erected if deemed necessary to protect neighboring property, automobiles, pedestrians or bicyclists, from golf balls that are hit beyond golf course boundaries. 
54.  Government services means buildings or facilities owned or operated by a government entity and providing services for the public, excluding utility and recreational services. Typical uses include administrative offices of government agencies, public libraries, and police and fire stations. A government services use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a government services use, except for a fire station, shall be limited to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Prisons. Jails, correctional facilities and prisons shall only be permitted in the CF District and shall be subject to Class A Conditional Use review and approval. Expansion of existing facilities shall be exempt from this requirement. 
55.  Groom's quarters means on-site living quarters for persons responsible for grooming and caring for horses boarded at the stable. Groom's quarters may be permitted as an accessory use, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Number of units. A maximum of one (1) groom's quarters not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet in area shall be permitted for each four (4) stalls. 
b.  Facilities. Groom's quarters may contain individual cooking facilities and/or one (1) common dining facility. 
56.  Groves/row crops means the cultivation of fruits and vegetables for bona-fide agricultural purposes. Groves/row crops within the Urban Service Area shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Setbacks. Structures and accessory activities shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Buffering. A buffer adjacent to residentially zoned shall be provided along all property lines that are not screened by plant material. The buffer shall consist of one (1) tree per thirty (30) linear foot plus hedges twenty-four (24) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches on center. 
c.  Equipment. Use of heavy equipment, except irrigation pumps, shall be limited to daylight hours. 
d.  Loading. All loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted to the site and shall not encroach on any setbacks. 
e.  Office. An office may be permitted as an accessory use provided it is not a mobile home. 
f.  Minimum lot size. In the Urban Service Area, the minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres. 
g.  Compatibility. The use shall assure that there is no incompatibility with surrounding land uses. In the event that an incompatibility exists, the petitioner shall satisfactorily mitigate the incompatibility prior to receiving conditional or DRC approval. The Village Council may impose conditions to the approval including but not limited to: controlling objectionable odors; fencing; sound limitations; inspections; reporting or monitoring; preservation areas; mitigation; and/or limits of operation. 
h.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of the Natural Resource Protection Regulations and Section 7.4 of this Code. A minimum setback (buffer) of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetland areas 
i.  Spraying. No aerial application of any pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers or any other chemical shall be allowed. In the event that over spraying of pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers, herbicides or any other chemical is experienced, the petitioner shall provide an increased buffer to insure that no further over spraying will occur, or will cease to operate. 
j.  Notification. Notification of the existence of the agricultural operation shall be submitted to the South Florida Water Management District. 
57.  Guest cottage means accessory sleeping quarters provided for non-paying guests by the occupant of a principal single family dwelling unit. A kitchen is not permitted in a guest cottage. A guest cottage shall be considered an accessory use to a single family home and shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Occupancy. Occupancy of guest cottage shall be limited to a non-paying occupants as follows: 
i.  A non-paying guest, other than a dependant or an immediate family member, for a period not to exceed eight (8) months per year. 
ii.  A dependant or an immediate family member may occupy the structure continuously with no time limitation. Immediate family member is restricted to great grandparents, grandparents, child, spouse, aunt, uncle, son or daughter in law, mother or father in law of the property owner. Dependant shall mean relying on another for support. 
b.  Number of units. A maximum of one (1) guest cottage may be permitted as an accessory use to a principal single-family dwelling unit. The guest cottage may be attached to the principal dwelling unit or may be freestanding. 
c.  Cooking facilities. There shall be no kitchen or cooking facilities contained within the guest cottage. 
d.  Architecture. The guest cottage shall be constructed of materials substantially equivalent to the principal dwelling unit, provided that such materials comply with all other applicable standards of the building code. 
e.  Compatibility. The guest cottage shall be compatible in character and subordinate in size to the principal dwelling unit. 
f.  Setbacks. The guest cottage shall comply with the minimum yard setbacks applicable to the principal single-family dwelling unit. 
g.  No separate ownership. The guest cottage shall remain accessory to and under the same ownership as the principal single-family dwelling unit, and shall not be subdivided or sold as a condominium. 
h.  Floor area calculation. In determining the floor area of a guest cottage all area under a solid roof, whether the area is air-conditioned space or not, shall be included. The guest cottage shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal structure. 
i.  Licensing. Prior to utilizing a guest cottage, the owner shall file with the Planning, Zoning and Building Department a form stating that the guest cottage is being occupied as follows: 
i.  A non-paying guest for a period not to exceed eight (8) months per year and any other information the Department deems appropriate; or; 
ii.  A dependant or an immediate family member only may occupy the structure continuously with no time limitation. Immediate family member is restricted to great grandparents, grandparents, child, spouse, aunt, uncle, son or daughter in law, mother or father in law of the property owner. Dependant shall mean relying on another for support. 
58.  Gun club enclosed or open means a facility used for the discharge of firearms or projectiles at targets. An enclosed or open gun club or shooting range facility shall comply with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  District regulations. An enclosed or open gun club use shall be subject to review as reflected in Table 6.4-1 of this section. 
b.  Setbacks and buffers. 
i.  Enclosed gun club. An enclosed gun dub shall have a one hundred (100) foot setback in addition to a fifty (50) foot buffer from a residentially occupied or zoned property. These setbacks are in addition to the minimum required setbacks of the district. 
ii.  Open gun club. An open gun club and its accessory shooting areas shall have a three hundred (300) foot setback in addition to a one hundred (100) foot buffer from residentially occupied or zoned property. These setbacks are in addition to the minimum required setbacks of the district. 
iii.  Lot size. Except in the IL district, the gun club use must be located on a minimum of five (5) acres or meet the minimum lot and setback requirements of the district in which it is located, whichever requires a greater lot size. 
59.  Gun (Shooting) Range, private means A private gun range shall be allowed in the AR district based on compliance with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  Private use only. A private open or enclosed gun range shall not be used for commercial purposes or by the general public. 
b.  Required Lot Size, Buffer and Approval Process: 
i.  Enclosed private gun range: An enclosed private gun range shall be located on a lot of five (5) acres or greater, and shall be subject to special permit issued by the Planning & Zoning Director. Further, an enclosed shooting gun range shall have a one hundred (100) foot setback and an additional fifty (50) foot buffer from residentially occupied property in addition to the required minimum setbacks. 
ii.  Open private gun range: Certain requirements for open private gun ranges vary based on location of proposed range and type of weapons to be fired. An outdoor gun range use for small caliber and rim fire shall have a one hundred (100) foot setback and an additional fifty (50) foot buffer from residentially occupied property. An outdoor gun range for large caliber or center fire shall have a three hundred (300) foot setback and an additional one hundred (100) foot buffer from residentially occupied property. These setbacks are in addition to the required minimum setbacks. The discharge of firearms shall not occur within three hundred (300) yards of a structure. The shooter must have the written permission of the property owner. Also, a bullet trap is required in all locations. 
(a)  Small caliber and rim fire. The open firing of handguns of twenty-two (22) calibers and less which are rim fire or the firing of any type of shotgun shall be allowed on lots of 2.5 acres or greater. A private gun range use which lies east of the L-40 canal, as defined below, shall be subject to DRC approval. A private gun range use which lies west of the L-40 canal, as defined below, shall require a special permit approved by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
(b)  Larger caliber or center-fire The open firing of any center-fire gun or of handguns of more than twenty-two (22) calibers shall require a minimum lot size of ten (10) acres. A private gun range located east of the L-40 canal, as defined below, shall be subject to Class A Conditional Use approval. A private gun range located west of the L-40 canal, as defined below, shall be subject to DRC review and approval. 
(c)  L-40 Canal. For the purpose of this subsection, the boundaries of the L-40 Canal are: From the Broward County line north along Canal L-36 to the Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge. Thence north to Southern Boulevard along Canal L-40. Thence west along Southern Boulevard to a north-south line 1-1/2 miles west of Canal L-8, which coincides with a private agricultural road heading north from Southern Boulevard at that point where State Road 880 intersects Southern Boulevard from the south. Thence north along the line of this north-south road to the boundary of the J.W. Corbett Wildlife Management Area. Thence east and north along the boundary at the J.W. Corbett Wildlife Management Area to the Martin County Line. 
60.  Home occupation means a business, profession, occupation or trade conducted within a dwelling unit for gain or support by a resident of the dwelling unit pursuant to the limits of this Code. A home occupation shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Incidental nature. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the building and shall be confined to no more than ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling. 
b.  Location. A home occupation with the exception of outside instructional services, shall be conducted within the principal dwelling or off-site, and shall not be conducted within any accessory building or structure or within any open porch or carport that is attached to and part of the principal structure. Instructional services, which by their nature, must be conducted outside of the principal structure, such as swimming lessons, shall be located in a rear or side yard. 
c.  No change to character of dwelling. The home occupation shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling in terms of exterior appearance and interior space. 
d.  Employees. A home occupation use shall be conducted by a member of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit. A maximum of one (1) person who is not a member of the immediate family may assist in the operation of the home occupation. In addition, only one (1) person outside of the home may be employed by the service provided by the home occupation. 
e.  Occupational license. A home occupation shall be operated pursuant to a valid occupational license for the use held by the resident of the dwelling. 
f.  No advertising. No external evidence or sign shall advertise, display, or otherwise indicate the presence of the home occupation, nor shall the street address of the home occupation be advertised through signs, billboards, television, radio or newspapers. Advertising on vehicles shall be limited to the minimum necessary to meet code requirements as mandated by PBC Contractors Certification Division Chapter 67-1876, or Fla. Stat. Section 489. 
g.  No on-premise sales. A home occupation shall not involve the sale of any stock in trade, supplies, products or services on the premises, except for home instructional services. 
h.  Instructional Services. Instructional services may be approved as home occupations, provided the services meet the following additional regulations. 
i.  Resident. The instruction must be conducted by a resident of the dwelling where lessons are provided. Only one (1) instructor shall be permitted to provide instruction. The occupational license shall be issued to the instructor. 
ii.  Insurance. Proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least three hundred thousand ($300,000.00) covering the instructional service shall be submitted to obtain-the home occupation. 
iii.  Cars. No more than two (2) cars associated with the lessons shall be permitted to be parked at the instructor's home at a time. 
iv.  Location, inside. Home instruction, inside. 
(a)  Number of students. A maximum of three (3) students at a time shall be permitted to receive instruction during a lesson. 
(b)  Hours of operation. Instruction shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
v.  Location, outside. Home instruction, outside. 
(a)  Lots less than 1.25 acres. On lots of less than one and one-quarter (1.25) acres only one student at a time shall be permitted to receive instruction during a lesson. 
(b)  Larger lots. On lots that are one and one quarter (1.25) acres or larger, up to three students at a time shall be permitted to receive instruction during a lesson. 
(c)  Hours of operation. Outside instruction shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(d)  Screening. On lots of two and one-half (2.5) acres or less, the instruction area shall be screened from view from adjoining property lines with fencing or vegetation. 
i.  No outside storage. No equipment or materials used in the home occupation shall be stored or displayed outside of the dwelling including driveways. 
j.  Nuisances prohibited. No home occupation shall involve the use of any mechanical, electrical or other equipment, materials or items which produce noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, smoke, dust, odor or other nuisance outside the residential building. There shall be no storage of hazardous or noxious materials on the site of the home occupation. There shall be no noise of an objectionable nature from the home occupation audible at adjoining property lines. 
k.  Violations or hazard. If any of the above requirements are violated, or if the use, or any part thereof, is determined by the Planning & Zoning Director to create a health or safety hazard, then the occupational license may be revoked. 
l.  Number. Only one home occupation shall be permitted on any lot. 
61.  Hotel, motel, boarding and rooming house means a commercial establishment used, maintained or advertised as a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for short term rent to tenants, in which rooms are furnished for the accommodation of such guests, which may have as an accessory use of one or more dining rooms. Typical uses include hotels, motels, rooming and boarding houses. A hotel or motel use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Accessory Lounge. A hotel may have an accessory lounge not to exceed to twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the hotel, exclusive of parking. 
62.  Hospital or medical center means a facility licensed by the State of Florida which maintains and operates organized facilities for medical or surgical diagnosis, care, including overnight and outpatient care, and treatment of human illness. A hospital is distinguished from a medical center by the provision of surgical facilities. A hospital or medical center use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres or the minimum requirement of the district, whichever is greater. 
b.  Frontage. The minimum frontage for the lot shall be three hundred (300) feet or the requirement of the district, whichever is greater. 
c.  Density. The number of patient rooms for the hospital or medical center shall not exceed one (1) patient room for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area (43.56 patient rooms per acre). 
d.  No housekeeping. Rooms or suites of rooms shall not be designed, altered or maintained for housekeeping or family living purposes. 
e.  Food preparation. The preparation of food shall be accomplished at a central kitchen facility under the auspices of a trained nutritionist. Meals may be served to persons in their rooms. 
f.  Heliport or helipad. Accessory heliport or helipad is permitted provided the use is explicitly requested during the approval process, or approved separately by DRC review. 
g.  Incinerators. Bio-hazardous waste incinerators with an allowable operating capacity equal to or less than one thousand (1,000) pounds per hour are permitted as an accessory to a hospital use with the following supplementary use standards: 
i.  Setbacks. An incinerator use shall be set back a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any property line abutting a residential direct or use. Incinerators approved prior to the effective date of this section shall not be considered nonconforming uses. Expansion of existing facilities may be allowed with lower setbacks provided the expansion is reviewed and approved by the DRC. 
ii.  Regulations. An incinerator use shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations of the FDER (including Chapter 17-2. F.A.C.), the Solid Waste Authority and the PBCPHU. 
iii.  Site plan. A site plan shall be provided illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, incinerator and storage areas. 
h.  Autoclaves. Biohazardous waste autoclaves are permitted as an accessory to a hospital use with the following supplementary use standards: 
i.  Regulations. An autoclave use shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations of the FDER (including Chapter 17-2. F.A.C.), the Solid Waste Authority and the PBCPHU. 
ii.  Site plan. A site plan shall be provided illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, autoclave and storage areas. 
63.  Kennel, commercial means a commercial establishment, including any building or land used, for the raising, boarding, breeding, sale or grooming of such domesticated animals as dogs and cats, not necessarily owned by the occupants of the premises, for profit. A commercial kennel use may be operated in conjunction with a residence and shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Limitations of use. A commercial kennel use shall be limited to the raising, breeding, boarding, sale, and grooming (herein after collectively referred to as "commercial care") of domesticated animals such as dogs and cats. In addition, the commercial care of snakes or birds may be permitted provided this use is explicitly requested during the approval process. 
Care of domestic animals is subject to the Division of Animal Care and Control. The keeping of wild or exotic animals is subject to the regulations of the Florida Game and Fresh Water Commission. 
b.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. 
c.  Frontage. The minimum required frontage on a public road to be used for the primary point of access shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Setbacks. No structure or outdoor run shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. 
e.  Outdoor runs. Outdoor runs shall be hard surfaced or grassed with drains provided every ten (10) feet, and shall be connected to an approved sanitary facility. Outdoor runs shall provide a chain-link material on the walls and the top. If necessary to protect the general public, safety fences of up to a height of six (6) feet shall be required on outdoor runs. If necessary to protect neighboring property, a landscape screen of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity shall be provided around the outdoor run. 
64.  Kennel, private means any building used, designed or arranged to facilitate the non-commercial care of dogs cats owned by the occupants of the premises. A private kennel use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Limitations of use. A private kennel use shall be established for non-commercial purposes only, and animals residing in a private kennel shall belong solely to occupants of the premises property size and restrictions on numbers of animals shall be regulated according to the PBC Division of Animal Care and Control. 
b.  Setbacks. No outdoor runs or structures associated with the private kennel shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. 
c.  Outdoor runs. If necessary to protect the general public, safety fences of up to a height of six (6) feet shall be required on outdoor runs. If necessary to protect neighboring property, a landscape screen of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity shall be provided around the outdoor run. 
65.  Landscape maintenance service means an establishment engaged in the provision of landscape installation or maintenance services, but excluding retail or wholesale sale of plants or lawn and garden supplies from the premises. A landscape maintenance service in the AR district use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. In the AR district, a landscape maintenance service use shall be located on a collector street. 
b.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres. 
c.  Landscape Maintenance service as a home occupation. 
i.  Requirements. A landscape maintenance service may be operated as a home occupation pursuant to all requirements of Section 6.4.60 of this Code. 
ii.  Buffering. Property adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be subject to compatibility requirements of the landscape code Section 7.3. 
iii.  Storage. No outdoor storage or accumulation of debris shall be permitted. 
iv.  Screening. Outdoor storage of equipment shall be completely screened from view, from roads and adjacent properties with native vegetation. 
d.  Landscape maintenance service as a principal use. 
i.  Equipment. A landscape maintenance operated as a principal use may not store or have onsite landscape installation equipment nor vehicles over one and one-half (1.5) tons. 
ii.  Buffering. Any property adjacent to a residential zoning district shall install a landscape compatibility strip. 
iii.  Storage. No outdoor storage or accumulation of debris shall be permitted. 
iv.  Screening. Outdoor storage of equipment shall be completely screened from view, from roads and adjacent properties with native vegetation. 
66.  Laundry services means an establishment that provides home-type washing, drying, dry cleaning, or ironing machines for hire, to be used by customers on the premises, or that is engaged in providing household laundry and dry cleaning services with customer drop-off and pick-up. A laundry service use shall comply with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a laundry service use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Size. Any laundry service use over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall be a Class A Conditional Use or a Requested Use, whichever is applicable. 
67.  Livestock raising means the breeding, raising and caring for animals that are used for products. Livestock shall include horses. In the Urban Services Area, livestock raising shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for livestock raising shall be five (5) acres. 
b.  Setbacks. All accessory uses such as troughs, feed mechanisms and storage shall be setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. 
c.  Palm Beach County Animal Care and Control Department. The Palm Beach County Animal Care and Control Department shall be notified as to the type of livestock and details of animal care to be provided. 
d.  Processing and Slaughtering. Processing and slaughtering shall be prohibited. 
e.  Loading. All loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted to the site and shall not encroach on any setbacks. 
f.  Waste. A plan outlining a method of waste removal shall be submitted to and approved by the County Health Department. 
g.  Compatibility. The use shall assure that there is no incompatibility with surrounding land uses. In the event that an incompatibility exists, the petitioner shall satisfactorily mitigate the incompatibility prior to receiving conditional or DRC approval. The Village Council may impose conditions to the approval including but not limited to: controlling objectionable odors; fencing; sound limitations; inspections; reporting or monitoring; preservation areas; mitigation; and/or limits of operation. 
h.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of the Natural Resource Protection Regulations and Section 7.4 of this Code. A minimum setback (buffer) of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetland areas. 
i.  Spraying. No aerial application of any pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers or any other chemical shall be allowed. In the event that over spraying of pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers, herbicides or any other chemical is experienced, the petitioner shall provide an increased buffer to insure that no further over spraying will occur, or will cease to operate. 
j.  Notification. Notification of the existence of the agricultural operation shall be submitted to the South Florida Water Management District. 
68.  Lounge, cocktail means a use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, lounges, and similar uses other than restaurants or alcohol sales for off-premises consumption. A cocktail lounge is distinct from a restaurant that sells alcohol when the establishment cannot qualify for a "Consumption on Premises, Special Restaurant Exemption" pursuant to the State Beverage Law. A cocktail lounge use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a cocktail lounge use shall not consist of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Planned Development Districts. Unless approved as a Requested Use in a Planned Development District, a cocktail lounge use shall not be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a residential district, measure by drawing a straight line between the nearest point on the perimeter of the exterior wall or bay housing the proposed lounge to the nearest point on the property line of the residential district, nor within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of another cocktail lounge use, measured by drawing a straight line between the nearest point on the perimeter of the wall or bay of the proposed lounge to the nearest point on the existing lounge. 
c.  Outdoor areas. Outdoor and open lounge areas shall be subject to the compatibility requirements of Section 7.3.10 and shall be subject to additional site design requirements to protect neighboring residential districts or uses against negative impacts from the open lounge area. 
69.  Machine or welding shop means a workshop where machines, machine parts, or other metal products are fabricated. Typical uses include machine shops, welding shops and sheet metal shops. A machine or welding shop use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  IL district. In the IL district, a machine or welding shop use shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area unless approved as a Class "B" Conditional use. 
69.1.  Manufacturing and processing within a Medical Arts Planned Development District, a manufacturing and processing use or facility shall be limited to the manufacturing, fabrication or processing of medical- or medically-related goods and products. 
70.  Marine facility means a commercial facility relating to boating. Typical uses include boat docks, marina's, boatyards, yacht clubs and marina boaters. A marine facility use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Dock length. All docks, buildings or other structures shall extend beyond the shallow water depth in accordance with ERM regulations. 
b.  Sewage and water facilities. All marine facilities shall provide at each boat slip an individual sewer and water hook-up that shall be connected to a sewage and potable water supply system approved by the PBCPHU. 
c.  Boatel units. The total number of units in a boatel shall be pro-rated on the basis of one thousand (1,000) square feet of dry land lot area for each unit. 
d.  Setbacks. Dry storage of boats and other marina related uses may be placed against the water's edge. 
e.  Boatyards and charter boat operations. Boatyards and charter boat operations shall be a Class "B" Conditional use in the IL district. Parking requirements for such activities shall be determined based on the characteristics of the proposed use. 
71.  Medical or dental office or clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination or treatment by one (1) person or group of persons practicing any form of healing or health-building services to individuals, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors. osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists, or any such profession, the practice of which is lawful in the State of Florida. A medical office or dental clinic use shall comply with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a medical office or dental clinic use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area per use, and shall not exceed eight thousand (8,000) square feet of gross floor area per lot, unless approved as a Class A Conditional Use. 
72.  Migrant farm labor quarters means one (1) or more residential buildings occupied or intended for seasonal occupancy by transient farm workers who are employed by the owner of the farm. A migrant farm labor quarters and camp use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
73.  Mobile home dwelling means the use of a lot or a unit for one (1) mobile home. A mobile home dwelling shall not be used for storage in any district. A mobile home dwelling shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Accessory dwelling to agriculture. In the AR-RR district, a mobile home dwelling shall be permitted as an accessory use to a principal bona fide agricultural use on a minimum of ten (10) acres in the RR10 land use designation in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, subject to the following standards: 
i.  Permits. Permits and inspections for trailer tie-down and, electric, water supply and sewage disposal facilities are approved by all governmental agencies having appropriate jurisdiction. 
ii.  R-O-W setback. The mobile home shall be set back a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the public road rights-of-way. 
iii.  Property setback. The mobile home shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from other property lines other than public road rights-of-way. 
iv.  Additions. No additions shall be permitted to the mobile home, except awnings, demountable screen panels, stairs, decks and trellises. 
v.  Number. Where more than one (1) mobile home is authorized for a parcel of land, the mobile homes shall be separated by a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. 
vi.  Separation. The mobile home shall be separated from an existing single-family dwelling unit by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet. 
vii.  Unity of title. A unity of title document shall be executed and recorded. 
viii.  Special permit. A special permit shall be obtained. 
b.  Temporary dwelling during home construction. In the AR and CRS districts, placement of a mobile home dwelling shall be permitted on a temporary basis subject to the following standards: 
i.  Agency approval. Sanitary sewage facilities shall be approved by all governmental agencies having appropriate jurisdiction, permits, and inspections for the installation must be obtained from the PZB Department. 
ii.  Building permit. A valid building permit for a single-family dwelling unit on the land shall have been approved by the Building Director. 
iii.  Special permit. A special permit valid for one (1) year shall be obtained. Requests for extensions of time beyond the initial one-year approval must be made on forms prescribed by PZB. In no case shall the total time exceed a maximum of two (2) years for the initial approval and subsequent extension. 
iv.  Removal agreement. Execution of a notarized Mobile Home Removal Agreement, which establishes that the mobile home shall be removed within thirty (30) days after certificate of occupancy or at the end of the maximum two-year time frame. Additionally, the building permit shall be stamped with the requirement to remove the mobile home within thirty (30) days after c/o is issued. 
v.  Additions. No additions shall be permitted to the mobile home, except awnings and demountable screen panels, stairs, decks and trellises. 
74.  Motion Picture Production studio means the use of a lot or building for the production of films or videotapes for exhibition or sale. A motion picture production studio use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Temporary film permit. A temporary film permit to allow locational shooting for a period of less than three (3) weeks may be permitted with an approved special permit from the Zoning Division. This permit may be issued in all districts subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Coordination. The Director of the Film Liaison Office shall coordinate with the Planning & Zoning Director to schedule the proposed film shooting. 
ii.  Conditions. Reasonable conditions of approval shall be recommended which are designed to mitigate any anticipated impacts on neighboring properties. 
iii.  Renewal. One (1) additional renewal may be granted for an additional three (3) weeks, for a maximum duration of six (6) weeks. 
b.  Extended film permit. An extended film permit shall be issued for a period greater than three (3) weeks but not to exceed six (6) months plus three (3) additional renewals thereof, each of which may not exceed six (6) months. The duration of the permit with extensions shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months. 
i.  Permit. A permit may be renewed upon the following circumstances; 
(a)  Request. The applicant has submitted to the Planning & Zoning Director a written request for renewal of the Permit and the Planning & Zoning Director approves the renewal; 
(b)  Conditions. The applicant has abided by all conditions of approval; 
(c)  Impacts. No significant or ongoing negative impacts on neighboring properties have been identified; and 
ii.  Renewal. In addition to the above requirements, any renewal that extends beyond one (1) year shall also abide by the following: 
(a)  Amendment. The property owner shall apply for a Site Specific (Future Land Use Map) amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or an amendment to the Future Land Use Map to allow the film making use on a permanent basis, and shall pursue such application in good faith. 
(b)  Denial. The rezoning request or Comprehensive Plan Amendment has not been denied. 
c.  Film Liaison Office. The Director of the Film Liaison Office shall coordinate with the Planning & Zoning Director to schedule the proposed film permit. 
d.  Public notification. Courtesy notices are mailed by the applicant to all property owners within a three hundred (300) to five hundred (500) feet radius of the property to be used as a film location for the extended film permits or for a permanent production studio. 
e.  Site plan review and approval. The proposed location and site plan shall be subject to review by the Development Review Committee. Reasonable conditions of approval shall be recommended which are designed to mitigate any anticipated impacts on neighboring properties. Conditions may include but are not limited to duration, restrictions of hours of operation, setback requirements, obtaining approvals from other appropriate agencies, and safety related requirements. The conditions shall be incorporated into the permit approval. 
f.  Posting of permit. A copy of the permit shall be posted on the site by the property owner. Copies of the permit shall be kept by the Planning & Zoning Director and the Code Enforcement Director for record keeping purposes. Any violation of these conditions may result in revocation of the permit or code enforcement action. 
g.  IL district. In the IL district, a permanent motion picture and T.V. production studio shall be permitted. 
75.  Multifamily means the use of a structure designed for two (2) or more dwelling units which are attached, or the use of a lot for two (2) or more dwelling units excluding mobile homes. Typical uses include apartments and residential condominiums. A multifamily use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Accessory uses. Accessory commercial uses contained within a multifamily structure for the multifamily zoning district, shall be permitted subject to the DRC, provided that the use is limited to a total floor area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the gross residential floor area contained therein, exclusive of vehicular parking and service areas, and limited to such uses as restaurants, delicatessens, and such personal services as beauty shops, barber shops, drug stores and professional offices. This provision is for twenty (20) units or more and utilizing twenty (20) square feet per unit with a maximum of two thousand (2,000) square feet per each project or development as indicated on the site or subdivision plan. The accessory use must meet parking requirements subject to Section 7.2. 
b.  Developments of ten (10) units or more. Multifamily development consisting of ten (10) or more units shall be subject to Section 6.6.1.F. (Multifamily recyclable material storage areas). 
76.  Newsstand or gift shop means a small establishment, occupying no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area, primarily engaged in the retail sale of gifts, novelties, greeting cards, newspapers, magazines or similar items. A newsstand or gift shop use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a newsstand or gift shop use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1.500) square feet of gross floor area for each establishment. 
77.  Nursery, retail means the cultivation for wholesale or retail sale of horticultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs, sod, and trees, intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. A retail nursery in the Urban Services Area shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. The use shall be located on a street of collector or higher classification. 
b.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre. 
c.  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
i.  Structures and accessory activities shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet except for shade houses which shall comply with the setbacks enumerated in 6.4.4.101. (Shadehouse). 
ii.  Container plants shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Loading. All loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted to the site and shall not encroach on any setbacks. 
e.  Office. An office may be permitted as an accessory use provided it is not a mobile home. 
f.  Minimum lot size. In the Urban Service Area, the minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres. 
g.  Compatibility. The use shall assure that there is no incompatibility with surrounding land uses. In the event that an incompatibility exists, the petitioner shall satisfactorily mitigate the incompatibility prior to receiving conditional or DRC approval. The Village Council may impose conditions to the approval including but not limited to: controlling objectionable odors; fencing; sound limitations; inspections; reporting or monitoring; preservation areas; mitigation; and/or limits of operation. 
h.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of the Natural Resource Protection Regulations and Section 7.4 of this Code. A minimum setback (buffer) of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetland areas. 
i.  Spraying. No aerial application of any pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers or any other chemical shall be allowed. In the event that over spraying of pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers, herbicides or any other chemical is experienced, the petitioner shall provide an increased buffer to insure that no further over spraying will occur, or will cease to operate. 
j.  Notification. Notification of the existence of the agricultural operation shall be submitted to the South Florida Water Management District. 
78.  Nursery, wholesale means the cultivation for wholesale sale of horticultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs, sod, and trees, intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. A wholesale greenhouse or nursery use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Limitations of sales. Sales from a wholesale greenhouse or nursery use are limited to exporters, distributors, landscape contractors, retailers, or other businesses. 
b.  Conditions of operation. Operation of heavy machinery from 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. at a wholesale greenhouse or nursery use is prohibited. 
c.  Parking and loading. All parking and loading associated with any nursery related use shall occur on nursery acreage, and not on access easements, or public or private rights-of-way, or through streets. 
d.  AR district. In the AR district wholesale greenhouse or nursery use may be operated in conjunction with a residence. A wholesale greenhouse or nursery greater than ten (10) acres shall be required to receive a conditional use B approval. 
e.  Vegetation removal permit. A wholesale nursery or greenhouse shall be required to submit a vegetation removal permit. 
f.  Buffering requirements. Wholesale greenhouse or nursery over ten (10) acres adjacent to residential property shall be required to construct a compatibility buffer strip subject to Section 7.3 of the Landscape code. 
g.  Water use permit. A wholesale greenhouse or nursery greater than ten (10) acres shall be required to receive a water use permit from the SFWMD. 
h.  Urban Service Area. In addition to the above standards, a wholesale nursery shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre. 
ii.  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as follows: 
(a)  Structures and accessory activities shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet except for shadehouses which shall comply with the setbacks enumerated in 6.4.4.101. 
(b)  Container plants shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
iii.  Buffering. A buffer shall be provided along all property lines that are not screened by plant material. The buffer shall consist of one (1) tree per thirty (30) linear foot plus hedges twenty-four (24) inches on center. 
iv.  Equipment. Use of heavy equipment shall be limited to daylight hours. 
v.  Loading. All loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted to the site and shall not encroach on any setbacks. 
vi.  Office. An office may be permitted as an accessory use provided it is not a mobile home. 
vii.  Compatibility. The use shall assure that there is no incompatibility with surrounding land uses. In the event that an incompatibility exists, the petitioner shall satisfactorily mitigate the incompatibility prior to receiving conditional or DRC approval. The Village Council may impose conditions to the approval including, but not limited to: controlling objectionable odors; fencing; sound limitations; inspections; reporting or monitoring; preservation areas; mitigation; and/or limits of operation. 
viii.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of Natural Resource Protection Regulations and Section 7.4 of this Code. A minimum setback (buffer) of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetland areas. 
ix.  Spraying. No aerial application of any pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers or any other chemical shall be allowed. In the event that over spraying of pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers, herbicides or any other chemical is experienced, the petitioner shall provide an increased buffer to insure that no further over spraying will occur, or will cease to operate. 
x.  Notification. Notification of the existence of the agricultural operation shall be submitted to the South Florida Water Management District. 
79.  Nursing or convalescent facility means an establishment where, for compensation pursuant to a previous arrangement, care is offered or provided for three (3) or more persons suffering from illness, other than a contagious disease, or sociopathic or psychopathic behavior, which is not of sufficient severity to require hospital attention, or for three (3) or more persons requiring further institutional care after being discharged from a hospital, other than a mental hospital. Patients usually require domiciliary care in addition to nursing care. A nursing or convalescent facility use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location and access. If ambulance service is required, a nursing or convalescent facility use shall have access from a collector road designed to minimize the adverse effects on adjacent property. The environment created for a nursing or convalescent facility use should be of a pronounced residential nature and should be designed to minimize any adverse conditions that might detract from the primary convalescent purpose of the facility. 
b.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area or the minimum requirement of the district, whichever is greater. 
c.  Frontage. The minimum frontage for the lot on which the nursing or convalescent facility is located shall be one hundred (100) feet, or the minimum requirement of the district, whichever is greater. 
d.  Density. Except in any land designated RR10 in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, the number of patient rooms shall not exceed one (1) for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area (43.56 patient rooms per acre). In any land designated RR10 in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan, patient density shall not exceed one/quarter (.25) patient room for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area, not to exceed twenty patients per acre. 
e.  Room size. Sleeping rooms shall be no less than one hundred (100) square feet for each patient single occupancy or eighty-five (85) square feet for each patient double occupancy. 
f.  No housekeeping. Rooms or suites of rooms shall not be designed, altered or maintained for housekeeping or family living purposes. 
g.  Food preparation. The preparation of food shall be accomplished at a central kitchen facility under the auspices of a trained nutritionist. Meals can be served to persons in their rooms. 
h.  Staff. A nursing or convalescent facility in excess of twenty (20) patients shall have a minimum of one (1) Licensed Practical or Registered Nurse for each floor or for every fifty (50) patients. Facilities with less than twenty (20) patients shall have a Licensed Practical Nurse (LPN) on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
i.  Room facilities. Each patient room shall be equipped with sanitary facilities in addition to audio monitors and call buttons. One (1) bathing facility shall be provided for every ten (10) patients. 
j.  Minimum leisure floor area. At least ten (10) square feet of total floor area per patient shall be devoted to a common area exclusive of halls, corridors, stairs and elevator shafts, wherein a variety of recreational or therapeutic activities shall occur. 
80.  Office, business or professional means an establishment providing executive, management, administrative or professional services, but not involving medical or dental services or the sale of merchandise, except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical uses include property and financial management firms, employment agencies, travel agencies, advertising agencies, secretarial and telephone services, contract post offices; professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; and business offices of private companies, utility companies, public agencies, and trade associations. A business or professional office use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a business or professional office building shall not exceed eight thousand (8,000) square feet of gross floor area per lot. A contract post office or an office for utility bill collection shall be permitted by right if it occupies less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  IL districts. In the IL district, only offices accessory to another permitted use and real estate or property management offices for industrial parks shall be permitted. 
c.  Accessory Uses. Except in the CN district, a business or professional office may have a convenience store not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent (25) of the floor area of the gross floor area, exclusive of parking whichever is less. All such uses shall be completely internal to the office and shall not have a separate entrance nor any exterior signage. 
81.  Packing plant means a facility, accessory to bona fide agriculture, used for the packing of produce not necessarily grown on site. A packing plant in the Urban Service Area shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. A packing plant shall be located on a collector or higher classification street. 
b.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for a packing plant shall be ten (10) acres. 
c.  Setbacks. The minimum setback shall be one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
d.  Noise. There shall be no outdoor loud speaker system. 
e.  Loading and unloading. All loading and unloading must be confined to the property and shall not encroach upon the setbacks. 
f.  Storage. Only equipment directly related to products packed at this plant shall be stored on the property and the equipment shall be screened from adjacent property. 
g.  Compatibility. The use shall assure that there is no incompatibility with surrounding land uses. In the event that an incompatibility exists, the petitioner shall satisfactorily mitigate the incompatibility prior to receiving conditional or DRC approval. The Village Council may impose conditions to the approval including but not limited to: controlling objectionable odors; fencing; sound limitations; inspections; reporting or monitoring; preservation areas; mitigation; and/or limits of operation. 
h.  Preservation. The use shall conform with all preservation, and vegetation removal requirements of the Village of Wellington LDR for the underlying permitted use, and shall conform with the provisions of Natural Resource Protection Regulations and Section 7.4 of this Code. A minimum setback (buffer) of one hundred (100) feet shall surround all designated wetland areas. 
i.  Spraying. No aerial application of any pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers or any other chemical shall be allowed. In the event that over spraying of pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers, herbicides or any other chemical is experienced, the petitioner shall provide an increased buffer to insure that no further over spraying will occur, or will cease to operate. 
j.  Notification. Notification of the existence of the agricultural operation shall be submitted to the South Florida Water Management District. 
81.5.  Pain Management Clinics shall be at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in size. Pain Management Clinics are prohibited from dispensing more than a three (3) day supply of a pharmaceutical directly to their patients. Pain Management Clinics cannot be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a licensed pharmacy. The Pain Management Clinic must have a Director of Medicine who is a physician duly actively licensed by the State of Florida. The Pain Management Clinic must provide the name and address of its Medical Director to the Wellington Growth Management Department and advise the Department within thirty (30) days of any change in who the Medical Director is and once again provide them with the name and address and contact information for the Medical Director. The Medical Director must maintain regular hours at the Pain Management Clinic and be available at the Clinic's Wellington office at least two (2) days a week. The Pain Management Clinic must submit an annual report to the Wellington Growth Management Department, documenting compliance with the Supplementary Use Standards and any other conditions of approval that may be attached to the granting of the Conditional Use approval. 
82.  Park, passive means a public or private outdoor recreational use relying on a natural or manmade resource base and developed with a low intensity of impact on the land. Typical uses include trail systems, wildlife management and demonstration areas for historical, cultural, scientific, educational or other purposes that relates to the natural qualities of the area, and support facilities for such activities. A passive park use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Accessory use. Accessory water craft rental and use in a passive park shall be regulated by the Department of Parks and Recreation. 
83.  Park, public means a publicly-owned or operated park or beach providing opportunities for active or passive recreational activities to the general public. A public park use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  AR district. In the AR district, a public park use shall be limited to athletic fields, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
84.  Parking garage or lot, commercial means a building or other structure that provides temporary parking or storage for motor vehicles, where some or all of the parking spaces are not accessory to another principal use. A commercial parking garage or lot use shall be subject to the following use standards: 
a.  Principal use. A commercial parking garage or lot use shall be the principal use. Parking spaces may be rented for parking. No other business of any kind shall be conducted on the lot, including repair, service, washing, display or storage of vehicles or other goods. 
b.  Proximity to residential district. A commercial parking garage or lot shall not be contiguous to lands in the residential districts. 
c.  Dead storage of vehicles. Dead storage of vehicles shall be permitted in the IL district only, subject to Section 6.5.10.E (Additional IL district regulations). 
85.  Personal services means an establishment engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature, or the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement or similar services, which may involve the limited accessory sale of retail products. Typical uses include art and music schools, beauty and barber shops, driving schools, licensed therapeutic massage studios, photography studios and tanning salons. A personal services use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a personal services use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
86.  Potting soil manufacturing means an establishment engaged in producing potting soil, including the use of incineration. A potting soil manufacturing facility is usually a combination of other types of facilities listed in this section. If a potting soil facility includes chipping or grinding, adherence to chipping and mulching standards in this section is required. If a potting soil facility includes composting, adherence to composting standards in this section is required. If a potting soil facility includes incineration, adherence to air curtain incinerator standards in this section is required. 
a.  Setback from residential districts and uses. Outdoor material storage piles shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district or use. 
b.  Health and Environmental Regulations. A potting soil facility shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the FDER (including Chapter 17-701, F.A.C), the PBCPHU, and the Solid Waste Authority. 
c.  Odor and dust reduction. A potting soil facility use shall be designed and operated to restrict objectionable odor and dust from entering adjacent properties. 
d.  Access. An access road for collection vehicles shall be provided to the entrance of the facility. Acceptable access does not include local streets. Access shall be restricted to specific entrances with gates that can be locked and that carry official notice that only authorized persons are allowed on the site. 
e.  Storage. On-site storage of unprocessed material shall be limited to forty-five (45) days and pile height of storage material shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet. Storage areas shall be effectively screened from view. Such screening shall be designed to ensure that storage areas cannot be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent residential districts. 
f.  Landscaping and buffering. The operation is subject to the compatibility requirements, of Section 7.3.10. The standards shall be waived if the required landscape buffer is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. 
g.  Supplemental application requirements. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
i.  Site plan. A site plan illustrating how the operation functions including circulation routes and their locations, square footage, height and location of buildings, chipper and storage piles; and 
ii.  Hours of operation. A statement specifying the hours of operation; 
iii.  Waste. An explanation of the quantity of waste to be received expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day; and 
iv.  Letter of approval. A notarized letter of approval shall be provided from the property owner verifying consent to use the property for potting soil manufacturing. 
87.  Recycling collection station means a mobile container designed and used for deposit of recyclable materials and typically monitored by a person. A recycling collection station use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Approval. Applicant shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
b.  Screening. No storage areas shall be visible from rights-of-way, residential uses or residential districts. 
c.  Containers. Recyclable materials shall be contained within a leak-proof bin or trailer. There shall be no outdoor storage of materials. 
d.  Processing. Only limited sorting, separation or other processing of deposited materials shall be allowed on the site. 
e.  Type of materials. There shall be no collection or storage of hazardous or biodegradable wastes on the site. There shall be no chipping, mulching or receiving of construction debris. 
88.  Recycling drop-off bin means a totally enclosed structure, containing no more than five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area, within which pre-sorted, non-biodegradable recyclable materials are collected for redistribution or sale for the purpose of reuse. A recycling drop-off bin use shall be subject to the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Approval. Applicant shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
b.  Mobility The mobility of the drop-off bin shall be retained. 
c.  Location and size. The drop-off bin shall be located in or adjacent to an off-street parking area, and shall not occupy more than five (5) percent of the total on-site parking spaces or shall be limited by the special use permit. 
d.  Maintenance. The bin and adjacent area shall be maintained in good appearance and free from trash, subject to revocation of the special use permit by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
e.  Type of materials. There shall be no collection or storage of hazardous or biodegradable wastes on the site. 
89.  Recycling plant means a permanent facility designed and used for receiving, separating, storing, converting, baling or processing of non-hazardous recyclable materials that are not intended for disposal. The use may include construction debris recycling or other intensive recycling processes such as chipping and mulching. A recycling plant use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Compatibility, screening, buffering. The proposed recycling plant shall be properly located and buffered to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. To ensure use compatibility with surrounding uses, adequate setbacks, and screening and buffering around the perimeter of the proposed recycling plant shall be required at the time the facility is constructed. The standards shall be waived if any of the required landscape buffer is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. Required minimum lot size, setbacks, screening and buffering shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
i.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for recycling plants in industrial districts shall be five (5) acres. The minimum lot size for such facilities in other districts shall be ten (10) acres, provided that underlying district lot sizes shall apply to recycling plants that operate completely in enclosed buildings that are located in the IL district. 
ii.  Setbacks. Except for a freestanding office, no part of a recycling plant and its accessory ramps, on site circulation system or storage areas, shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any property line. However, if the facility is in an industrial district and is contiguous to land in an industrial district or designated for an industrial use on the Future Land Use Atlas in the Comprehensive Plan, the setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet of that contiguous property line. No part of a recycling plant, its accessory ramps, on-site circulation system or storage areas shall be sited within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a school, park, church, library or residential lot. In no case shall the setback be less than the requirement of the district. No additional setback beyond district setbacks shall apply to recycling plants that operate completely in enclosed buildings and are located in the IL district. 
iii.  Screening and fencing. All storage areas shall be effectively screened from view by on-site walls, fences or buildings. Such screening shall be designed and installed to ensure that no part of a storage area can be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent lots. In no case shall the height of recyclable or recovered materials, or non-recyclable residue stored in outdoor areas exceed twenty (20) feet or the height of the principal building on the lot, whichever is greater. For an outdoor recycling plant contiguous to property in a residential district, an opaque fence/wall a minimum of eight (8) feet in height shall be placed along the inside border of the required landscape strip. The purpose of the fence/wall inside the landscape strip is to protect the landscape strip from the intensive activity of the recycling facility and to supplement the landscape strip as a buffer. 
iv.  Perimeter landscape buffer strips. Buffer strips must be installed pursuant to Section 7.3.10 for facilities in industrial districts contiguous to land zoned for industrial use and for completely enclosed recycling plants in the IL District. For all other facilities, a landscape strip shall be installed, provided that when the property line is contiguous to residential districts, the landscape buffer strip shall be fifty (50) feet in width. 
b.  Access. An access road that can be negotiated by loaded collection vehicles shall be provided to the entrance of the recycling plant. Access shall not be provided on a residential street. Access shall be restricted to specific entrances with gates which can be locked at all times and which carry official notice that only authorized persons are allowed on the site. 
c.  Drainage. Untreated surface water runoff shall not be permitted to discharge directly into lakes, streams, drainage canals or navigable waterways other than into or through approved on-site containment areas. 
d.  Storage areas. All outdoor storage of recyclable materials shall be in leak-proof containers or located on a paved area that is designed to capture all potential run-off associated with the stored material. Run-off shall be handled in a manner that is in conformance with local, state and Federal regulations. 
e.  Chipping and mulching. If a recycling plant facility includes chipping or grinding, adherence to chipping and mulching standards in Section 6.4.4 is required. 
f.  Performance standards. The operation of a recycling plant shall conform to all other requirements of this Code. 
g.  Consistent with Comprehensive Plan. The proposed recycling plant shall be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this section. 
h.  Supplemental application requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of this Code, applications for recycling plants shall include the following: 
i.  Access. Graphic illustration and narrative analysis of year round access routes to the site. 
ii.  Type of facility. An explanation of the type of facility requested. It shall specify the type of materials to be handled and include a description of the proposed method of operation, including special waste handling procedures and limitations. 
iii.  Quantity of waste. An estimate of the quantity of waste to be received, expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day. 
iv.  Hours of operation. A statement specifying the hours of operation. 
v.  Dust control. A plan to address dust control in traffic, storage and processing areas and contingency during high winds. Dust control measures may include: additional setbacks, full or partial enclosure of chipper or grinder, screening/fencing, vacuuming or watering traffic areas and watering or enclosing storage piles. 
vi.  SWA permit. Verification that the applicant has obtained a permit from and posted a bond with the Solid Waste Authority (SWA) before Site Plan approval. This SWA permit shall be approved consistent with the procedures for obtaining an amendment to the Future Land Use Map. 
vii.  Fire protection. A recycling plant shall be located within ten (10) miles of a full-service fire station or have and maintain on-site fire fighting equipment acceptable to the Palm Beach County Fire Marshall. 
viii.  Solid waste district. A recycling plant may also be located in the Solid Waste Planned District. 
90.  Repair and maintenance, general means an establishment engaged in the repair and maintenance of motor vehicles or other heavy equipment or machinery, including automobiles, boats, golf carts, mopeds, motorcycles and trucks, excluding paint and body work. Typical uses include automobile repair garages, automobile tune-up stations, automotive glass shops, quick-lubes, and muffler shops. A general repair and maintenance use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Enclosed repair activities. Except in industrial districts, all repair and maintenance activities shall be conducted within an enclosed structure, and there shall be no outside storage of disassembled vehicles, or parts thereof. 
b.  Setbacks. No repair or maintenance activity shall be conducted within one hundred (100) feet of any property line adjacent to a residential district. 
c.  Service bay orientation. No service bay door shall be oriented toward any adjacent residential district or any adjacent public street. 
d.  No loudspeakers. No outdoor speaker or public address system that is audible off-site shall be permitted. 
e.  No vehicle testing on residential streets. Vehicles shall not be tested off-site on residential streets. 
f.  Water recycling. Any accessory automatic car wash facility shall utilize a water recycling system. 
91.  Repair services, limited means an establishment engaged in the repair of personal apparel and household appliances, furniture, and similar items, excluding repair of motor vehicles. Typical uses include apparel repair and alterations, small appliance repair, small motor repair (including golf carts, mopeds and lawn mowers), bicycle repair, clock and watch repair, and shoe repair shops. A limited repair services use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a limited repair services use shall not occupy more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Enclosed repair activities. All repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed structure in all districts except IL. 
c.  IL district. In the IL district, outdoor storage or outdoor repair activities shall be completely screened from view with a combination of fencing and vegetation to a height of six (6) feet. 
92.  Restaurant, fast food means an establishment where the principal business is the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation is that of a fast-food or drive-in restaurant offering quick food service, where orders are generally not taken at the customer's table, where food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers, and where food and beverages may be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle. 
93.  Restaurant, general means an establishment excluding drive-thru's, where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation consists of one or more of the following: 
a.  Sit-down. A sit-down restaurant where customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are generally served food and beverages in non-disposable containers by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed; or 
b.  Cafeteria. A cafeteria or cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages generally are served in non-disposable containers and consumed within the restaurant; or 
c.  Shopping center. A restaurant, which may have characteristics of a fast food restaurant, having floor area exclusively within a shopping or office center, sharing common parking facilities with other businesses within the center, and having access to a common interior pedestrian access way. 
d.  Alcohol. This use may include the on-premise sale, service and consumption of alcoholic beverages as an accessory and secondary use. A general restaurant use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
i.  CN district. In the CN district, a general restaurant use shall not occupy more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. In addition, no such use shall provide other than take-out service unless the use is approved as a Class "A" Conditional use. 
ii.  IL district. In the IL district, a general restaurant use shall be permitted only as an accessory use, to a permitted principal industrial use. 
iii.  Outdoor dining areas. Outdoor dining areas shall comply with district setback requirements for structures, and shall be subject to Site Plan review pursuant to Section 5.6. 
94.  Restaurant, specialty means an establishment, excluding drive-thru's, engaged in the retail sale of a limited variety of baked goods, candy, coffee, ice cream or other specialty food items, which may or may not be prepared for on-premises sale and which may be consumed on the site. A specialty restaurant use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  CN district. In the CN district, a specialty restaurant use shall be limited to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Outdoor dining areas. Outdoor dining areas shall comply with district setback requirements for structures, and shall be subject to Site Plan review pursuant to Section 5.6. 
c.  Catering service. Except in the IL district, the use of more than three (3) delivery or service vehicles shall be approved by the Development Review Committee. 
d.  PUD Recreational use zone. A specialty restaurant is permitted for members and their guests. 
95.  Retail sales, general means an establishment providing general retail sales or rental of goods, but excluding those uses specifically classified in another use type. Uses include typical retail stores such as but not limited to clothing stores, auto parts stores, book stores, business machine sales, food stores (excluding convenience stores) and marine supply sales (excluding boat sales). Uses shall also include the sale of bulky goods such as household goods, lawn mowers, mopeds, motorcycles and golf carts. Retail establishments may rent and perform incidental repair to their products. Retail pharmacy establishments and medical marijuana dispensing organizations/facilities and medical marijuana treatment center dispensaries must also comply with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  Retail pharmacy facilities and medical marijuana dispensing organizations/facilities and medical marijuana treatment center dispensaries must have a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. 
b.  No more than one (1) retail Pharmacy facility or medical marijuana dispensing organization/facility or medical marijuana treatment center dispensaries may be permitted to operate within any individual retail development. Pharmacy operations that function as an accessory service within grocery stores do not apply to this limitation. 
c.  Retail pharmacy facilities and medical marijuana dispensing organizations/facilities and medical marijuana treatment center dispensaries shall not be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any public or private school. 
d.  Retail pharmacy facilities and medical marijuana dispensing organizations/ facilities and medical marijuana treatment center dispensaries located within larger retail developments with frontage on State Road 7/U.S. 441 or on individual sites with frontage on State Road 7/U.S. 441, pharmacy product distributorships and pharmacy product compounding facilities not open to the public are exempt from the provisions of both a. and b. above. 
96.  Retail sales, mobile, temporary or transient means retail sales operations without a fixed or permanent location. Typical uses include sales of flowers or food products; temporary seasonal sales, such as Christmas trees or sparklers as defined in F.S. chapter 791; and special event sales which require a tent or temporary structure. In no case shall fireworks be offered for sale, exposed for sale, located or sold under a permit issued in accordance with this section. In accordance with Section 791.04, Fla. Stat., the sale of fireworks to the general public is prohibited. 
A mobile, temporary, or transient retail sales or service use shall comply with the following supplementary standards. These standards may be enforced by the Code Enforcement Citation System and shall be considered a Class IV violation for purposes of fine levied. If the vendor is found in violation of any provision of the terms of the permit or of this Code, the Planning & Zoning Director shall have all remedies provided by Code or Statute and shall withhold future special permits for a period of eighteen (18) months. A copy of the approved special permit shall be kept on site during the entire duration of the temporary use. 
a.  Temporary sales. A temporary seasonal retail sales use, such as Christmas tree or sparklers, or special event sales, such as the sale of furniture, plants, or toy sales, that may or may not require a tent or temporary structure, excluding trailers, shall: 
i.  Approval. Obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
ii.  Location. Be located in a CG or SA district, except that the temporary sale of Christmas trees shall be permitted in the AR district if it is accessory to a nursery, limited to no more than thirty (30) days, and not located within required yard setbacks. 
iii.  Permission. Have written permission from the property owner, 
iv.  Setbacks. The use shall comply with the setbacks of the district. At a minimum, the use shall be setback from all rights-of-way a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
v.  Duration. Not exceed fifteen (30) days in duration, provided that an additional fifteen (15) days duration may be approved, subject to the Planning & Zoning Director's discretion. Issuance of permits shall be limited to four (4) times a year per site. 
vi.  Parking. Meet the off-street parking requirements of Section 7.2 (Off-street Parking Regulations). 
vii.  Safe distance triangle. Not be located within safe distance triangles. 
viii.  Tent. Not have more than one (1) tent or structure for each lot. 
ix.  Lighting. Comply with Section 7.8 2 (Outdoor lighting standards). 
x.  Signage. Meet the following requirements for signage: 
(a)  Size. For a temporary sale, one (1) on-site, non-illuminated freestanding sign shall be permitted. This sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height from finished grade and shall be located at least five (5) feet from all base building lines. 
(b)  Site plan. The proposed sign, including the location, size and elevation, shall be shown on the site plan for the special use. 
(c)  Duration. The sign may remain on the site only for the approved duration of the temporary sale. 
(d)  Type. No other type of sign, including balloons, banners, or emblems shall be permitted. 
xi.  Debris. All debris shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of expiration of permit and the property will be returned to an orderly and sanitary condition. 
xii.  Insurance. Submit proof of liability insurance paid in full covering the period for which the permit is issued, in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per occurrence. 
xiii.  Special Provisions for the sale of Sparklers. In addition to the requirements set forth above, sales of sparklers shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Seasonal limitations. Seasonal sales shall be limited to June 20 through July 5 and December 10 through January 2 of any given year. 
(b)  Location. The sale of sparklers shall be limited to the Commercial General and Light Industrial zoning districts. 
(c)  Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be limited from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(d)  Electrical service. Temporary electrical service to a site shall be provided by an approved temporary connection. If a generator is used on site, it shall meet the supplemental requirements established by the Village Chief Electrical Inspector and Palm Beach County Fire-Rescue Department. 
(e)  Storage trailers. Temporary storage trailers may be permitted in conjunction with the temporary sales. Trailers shall be parked a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from primary circulation routes and shall be parked the maximum extent possible from all buildings on or surrounding the site. 
(f)  Supplemental application requirements. An application for each location shall be submitted. Each permit application shall be supplemented with the following documentation: 
(i.)  Certification. A certification of registration from the State Fire Marshal authorizing sale of sparklers. 
(ii.)  Affidavit. A signed and notarized affidavit of Approved List of Sparklers. 
(iii.)  Site plan. A site plan approved by the Department of Fire-Rescue and Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office. 
(iv.)  Removal agreement. A signed and notarized Removal Agreement. 
b.  Mobile sales. Mobile retail sales of food shall be conducted from a portable stand and shall: 
i.  District. Be located in the CC-Community Commercial, CG-General Commercial or IL-Light Industrial Zoning District; 
ii.  Permission. Obtain written permission of the property owner; 
iii.  Special permit Obtain a special permit from the Zoning division; 
iv.  Location. Not be located in any required parking spaces; 
v.  Landscape. Not be located in any landscape buffer; 
vi.  Residentially zoned property. Not be located immediately adjacent to any residentially zoned area, excluding properties zoned AR; 
vii.  Distraction to motor vehicles. Not be located in such a manner as to distract motor vehicle operators or promote, require or cause any vehicles to stop, stand or to park in violation of official traffic-control devices, including, but not limited to signs, signals, and markings erected by authority of the Village, County or State for the purpose of regulating, moving or guiding traffic; 
viii.  Insurance. Submit to the Zoning division of Planning, Zoning and Building, if located on private property, a certified copy of liability insurance paid in full, covering the period for which the permit is issued, in the minimum amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per occurrence. 
ix.  Circulation. Not be located in any driveway aisles or loading areas or interfere with on-site circulation; 
x.  Safe distance triangle. Not be located within safe distance triangles, as defined in Palm Beach County Code, Article 7, Landscape Code; 
xi.  Number. Be the only outdoor vendor on the lot; and 
xii.  Mobility. Be removed from the site at night. 
xiii.  Signage. Signage for vendors shall be limited to one sign, with a maximum sign face area of ten (10) square feet. The sign shall be no closer to any property line than the vendor. Banners, pennants, balloons or flags shall be prohibited. 
c.  Transient sales. Transient sales vehicles that travel to several locations in one (1) day, such as lunch wagons or ice cream trucks are: 
i.  Travel. Permitted to travel to any business or residence; and 
ii.  Parking. Not permitted to park in any one location for more than two (2) hours. 
d.  Mobile medical or professional units. Mobile medical facilities or other self contained facilities that travel to several locations, are at the location for a period greater than twenty-four (24) hours, and provide medical or other professional services shall be required: 
i.  Special permit. Receive a special permit that is renewed annually. 
ii.  Site plan. Provide a site plan for all locations indicating where the unit shall be placed on the site; and, 
iii.  Visitation. Specify length of time and frequency of visits to the various locations. The unit shall be on each site no longer than thirty (30) days from the date permit is issued. Units shall visit the site no more than six (6) times a year. 
97.  Sanitary landfill or incinerator means a permitted disposal facility employing an engineered method of disposing of solid waste on land in a manner which minimizes environmental hazards by spreading the solid wastes in thin layers, providing a sand fill or approved substitute cover. A sanitary landfill or incinerator shall only be located in the SWPD, Solid Waste Disposal Planned Development District, except when an incinerator is an accessory use to a hospital. 
98.  School Siting. Schools shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
General (all schools). 
The following additional conditions shall apply to the proposed sites of the specific school types when constructing new facilities: 
(1)  For primary schools, the proposed site shall have direct access to at least a minor collector road. Outdoor recreational facilities and similar support facilities shall be located and buffered on the proposed site to minimize impacts on the adjacent properties. 
(2)  For secondary schools, the proposed location shall have direct access to at least a major collector road. Stadiums, outdoor recreational facilities and similar support facilities shall be located and buffered on the proposed site to minimize impacts on adjacent properties. 
(3)  Bike paths/pedestrian access. Prior to approval of a building permit, a pedestrian access/bike path and cross-walk plan shall be submitted by the applicant showing access to the school site from surrounding neighborhoods. This system shall be integrated with existing or proposed pedestrian/bike path systems in the area, and shall be subject to the approval by the Village Engineer. 
(4)  Vehicular circulation. Vehicular circulation shall be designed to provide an independent traffic flow for school employees, visitors, and deliveries from the bus loading area and parent drop-off area, where applicable. 
(5)  Dumpsters. Dumpster and trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from residential property and screened from view with a six (6) foot solid wood fence and hedge combination unless part of a pre-existing commercial development. 
(6)  Fencing. A six (6) foot high security fence shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the outside activity area to limit access. 
(7)  Outside activity areas. Outside activity areas shall be located away from adjacent residential areas, whenever possible. Outside activity areas located adjacent to developed residential properties because of site design constraints shall provide a fifty (50) foot buffer. This landscape buffer shall be supplemented with a six (6) foot high hedge or hedge/berm combination and a double row of native canopy trees, spaced an equivalent of one (1) tree per twenty (20) linear feet of landscape buffer. 
(8)  Subject to site plan conditions, schools with one hundred (100) or fewer on-site students are a permitted use within commercially zoned districts and within commercial or industrial pods of Planned Development Districts (PDD). Schools with one hundred one (101) or more on-site students shall be considered a Conditional Use. All schools must demonstrate consistency with the existing site plan/conditions of approval if applicable. 
(9)  Existing public schools are considered conforming uses and shall not require conditional use approval to expand or modify their facilities. 
99.  Security or caretaker quarters means a residence, located on a site for occupancy by a caretaker or security guard. A security or caretaker quarter use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Approval. Applicant shall obtain a special permit from the Zoning Division. 
b.  Maximum number of quarters. 
i.  No more than one (1) security or caretaker quarters use shall be developed upon the same lot as a bona fide agricultural, commercial, industrial or institutional use. 
ii.  In the case of a conditional use, not more than one (1) security or caretaker quarters use shall be permitted within the area governed by the entire site plan. 
c.  Limitation on occupancy. The security or caretaker quarters use shall be for the exclusive use of and shall be occupied only by a guard, custodian, caretaker, owner, manager or employee of the owner of the principal use, and his family. Such person shall be actively engaged in providing security, custodial or managerial services upon the premises. 
d.  Not with temporary uses. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a security or caretaker quarters use shall not be permitted in association with a temporary use. 
e.  Property development regulations. A security or caretaker quarters use shall not be established upon a substandard lot, nor shall the development of such quarters cause a site to violate this Code. 
f.  Construction standards. Development of a security or caretaker quarters use shall meet the appropriate standards of the Palm Beach Building Code and other applicable laws. 
g.  Use of mobile home. A mobile home may be used for a security or caretaker quarters use only in the AGR, AP, SA, RSER, AR, IL, IG and CF districts. Mobile homes as accessory use to an agricultural use in districts within the Urban Services Area shall be on a minimum of five (5) acres. Agricultural uses outside the Urban Services Area, shall meet the lot size and property development regulations of the district. See Section 6.4.4.62. 
h.  Discontinuation of use. A security or caretaker quarters use shall continue only so long as the principal use that it is meant to serve remains active. Upon termination of the principal use, the right to have the caretaker or security quarters shall end, and the quarters shall immediately be discontinued. Once discontinued, such quarters shall not be re-established except in conformity with this section. 
i.  Accessory use. A security or caretaker quarters use shall be allowed as an accessory to a public or civic use in all districts. 
j.  Renewal of Special Permit. The special permit shall be renewed annually in accordance with Section 5.5.5.J. of this Code. 
100.  Self-service storage. Self-service storage, limited-access means a multi-storied self-service storage facility, with limited access points from the exterior of the building to interior halls that serve individual bays. Self-service storage, multi-access means a one story self-service storage facility with multi-access points from the exterior of the building to individual bays. A self-service storage use may be developed as a one story multiple access facility or as a multi-story limited access facility in accordance with the standards in this subsection. 
a.  General. All self-service storage uses shall comply with the following: 
i.  Uses. Self-service storage facilities shall be limited to the rental of storage bays and the pickup and deposit of goods or property in dead storage. 
ii.  Vehicle Rental. A Vehicle Rental Facility may be permitted on site subject to review and approval as a Conditional Use A. The accessory use shall be limited to the rental of trucks and trailers used for moving; the installation of hitch and towing packages, and wash facility for rental inventory. The rental facility office shall be located facing a collector street. A maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of the rental office may be devoted to the rental and sale of retail items used for moving and storage including but not limited to: hand trucks, cartons, tape, and packing materials. 
(a)  Employee and Customer Parking. If a Conditional Use A is requested for a vehicle rental facility, then parking shall be calculated in accordance with Section 7.2.3 of this Code. 
(b)  Parking of rental trucks. Parking of rental trucks and trailers approved as an accessory commercial use may be permitted to be parked outside subject to the following criteria: 
(i.)  Section 7.2 of this Code. 
iii.  Use of bays. Use of storage bays shall be limited to storage of personal goods. Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate or process goods; service or repair vehicles, boats, small engines or electrical equipment, or to conduct similar repair activities; conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind; or conduct any other commercial or industrial activity on the site. Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility use shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address in order to obtain an occupational license or other governmental permit or license to do business nor as a legal address for residential purposes. Violation of this subsection shall cause revocation of any license or permit obtained to conduct such activity. 
iv.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for a self-service storage facility shall be two (2) acres. A self-service storage facility use included within a Planned Development District shall have a minimum of two (2) acres devoted exclusively to such use. 
v.  Security quarters permitted. A security or caretaker quarters use may be established on the site of a self-storage facility pursuant to Section 6.4.4.99. 
vi.  Outside storage. Except as provided in this section, all property stored in the area devoted to a self-service storage facility use shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. Open storage of recreational vehicles and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by persons for their personal use shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility use, provided that the following standards are met. 
(a)  Location. The storage shall occur only within a designated area. The designated area shall be clearly delineated on the approved site plan. 
(b)  Lot area. The storage area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area unless approved by the Village Council. In no case shall the storage area exceed fifty (50) percent of the lot area. 
(c)  Screening. The storage area shall be entirely screened from view from adjacent residential areas and public roads by a building or by installation of a six-foot high wall meeting the requirements of Section 7.3.10. 
(d)  Setbacks. Storage shall not occur within the area set aside for minimum building setbacks. 
(e)  Boats. Pleasure boats stored on the site shall be placed and maintained upon wheeled trailers. 
(f)  Dry stacking. No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on site. 
(g)  Vehicular maintenance. No vehicle maintenance, washing or repair shall be permitted in a self-storage facility. 
(h)  Vehicles Permitted. No more than a total of ten (10) rental trucks and/or trailers may be stored or displayed at a self-storage facility at any given time. Trucks with truck beds cabs which exceed twenty-five (25) feet or more in length shall be prohibited from being stored on-site. 
vii.  Landscaping and buffering. 
(a)  Wall option. A self-service storage facility use may dispense with the wall that is required to be erected within the required perimeter landscape strip for that portion of the perimeter if all of the following standards are met. 
(i.)  Facades. The exterior facades of storage structures present an unbroken, wall-like appearance when seen from adjacent lots and rights-of-way. This shall not prevent the installation of fire access doors, if mandated by law. 
(ii.)  Wall. The exterior facades of separate storage structures are joined by walls to give the appearance of structural continuity. 
(iii.)  Buffering. The resulting area between the outer face of the structures and the property line or right-of-way is maintained and appropriately planted as a landscape buffer. 
(iv.)  Access. There are no aisle ways or other vehicle access ways located in the area between the building and the right-of-way or adjacent lot boundary. 
(v.)  Berm. Either a landscape berm is installed in the perimeter landscape buffer or the area is maintained for vegetation preservation. 
(b)  Supplemental planting. The following planting standards shall apply, regardless of the buffer and wall option. 
(i.)  Planting. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted for each twenty (20) feet of perimeter landscape strip. 
(ii.)  Aisle ways. The gross area of interior aisle ways in a self-service storage facility shall be treated as a specialized vehicular use area, pursuant to Section 7.3.10 provided that one (1) additional tree shall be planted for each five hundred (500) square feet of landscape area transferred to the perimeter of the lot. 
(iii.)  Height. Immediately upon planting, trees shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height with a crown spread of five (5) feet. 
(c)  Dumpsters. Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be screened from view of adjacent lots and streets. 
viii.  Signage. Signage shall comply with Article 7, Chapter 14 or this subsection, whichever is more restrictive. 
(a)  Freestanding signs. The maximum number of freestanding signs shall be one (1) sign for each lot frontage on which a self-service storage facility use has access to a public street. The sign shall be placed along this frontage. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35) "feet". 
(b)  Wall signs. The maximum number of flat or wall signs shall be one (1) sign for each building facade facing a public road on which the self-service storage facility has access. No signs shall be placed on the doors or walls of individual storage bays. 
(c)  Roof signs. No roof signs shall be permitted on the site. 
(d)  Sign area. The maximum sign area of on-premises signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet for each sign face. 
ix.  Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be the minimum necessary to discourage vandalism and theft. If a facility abuts a residential district, outdoor lighting fixtures shall be no more than fifteen (15) feet in height. 
x.  No loudspeakers. No exterior loudspeakers or paging equipment shall be permitted on the site. 
xi.  Door orientation. Storage bay doors shall not face any abutting property located in a residential district, nor shall they be visible from any public road. 
xii.  Barbed wire. No barbed or razor wire may be used. 
xiii.  Architecture. The exterior facades of all structures shall receive uniform architectural treatment, including stucco and painting of surfaces. The colors selected shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Supplemental standards for multi-access self-storage facilities. In addition to the general standards above, multi-access self-service storage facilities shall comply with the following regulations: 
i.  Separation between buildings. Separation between buildings within the facility shall comply with the circulation standards in this subsection or be a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
ii.  Maximum bay size. The maximum size of a storage bay shall be four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
iii.  Height. With the exception of a structure used as a security or caretaker quarters, the maximum height of a self-service storage facility use shall be one (1) story with the height of the structure not to exceed twenty (20) feet. In addition, a parapet wall shall be constructed to screen roof mounted air conditioning and any other equipment. The combined height of the building and the parapet wall shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
iv.  Circulation. The following on-site circulation standards shall apply: 
(a)  Interior. Interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisle ways adjacent to the storage bays. These aisle ways shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking while using storage bays. The minimum width of these aisle ways shall be twenty-one (21) feet if only one-way traffic is permitted, and thirty (30) feet if two-way traffic is permitted. 
(b)  Flow. The one- or two-way traffic flow patterns in aisle ways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist at a minimum of use of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows. 
(c)  Access. Appropriate access and circulation by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of internal turning radii of aisle ways. 
c.  Supplemental standards for limited access self-storage facilities. In addition to the general standards above, limited-access self-storage facilities shall comply with the following regulations: 
i.  Height. The structure shall meet the height requirements of the district. A parapet wall shall be constructed to screen roof-mounted air conditioning and any other equipment. The parapet wall shall be included in the height of the structure. 
ii.  Architectural Compatibility. The Architectural Review Board may require one or more of the facades to incorporate architectural features on one or more facades to reduce the scale and mass of the structure. Elevations demonstrating the architectural treatment shall be submitted and approved prior to certification of the final site plan by the Development Review Committee. The Planning & Zoning Director may require the architectural elevations to be reviewed by the Architectural Review Board if it is determined that the proposed architectural features do not correspond to the context and character of the surrounding land uses. Architectural treatment may be required to ensure that the building is compatible with surrounding land uses and does not appear as an industrial warehousing structure. Architectural treatment may include, but is not limited to: 
(a)  Roof. Use of varying roof heights, pitches and overhangs; 
(b)  Windows. Use of appearance of window openings in proportion to the overall facade and the horizontal or vertical emphasis of major building elements; and, 
(c)  Materials. Use of building materials to create visual details to provide relief in building mass. Elevations demonstrating the architectural treatment shall be submitted and approved prior to certification of the final site plan by the Development Review Committee. The Planning & Zoning Director may require the architectural elevations to be reviewed by the Architectural Review Board if it is determined that the proposed architectural features do not correspond to the context and character of the surrounding land uses. 
iii.  Loading. Each entry point used to access hallways leading to the storage bays shall accommodate a minimum of two (2) loading berths and related maneuvering area. The loading areas shall not interfere with the primary circulation system on site. 
iv.  Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 7.2. Parking allocated to the storage bays shall be distributed among and conveniently located to the loading areas. 
d.  Supplemental standards for self-storage facilities in a Multiple and Mixed Use Planned Development. In addition to the general standards above and those regulations applicable to Multiple and Mixed Use Planned Developments, self-storage facilities located in a Multiple and Mixed Use Planned Developments shall comply with the following regulations or whichever is more restrictive: 
i.  Location. The Multiple and Mixed Use Planned Developments must be located on and possess an access to an arterial roadway as listed in the Florida Department of Transportation, Village, Palm Beach County or Federal Functional Classification Table. 
ii.  Maximum lot size. The Multiple and Mixed Use Planned Developments shall be a minimum of twenty (20) acres, of which a maximum of fifteen (15) percent may be used for the self-storage facility. 
iii.  Setbacks. The self storage facility shall be setback a minimum of three hundred fifty (350) feet from the arterial road right-of-way set forth in subsection i above. 
iv.  Phasing. In addition to the phasing requirements of Section 5.8.4.C.2 (Conditional uses or Planned Development Districts other than Planned Unit Development Districts) a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the additional project square footage shall be built and obtain a certificate of occupancy simultaneously with or prior to the self storage facility. 
v.  Type of Self Storage. Multi-access self storage facilities are not permitted without a limited access self-storage facility and they shall be located behind the limited access self-storage facility. 
vi.  Architecture. The exterior facades of all structures within the Multiple and Mixed Use Planned Developments shall receive uniform architectural treatment, including materials, texture and colors. 
e.  Standards for portable storage units. Portable storage units shall mean any portable, above-ground containers including but not limited to, nonlicensed trailers and other containers used for temporary storage of personal property, merchandise or materials. Portable storage units are intended only to be used for short-term storage. 
i.  Location. In residential zoning districts, portable storage units shall be placed on either the driveway, approved parking areas, or within the buildable portion of the lot. In nonresidential zoning districts, portable storage units shall only be allowed in conjunction with the issuance of a valid building permit and located so as not to create a hazard for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Portable storage units shall not be placed within any right-of-way, on top of any easement, on any required parking area or drive aisle, on landscape buffers or any drainage areas. 
ii.  Duration. Portable storage units shall be allowed to be placed at a location for a period of no more than seven (7) calendar days if the unit is placed in the front or side corner of the property with a maximum of two (2) such placements per year for that property. A minimum seven (7) days shall be required between any two (2) of the annual placements. 
iii.  Construction sites. In conjunction with a valid building permit, portable storage units may be located in the rear or side yards for the duration of a valid building permit, under the following conditions: the unit must meet setback requirements for accessory structures in the applicable zoning district, the unit is screened from view and the unit is properly secured via approved storm wind strips. When installed as part of a valid building permit, portable storage units shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
iv.  Signage. All portable storage units shall have the name, current phone number and address of the company supplying the unit placed on a sign no more than six (6) square feet in area. No other signage may be placed on the unit. 
v.  Hazard. Portable storage units shall be secured at all times whenever loading or unloading is occurring. No hazardous materials shall be stored in these units at any time. 
101.  Shade House means an accessory agricultural structure consisting of a screened enclosure with a screened or rolled plastic roof used to protect plants from insects, heat and exposure to the sun, A shade house shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Permits. A shade house used for bona-fide agricultural purposes less than twelve (12) feet in height shall not be required to obtain a building permit. 
b.  Urban Services Area. 
i.  Less than twelve (12) feet in height. A shade house less than twelve (12) feet in height shall meet the minimum setbacks of the district. 
ii.  Greater than twelve (12) feet in height. A shade house greater than twelve (12) feet in height shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front and side corner and fifteen (15) feet from the side interior and rear. 
102.  Single-family means the use of a lot or a structure for one (1) detached dwelling unit, excluding a mobile home but including a manufactured building. A single-family dwelling shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Excavation for ponds. Standards for Type IA and Type IB Excavation for ponds are located in Article 7. (Excavation). 
103.  Solid waste transfer-station means a facility where solid waste from several relatively small vehicles is placed into one relatively large vehicle before being transferred to a solid waste processing or disposal facility. Solid waste may be sorted but not processed at the transfer station. A solid waste transfer station use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards 
a.  Compatibility, screening, buffering. The proposed solid waste transfer station shall be properly located and buffered to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. To ensure use compatibility with surrounding uses, adequate setbacks, and screening and buffering around the perimeter of the proposed solid waste transfer station shall be required at the time the facility is constructed. The standards shall be waived if any of landscape buffer is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. Required minimum lot size, setbacks, screening and buffering shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
b.  Setbacks. No part of a transfer station or its accessory ramps and access roads shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any public road, drainage canal, lake, stream, navigable waterway or property line. 
c.  Screening and fencing. All storage areas shall be effectively screened from view by walls, fences or buildings. Such screening shall be designed and installed to ensure that no part of a storage area can be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent lots. In no case shall the height of recyclable or recovered materials, or non-recyclable residue stored in outdoor areas exceed twenty (20) feet or the height of the principal building on the lot, whichever is greater. 
d.  Perimeter landscape buffer strips. Buffer strips shall be installed pursuant to Section 7.3.10 for facilities in industrial zoning districts contiguous to land zoned for industrial use. For all other facilities, a landscape strip shall be installed, provided that when the property line is contiguous to property in a residential district, the landscape buffer strip shall be a fifty (50) feet in width. 
i.  Access. An access road that can be negotiated by loaded collection vehicles shall be provided to the entrance of the solid waste transfer station. Access shall not be provided on a residential street. Access shall be restricted to specific entrances with gates which can be locked at all times and which carry official notice that only authorized persons are allowed on the site. 
ii.  Drainage. Untreated surface water runoff shall not be permitted to discharge directly into lakes, streams, drainage canals or navigable waterways other than into or through approved on-site containment areas. 
iii.  Storage areas. All outdoor storage of recyclable materials shall be in leak-proof containers or located on a paved area that is designed to capture all potential run-off associated with the stored material. Run-off shall be handled in a manner that is in conformance with local state and federal regulations. 
iv.  Performance standards. The operation of a solid waste transfer station shall conform to all other requirements of this Code. 
v.  Consistent with Comprehensive Plan. The proposed solid waste transfer station shall be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this section. 
vi.  Supplemental application requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of this Code, applications for solid waste transfer stations shall include the following: 
(a)  Access. Graphic illustration and narrative analysis of year round access routes to the site. 
(b)  Type. An explanation of the type of facility requested. It shall specify the type of materials to be handled and include a description of the proposed method of operation, including special waste handling procedures and limitations. 
(c)  Waste. An estimate of the quantity of waste to be received, expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day. 
(d)  Hours of operation. A statement specifying the hours of operation. 
(e)  SWA permit. Verification that the applicant has obtained a permit from and posted a bond with the Solid Waste Authority (SWA) before site plan approval. This SWA permit shall be consistent with the procedures for approval of an amendment to the Future Land Use Map. 
104.  Stable, commercial means a commercial establishment for boarding, breeding, training or raising of horses not necessarily owned by the owners or operators of the establishment, rental of horses for riding, or other equestrian activities, excluding uses classified as equestrian arena. A commercial stable use may be operated in conjunction with a residence and shall comply with the Animal Care and Control Regulations pursuant to Ord. 89-2, as amended, as well as the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Limitations of use. Commercial stables shall be limited to the raising, breeding, training, boarding, and grooming of horses, or rental (livery) of horses for riding. 
b.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres in all permitted districts, except that stables which rent horses (livery) shall have a minimum of ten (10) acres. 
c.  Frontage. The minimum required frontage on a public road to be used from the primary point of access shall be one hundred (100) feet or the minimum standard of the district in which the commercial stable is located, whichever is greater. 
d.  Setbacks. No structure or stable shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line, or the minimum setback standard of the district in which the commercial stable is located, whichever is greater. 
e.  AR district. In the AR district, rental of horses for riding shall be permitted only if approved as a Class "B" Conditional use. 
f.  Limited to Equestrian Preservation Areas. Stables are permitted only within the Equestrian Preservation Areas, consistent with the provisions of Section 6.10.12. 
105.  Stable, private means the care of horses owned by the occupants or owners of the premises. A private stable shall comply with the Animal Care and Control Regulations pursuant to Ord. 89-2, as amended as well as the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Limitations of use. A private stable shall be limited to the boarding, breeding, training or raising of horses owned by the occupants or owners of the premises. 
b.  Boarding. On sites of at least two (2) acres, boarding for up to four (4) horses not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises shall be permitted. 
c.  Setbacks. No structure or stable shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line, or the minimum setback standard of the district in which the private stable is located, whichever is greater. 
d.  Limited to Equestrian Preservation Areas. Stables are permitted only within the Equestrian Preservation Areas, consistent with the provisions of Section 6.10.12. 
106.  Agricultural stand means a temporary stand, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet, used for the retail sale of agricultural products, not necessarily grown on site, consisting of fresh unprocessed fruit, vegetables, flowers, and containerized interior house plants. The stand shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Approval. An agricultural stand is permitted subject to a special use permit approval. Application shall be made on forms provided by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
b.  Locational criteria. The stand and accessory area shall be: 
i.  permitted only in the AR/Rural, CN, and IL districts; 
ii.  located on an arterial roadway designated on the Village or Palm Beach County Thoroughfare Plan; 
iii.  located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from an intersection of an arterial and any other dedicated right-of-way; 
iv.  located at least six hundred (600) feet from any other agricultural stand permitted in accordance with these provisions; if located in a zoning district other than a commercial district; and, 
v.  located at least five hundred (500) feet from adjacent residential uses. 
c.  Number. Only one (1) stand shall be permitted on a lot of record. 
d.  Size and configuration. The stand and accessory area shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. The accessory area shall be limited to display, storage and cashier purposes and shall be covered by a removable cantilevered canopy or umbrellas. No outdoor display or storage shall occur outside of the stand, umbrella or canopy area. 
e.  Uses. The use of the stand shall be limited to those uses identified above. No on-site food preparation or processing shall be permitted. No vending machines shall be permitted on-site. No additional special permits shall be permitted in conjunction with the stand except for seasonal sales. Seasonal sales may be permitted in accordance with Section 6.4.4.83 of this Code. 
f.  Mobility. The stand shall be transportable, retain its mobility, and have a frame of sufficient strength to withstand being transported. The stand shall be transportable by wheels, skids or hoist. 
g.  Building Materials. The stand shall be constructed of durable materials such as but not limited to metal, fiberglass, wood, etc. The structure used for a stand shall be constructed for the sole purpose of selling agricultural products. Semi-trucks, mobile homes, and other permanent or temporary structures shall not be used as a stand. Motor vehicles, including vans and small trucks may be permitted provided the vehicle is removed from site at the end of each business day. These vehicles shall not be used for permanent or temporary residential purposes. 
h.  Sanitation. The stand shall provide sanitary facilities in accordance with the laws of the Village of Wellington, as applicable. 
i.  Electricity. Electricity may be connected to a stand for lighting, cash register, refrigeration and fans. Electricity shall not be used for preparation of food, and other uses similar to a vegetable market or a convenience store. Electrical service to a site shall be provided in accordance with the electrical code. If a generator is used on site, it shall meet the supplemental requirements established by the Building Official and Palm Beach County Fire-Rescue Department. 
j.  Refrigeration. Refrigeration shall be contained within the confines of the one hundred fifty (150) square foot stand. Appropriate permits shall be obtained. If a motor vehicle is used for the stand, portable refrigeration may be used if contained as part of a motor vehicle and removed from the site daily. 
k.  Setbacks. The stand shall be set back at least thirty-five (35) feet from the front property line and fifty (50) feet from all other parcel boundaries, designated for the stand. 
l.  Signage. Signs for vendors shall be limited to two (2) signs, with a combined maximum sign face area of thirty-two (32) square feet single-faced or sixty-four (64) square feet double-faced. The sign shall be no closer to any property line than the vendor stand. Banners, pennants, balloons or flags shall be prohibited. 
m.  Concurrency and Impact Fees. A concurrency certificate is not required for stands one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less. Impact fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the special permit in accordance with the impact fee schedule contained in Art. 10. 
n.  Permission. The vendor shall receive written permission from the property owner. 
o.  Insurance. Submit proof of liability insurance paid in full covering the period for which the permit is issued, in the minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence. 
p.  Renewal of special permit. The special permit shall expire within one year from the date the permit was issued. The special permit may be renewed annually in accordance with Section 5.5.5.J of this Code. 
q.  Existing stands. All stands with a valid permit in effect on July 11, 1995, and which have been operating continually with a valid occupational license since issuance of the valid permit, shall be grandfathered. These operations may continue in the configuration as existed on July 11, 1995 in accordance with the laws and ordinances of The Village of Wellington, Florida, and as provided herein: 
i.  the enclosed portion of the stand shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet unless provided for below; 
ii.  display of products immediately adjacent to the stand, whether or not displayed under an umbrella or canopy, may continue in the same configuration as existed on July 11, 1995; 
iii.  the stand shall not sell any products unless permitted in accordance with the uses permitted to be sold in an agricultural stand as set forth in this subsection, as amended; 
iv.  portable refrigeration may be permitted if confined within the three-hundred (300) square foot stand and all required electrical permits have been obtained; and, 
v.  the use of vending machines shall not continue. 
Expansion of existing stands shall not be permitted. Any future expansion of an existing stand shall comply with the regulations of this section. If an existing stand is expanded, repaired, or altered, the affected area shall comply with the regulations herein. 
107.  Storage, agricultural means the storage of equipment or products accessory or incidental to a primary agricultural use. Agricultural storage shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  General. Any storage of hazardous waste or regulated substances shall comply with local, state and federal regulations. 
b.  Outdoor storage. Outdoor agricultural storage shall comply with the following supplementary use regulations: 
i.  AR district in Urban Service Area. Outdoor storage shall meet the setbacks of the AR district. 
ii.  Residential, Commercial and Industrial districts in the Urban Service Area. Outdoor agricultural storage shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Setbacks. Outdoor agricultural storage shall meet the setbacks of the specific district. 
(b)  Screening. Outdoor agricultural storage shall be screened from view by a solid fence, wall or building. 
c.  Enclosed storage. Enclosed agricultural storage shall be permitted in conjunction with a bona fide agricultural use with or without a principal structure. Enclosed storage shall be contained within a permanent structure. Mobile homes and shipping containers shall not be permitted. 
i.  AR district in Urban Service Area. An enclosed structure shall be set back one hundred (100) feet in the front and side corner and fifty (50) feet in the side interior and rear. 
ii.  Residential, Commercial and Industrial districts in the Urban Service Area. An enclosed structure shall meet the principal use setback of the specific district. 
108.  Sugar mill or refinery means an establishment for the extraction and refining of sugar from agricultural products. 
109.  Theater drive-in means an establishment for the outdoor viewing of motion pictures by patrons while in their automobiles. 
110.  Townhouse means a dwelling unit located on an individual lot and attached by at least one but no more than two (2) party wall(s) along fifty (50) percent of the maximum depth of the unit, to one (1) or more other dwelling units; has a continuous foundation; each on its own lot, with said party wall(s) being centered on the common property line(s) between adjacent lots. A townhouse development shall comply with the following supplementary use standards. In the case of conflict with the property development regulations of the district, these standards shall apply. 
a.  General development regulations. See Section 6.5. Property development regulations for additional general development regulations not included in this section. 
b.  Minimum lot area. 
i.  Size. No townhouse lot shall be less than sixteen hundred (1,600) square feet. 
ii.  Ownership. Where any portion of the original lot is not divided among and incorporated into the resulting townhouse lots, then that portion of the original lot shall be held by either of the following or a combination of the following: 
(a)  Common area. The lot owners, in which event each lot owner shall have an undivided interest in the common area, which shall be appurtenant to that lot. The individual interest in the common areas shall not be conveyed separately from the ownership of said lot; or 
(b)  Property owners association. A property owners association. 
c.  Minimum lot width. The minimum width of a townhouse lot shall be sixteen (16) feet and the minimum area to be conveyed shall be not less than one hundred (100) percent of the total ground floor building area of the dwelling unit. Where one hundred (100) percent of the townhouse lot is conveyed in fee simple then a homeowners maintenance association shall be formed among the unit owners to assure compliance with exterior area maintenance regulations as may be adopted by the association. 
d.  Setbacks and separations. A townhouse development shall comply with the following setbacks and separations: 
i.  Minimum townhouse setbacks. 
Minimum Townhouse Setbacks 
YARD SETBACKS 
(25' Maximum Building Height) SETBACKS 
(35' Maximum Building Height) Front 25 feet - garage 
15 feet - unit 30 feet - garage 
20 feet - unit Side (interior unattached) 7.5 feet 12.5 feet Side (interior attached) 0 feet 0 feet Side (street) 25 feet 25 feet Rear 25 feet 25 feet  
NOTES: 
(a)  Setbacks shall be measured from perimeter property lines, perimeter landscape areas (if within a PPD), canal rights-of-way, residential access streets and road rights-of-way; 
(b)  Townhouse units shall also be setback a minimum distance of ten (10') feet from parking tracts. Townhouse units developed on parking tracts shall not support garages (attached or detached), as part of the unit. 
(c)  Townhouse units which abut a perimeter landscape area or a passive open space area, (lake, canal, neighborhood park, etc.) may reduce the minimum rear or side building setback distance by twenty-five (25) percent, (See Section 6.5.7.F, Setbacks abutting passive open space). This setback reduction shall not be used in conjunction with other setback reduction regulations.) 
(d)  Recreation buildings and other structures allowed within townhouse developments which are not considered accessory structures shall comply with the setback and separation requirements of this section. 
(e)  Townhouse buildings located within a planned development may request flexible regulations for side and rear building setbacks by applying to the DRC as described in Section 6.8.1. 
ii.  Minimum townhouse separations. 
Minimum Townhouse Cluster Separations 
YARD SEPARATIONS 
(25' Maximum 
Building Height) SEPARATIONS 
(35' Maximum 
Building Height) Front 25 feet 30 feet Side (interior) 15 feet 25 feet Side (street) 25 feet 25 feet Rear 25 feet 25 feet  
NOTES: 
(a)  For a townhouse with a one (1) car garage, a driveway, twenty feet in length, shall be provided. 
(b)  Separations shall apply to the proximity of one townhouse building (group of attached townhouses) to another. 
(c)  Minimum townhouse separations do not apply to the proximity of an accessory structure to a townhouse unit. 
(d)  Townhouse buildings located within a planned development may request flexible regulations for side and rear building separations by applying to the DRC as described in Section 6.8.A.8.f.(1), Regulating Plan. 
e.  Height. No building or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
f.  Accessory buildings and structures. No detached accessory buildings or structures other than permitted fences or walls shall be permitted on any lot less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
g.  Access and parking. Townhouse lots may be arranged in groups fronting on residential access streets (if located within a Planned Development) or fronting on parking tracts as allowed in Section 8.22, Access and Circulation Systems. Minimum parking requirements shall be in accordance with Article 7.2, Off-street parking and loading of this Code. 
h.  Replacement of similar structure. In the event a townhouse unit developed pursuant to this section is destroyed or removed by or for any cause, the unit, if replaced, shall be replaced with a unit of at least similar size and type, that does not exceed the dimensions of the prior unit. Units that were legally approved as townhouse units by either the Village of Wellington or Palm Beach County prior to March 1, 2007, which are destroyed or removed by, or for, any cause may be rebuilt in accordance with the footprint and dimensions that were approved regardless as to whether they exist on a lot that was platted as a townhouse lot or lot that was converted through the plat waiver process and without regard to their non-conformity with these regulations to the extent the non-conformity existed on March 1, 2007. 
i.  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. An attached townhouse building shall be developed as a whole, and no certificate of occupancy for a townhouse unit shall be issued until completion of one (1) or more adjacent units and the entire attached building exterior, parking and landscaping. 
j.  Minimum townhouse attachment. A townhouse unit shall be attached to another townhouse unit along a minimum of fifteen (15) feet of the length of the unit. This minimum attached length between townhouses is limited to the portion of a building supporting an air conditioned living area, a garage or a storage area and shall share a continuous foundation with the townhouse building. 
k.  No more than eight (8) townhouse units can be attached to each other. 
111.  Utility, minor means elements of utility distribution, collection, or transmission networks, other than electrical generation and transmission voltage facilities, required by their nature to be relatively dispersed throughout the service area. Typical uses include gas and water regulations, electrical distribution substations, sewage lift stations, and telephone exchange buildings and substations. A minor utility use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. The proposed minor utility shall be located within reasonable proximity of the area to be served by the facility. 
b.  Compatibility, buffering, screening. The proposed minor utility shall be properly located and buffered to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. If deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, adequate setbacks, screening and buffering around the fenced area of the utility shall be required at the time the facility is developed. The standards shall be waived if any of the required landscape buffer is not visible from adjacent lots or rights-of-way. 
c.  Compliance with the Code and state and federal laws. The proposed utility shall meet all requirements of this Code and all other relevant state and federal laws. 
d.  Maximum size of structure. The minor utility structure, buildings, and appurtenances shall not exceed fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of gross enclosed floor area. 
112.  Vehicle sales and rental means an establishment engaged in the retail or wholesale sale or rental, from the premises, of motorized vehicles or equipment or mobile homes, along with incidental service or maintenance. Typical uses include new and used automobile sales, automobile rental, boat sales, boat rental, mobile home, manufactured housing and recreational vehicle sales, construction equipment rental yards, moving trailer rental, farm equipment and machinery sales and rental. A vehicle sales and rental use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards. 
a.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot area for vehicle sales and rentals is three (3) acres, except: 
i.  IL district. In the IL District, and 
ii.  Rental. For truck and trailer rental accessory to an auto service station, not exceeding five (5) trucks or trailers for rent. 
b.  Parking. Unless otherwise provided for in this section, all vehicular use areas and specialized vehicular use areas for display, sale, rent, or storage purposes shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 7.2 (Off-street Parking Regulations) and Section 7.7 (Driveways and Access). 
i.  Display. Motor vehicle display, sales, rental and storage. 
(a)  Storage. Motor vehicle dealerships may store vehicles outdoors on an improved parking surface without reference to parking stalls, backup distances, parking stall striping or wheel stops. For outdoor motor vehicle sales and display parking, signs and stall striping are not required, but in all other respects, outdoor sales and display parking shall conform to the provisions of Section 7.2 (Off-street Parking Regulations). Parking for vehicle storage, sales or display may not be counted toward meeting the number of required off-street parking spaces to be provided for customers and employees. 
(b)  Display. If a specialized vehicular use area is utilized for display of vehicles, there shall be a barrier separating it from customer parking. This barrier may be in the form of a landscape strip, curbing, removable bollards or other suitable barrier approved by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
(c)  Vehicles. No vehicle shall be parked with its hood or trunk open. Motor vehicles on display shall not be elevated. 
ii.  Customer parking. Customer parking shall be marked with an above grade sign and shall be physically separated from the motor vehicle sales, storage and display space. 
iii.  Security. When the facility is not open, the parking area shall be locked and gated. 
c.  Car wash. If an accessory car wash facility is installed on-site, it shall use a water recycling system. 
d.  Loudspeakers. No outdoor speakers or public address systems that are audible from the exterior of the site shall be permitted. 
e.  Accessory repairs and parts sales. Repair facilities and sales of parts may be provided as an accessory use. Repair facilities and paint and body shops shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district lot. Service bay doors shall not be oriented toward any adjacent property in a residential district, or oriented toward any adjacent public street. There shall be no outdoor repair of vehicles. No outside storage of disassembled vehicles, or parts thereof, shall be permitted on-site. 
f.  Unloading space. The development shall include an area on-site to unload vehicles from car carriers. This area shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide and sixty (60) feet long, shall have sufficient maneuvering area adjacent to it, shall be located out of the vehicular traffic circulation and shall not be adjacent to residential district lots. The unloading area shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property in a residential district. 
g.  Operating conditions. No vehicles, other than for customer and employee parking, shall be stored or displayed on the site except those which are intended for sale and are in running condition. Motorcycles, auto, truck, boat, mobile home, and recreation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe operating condition at all times. If in a used condition, they shall have a current valid license plate. 
h.  Sales office. No mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle shall be used as sales offices, storage space or for sleeping purposes. Sales offices and storage shall be contained in buildings in conformance with the Village Building Code and Fire Code. 
i.  Fencing and screening. A safety fence of up to a height of six (6) feet shall be required if it is determined necessary to protect the general public health and safety. Screening of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity shall be required if it is determined necessary to protect neighboring property from potential loss of use or diminishment of land value. On property lines not adjacent to a public street, there shall be provided a chain-link fence or wall eight (8) feet in height from the finished grade. 
j.  IL district. In the IL district, a vehicle sales and rental use shall be limited to the following: 
i.  In conjunction with repair facility. A vehicle sales and rental use in conjunction with a general repair and maintenance use shall be permitted, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Limitations. The vehicle sales and rental uses shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) vehicles per lot and shall be subject to development review committee. 
(b)  Display. Vehicles on display must be within fifty (50) feet of a repair bay. 
(c)  Site plan. Site plan approval shall be based on the standards in Section 6.4.4 (Vehicle sales and rental-parking). 
ii.  Truck and trailer rental. Truck and trailer rental limited to a maximum of five (5) vehicles per lot shall be permitted subject to Development Review Committee. Truck and trailer rental exceeding five (5) vehicles per lot shall be permitted only if approved as a Class "B" Conditional use. 
iii.  Automobile rental. Automobile rental shall be permitted as a Class W Conditional use. 
iv.  Mobile home, RV sales, heavy equipment or rental. The sale or rental of mobile or manufactured homes, recreational vehicles or heavy equipment shall be permitted as a Class "B" Conditional use. 
k.  Accessory truck and trailer rental. Accessory truck and trailer rental limited to a maximum of five (5) vehicles per lot may be permitted subject to DRC review. Truck and trailer rental exceeding five (5) vehicles shall be permitted only if approved as a Class "B" conditional use. 
113.  Vehicle repair and related services, minor mobile means a business which travels to the customer's vehicle in order to perform minor repairs or related services. Mobile minor vehicle repair and services shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Registration. Registration with the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs is required for minor auto repair. 
b.  Insurance. Liability insurance as required by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs shall be obtained. 
c.  Regulations. There shall be adherence to all regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency regarding leakage or spills of toxic fluids. 
d.  Recycling. All oils and fluids must be recycled using the methods prescribed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
e.  Home occupation. If the repair or service is a home occupation, there must be adherence to all home occupation standards as required in Section 6.4. and to all parking standards for residential districts as required in Section 7.2. 
114.  Veterinary clinic means an establishment engaged in providing medical care and treatment for animals. A veterinary clinic use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  AR district. In the AR district, a veterinary clinic use shall be for livestock only and shall be located on a minimum of five (5) acres. 
b.  AR in the Urban Service Area. In the AR district in the Urban Service Area, a veterinary clinic shall be only for large animals. 
c.  CN district. In the CN district, a veterinary clinic shall not have outdoor facilities nor occupy more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Outdoor runs. Veterinary clinics with outdoor runs or boarding facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre. 
ii.  Setbacks. No outdoor run or boarding structure shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. 
iii.  Design. Outdoor runs shall be hard surfaced or grassed with drains provided every ten (10) feet, and shall be connected to an approved sanitary facility. Outdoor runs shall provide a chain-link material on the walls and the top. If necessary to protect the general public, safety fences of up to a height of six (6) feet shall be required on outdoor runs. If necessary to protect neighboring property from potential loss of use or diminishment of land value, a landscape screen of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity shall be provided around the outdoor run. 
115.  Vocational school means an establishment, for profit or not, offering regularly scheduled instruction in technical, commercial, or trade skills such as, but not limited to business, real estate, building and construction trades, electronics, computer programming and technology, automotive and aircraft mechanics and technology, or other types of vocational instruction. 
116.  Warehousing means an establishment engaged in the storage of materials, equipment, or products within a building for manufacturing use or for distribution to wholesalers or retailers, as well as activities involving significant movement, breaking of bulk and storage of products or equipment. Typical uses include motor freight transportation, moving and storage facilities, cold storage, warehousing and dead storage facilities, but exclude self-service storage facilities and office/warehouse combinations. A warehouse use shall comply with the following supplementary standards: 
a.  Accessory Office. A general warehouse use with an accessory office shall be equipped with sanitary facilities. 
b.  Parking. The commercial establishment shall require limited off-street parking. 
c.  Public Access. Storage of stock-in-trade, equipment or material best kept in a warehouse-like environment shall not be open to the general public. 
d.  Sales. Retail sales shall be prohibited. 
e.  Storage. All materials shall be stored entirely within an enclosed building. 
f.  Manufacturing. No manufacturing, assembly or processing shall take place on site. 
g.  Office/Warehouse. An office/warehouse combination is a construction office for special trade contractors, or a commercial wholesale trade establishment consisting of a mix of small scale, independent business offices each having a contiguous, accessory enclosed storage area which is internally accessible to the office. 
i.  Office space. The minimum percentage of office space supporting the warehouse use shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area. 
ii.  Regulations. The approved office/warehouse combination shall follow the warehouse regulations a. through f. as shown in this section. 
h.  Conforming use status of prior approvals. Office/warehouse combinations that were approved by special exception or other previous approvals, prior to adoption of this section [June 2. 1992] shall be considered to be a conforming land use. The approved office/warehouse combination shall follow conditions a. through f. above. 
117.  Water or wastewater treatment facility and de-watered domestic wastewater residuals land application means a facility designed for treatment and disposal of more than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day of wastewater, including large regional plants and above ground package treatment facilities. A water or wastewater treatment facility use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards in all zoning districts. Dewatered domestic wastewater residuals may be applied to land when found to comply with subsection i. below. 
a.  Location. The location of the proposed water or wastewater treatment facility shall be within reasonable proximity of the area to be served by the facility. 
b.  Stock piling or sludge. Stock piling of sewage sludge on-site is prohibited without odor control. 
c.  Facility Odor. Facilities shall be designed and operated to restrict objectionable odor from entering adjacent properties. 
d.  Compatibility, buffering, screening. The proposed water or wastewater treatment facility shall be properly located and buffered to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. Adequate setbacks, screening and buffering around the perimeter of the proposed water and/or wastewater facility site shall be required at the time the facility is developed. For purposes of this section, the AR-Agricultural Residential Zoning District is not considered a residential district. Required setbacks, screening and buffering shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
Table 6.4-6 
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY SETBACKS 
Type/Capacity Type of Facility Setbacks from 
Residential and 
Commercial 
Zoned Property Setbacks from Non- 
Residential or Non- 
Commercial Zoned 
Property Wastewater treatment facilities over one million gallons per day capacity: Head works, clarifiers, sludge; Treatment & handling facilities without odor control 750 feet 500 feet Head works, clarifiers, sludge; Treatment & handling facilities with odor control 300 feet 200 feet Chemical storage facilities 300 feet 200 feet Accessory facilities 200 feet 100 feet Wastewater treatment facilities up to one million gallons per day capacity including package treatment facilities Treatment units without odor control 150 feet 150 feet Treatment units with odor control 100 feet 100 feet Chemical storage facilities 100 feet 100 feet Accessory facilities 100 feet 100 feet  
NOTES: 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions shall be governed by the regulations above or the most recent standards adopted by the District and shall apply only to new schools. The District shall forward any changes in the standard to the Department within twenty (20) days of School Board adoption. Minimum lot dimensions shall include, if applicable, sufficient room for any on-site retention. 
(2)  Tertiary filters do not require odor control. 
Table 6.4-7 
WATER TREATMENT FACILITY SETBACKS 
Type/Capacity Type of Facility Setback Water treatment facilities over two million gallons per day capacity. Treatment units and chemical storage 200 feet Units which will cause airborne sulfides 500 feet 5 Accessory facilities 100 feet Water treatment facilities up to two million gallons per day capacity including package treatment facilities. Treatment units and chemical storage 100 feet Units which will cause airborne sulfides 250 feet 2 Accessory units 100 feet  
NOTES: 
(1)  Maximum building height. Structures higher than thirty-five (35) feet are allowed provided the following setbacks are met: 
(a)  The minimum yard setbacks of this section; and 
(b)  An additional one (1) foot setback for each one (1) foot in height exceeding thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  Unless treatment for removal of sulfides for odor control is included. 
i.  Buffer. Perimeter landscape buffer strips with a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet; 
ii.  Trees. Double rows of trees planted within landscape buffers at a ratio of one (1) twelve (12) foot tall tree for each thirty (30) linear feet of abutting property line or fraction thereof, and 
iii.  Screening. Screening around the Perimeter of the site, consisting of a hedge, earthen berm, fence or wall which will present a solid visual screen at least six (6) feet in height within one (1) year of installation. 
e.  Complies with the Code and state and federal laws. The proposed water or wastewater treatment facility meets all requirements of this Code and all other relevant state and federal laws. 
f.  Consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The proposed water or wastewater treatment facility is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
g.  Package water or wastewater treatment facility. If a package water or wastewater treatment facility is developed, the following additional standards shall be met. 
i.  Confirmation. If a package treatment facility is proposed to be developed in the designated Urban Service Area (USA) in the Comprehensive Plan, confirmation shall be provided from the appropriate public utility that central water or wastewater service is not available at the time the application for development permit is submitted, and that service is projected to be available within four (4) years of that date; 
ii.  Duration. The use of package treatment facilities in the USA shall be permitted only until such time as central water or wastewater service is available from the appropriate public utility; 
iii.  LSA. If the package wastewater treatment facility is proposed to be developed in the designated Limited Service Area (LSA) of the Comprehensive Plan: 
(a)  Confirmation. Confirmation is provided from the PBCPHU that use of a package wastewater treatment plant is necessary to protect water quality; and 
(b)  Certification. A certificate is provided by the PBCPHU that the uses proposed can be adequately served with a package wastewater treatment plant. 
iv.  Standards. Package treatment facilities, where permitted, shall be designed and installed in accordance with all relevant state, federal and local utility standards. 
h.  Effect on previously approved facilities. Water and wastewater treatment facilities approved prior to the effective date of this section shall not be considered nonconforming uses. Expansion of existing facilities may be allowed with setbacks lower that those listed in the table in this section provided the expansion is reviewed and approved by the DRC and if odor control is provided for significant sources of odor. 
i.  De-watered Domestic Wastewater Residual Land Application: Class A or B Dewatered Domestic Wastewater Residuals (DDWR), as defined by Chapter 17-640, F.A.C. and Article 3 of this Code, may be applied to the land at bona fide agricultural operations in the AP, AGR and AR zoning districts as specified below. Class AA DDWR, as defined by Chapter 17-640, F.A.C. and Article 3 of this Code, has unlimited distribution pursuant to Chapter 17-640, F.A.C. Nothing herein shall preclude disposal of DDWR at a landfill or at a wastewater treatment facility in compliance with applicable federal, state and local regulations nor effect any DDWR operation approved prior to the effective date of this section. 
i.  AR district: Land application of Class A or B DDWR shall be permitted in the AR zoning district on the site of bona fide agricultural operations following approval by the Development Review Committee (DRC). An applicant shall demonstrate compliance with DER standards except that the required separation from buildings and other property lines shall be as specified below. In the case of several adjacent properties which all apply DDWR to the land, the properties may be combined for the purpose of measuring the required separation and the separation may be measured from the boundary of the most exterior application area. 
(a)  External separation. There shall be a minimum separation of five hundred (500) feet from any off-site structure occupied on a daily or frequent basis by people. This distance shall be measured from the perimeter of the DDWR application area outward toward the structure. 
(b)  Internal separation. Internal to each site, there shall be a minimum two hundred (200) hundred foot separation from the perimeter of the DDWR land application area to the property line of the adjacent parcel 
These setbacks may be reduced or increased by the DRC when approved by the Director of the Palm Beach County Public Health Unit and found by the DRC to be consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, the intent of this section, and the compatibility standards of this Code. 
118.  Wholesaling, general means an establishment engaged in the display, maintaining inventories of goods, storage, distribution and sale of goods to other firms for resale, or the supplying of goods to various trades such as landscapers, construction contractors, institutions, industries, or professional businesses. In addition to selling, wholesale establishments sort and grade goods in large lots, break bulk and redistribute in smaller lots, delivery and refrigeration storage, but excluding vehicle sales, wholesale greenhouses or nurseries, wholesale of gas and fuel, and wholesale building supplies. A general wholesaling use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  IL District. In the IL district a general wholesaling or warehouse use which has an accessory office shall be equipped with sanitary facilities. 
119.  Zero lot line home means the use of a lot for one (1) detached dwelling unit with at least one (1) wall, but not more than two (2) walls or a portion thereof, located directly adjacent to a side lot line, excluding a mobile home but including a manufactured building. A zero lot line home development shall comply with the following supplementary use standards. In the case of conflict with the property development regulations of the district, these standards shall apply. 
a.  Design standards. A zero lot line development shall contain homes (dwelling units) which are constructed abutting a lot line and may contain side street homes (see 103.a.2, Side street homes, below). Zero lot line and side street homes have lot sizes and building setbacks which are substantially smaller than a typical single family house. Special attention is required to ensure that the design of the lot and home provides privacy and an outdoor recreation area for the residents. Zero lot line and side street homes shall comply with the following design standards: 
i.  Zero lot line home. A zero lot line home shall be designed abutting one (1), but not more than two (2) property lines and shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum zero setback. A minimum length of the home, twenty (20) feet, shall be located abutting a lot line and shall have a zero foot setback from the lot line. Credit towards meeting this minimum length requirement shall be granted for an air conditioned living area, a garage or a storage space which is attached or otherwise a part of the house. Attached shall mean that the buildings share a continuous foundation, and a portion of the buildings abut a lot line with a zero foot setback. If the home abuts two (2) lot lines, the minimum length measurement shall be cumulative for the two (2) lot lines; 
(b)  Prohibited openings. Openings such as doors or windows (including the second and third floors of the home), shall not be allowed in the portion of the home abutting the zero lot line. 
(c)  Maintenance and roof eave encroachment easement. The plat of a zero lot line development shall indicate the establishment of a maintenance and roof eave encroachment easement along the zero lot line. 
(i.)  Easement width. This easement shall be of sufficient width, minimum two (2) feet, to allow for the maintenance of the zero lot line wall and to accommodate the overhang of the roof eave and gutter. 
(ii.)  Roof eave encroachment. Roof eaves may project over the zero lot line up to a maximum of eighteen (18) inches provided that gutters we installed to prevent water runoff onto the abutting property. 
(iii.)  Drainage easement. Eaves shall not project over drainage easements. No construction shall be permitted within an established easement, except as allowed in Section 6.5.11, Easement encroachment. 
(d)  Atrium. An atrium may be constructed along the zero lot line side of the home to provide light, air, and a means of emergency escape. A gate may be installed for emergency exit purposes provided the gate is a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in width to provide handicap access; a minimum of six (6) feet eight (8) inches in height; opaque (to maintain privacy); and, operable only from the inside with the door opening inward. 
(e)  Recess minimum. The remaining portion of the home may be recessed from the zero lot line by complying with the following standards: 
(i.)  Distance. The home shall be recessed a minimum distance of four (4) feet from the zero property line; 
(ii.)  Openings. Openings (doors or windows) in the recessed portion of the home shall not be adjacent to the outdoor patio or pool of another home unless the outdoor area is completely screened from view from the adjacent home. 
(f)  Privacy wall or fence. On every zero lot line home created pursuant to this section, a minimum five-foot high solid privacy wall or privacy fence (or combination thereof) shall be constructed along the zero lot line beginning at the rear of the home and extending a minimum distance of ten (10) feet toward the rear property line. The privacy wall shall ensure a minimum private outdoor living space for each unit. 
(i.)  Screened roof enclosure. A five-foot high solid privacy wall constructed of masonry or other acceptable to the Building Division shall be provided when a screened roofed enclosure extended to the zero lot line. The wall shall extend to the rear corner of the screened roofed enclosure. 
(ii.)  Solid roof enclosure. A eight-foot high solid privacy wall constructed of masonry or other material acceptable to the Building Division shall be provided when a solid roofed screen enclosure extends to the zero lot line. The screen enclosure shall be attached to the masonry walls. The wall shall extend to the rear comer of the solid roofed enclosure. 
(iii.)  Final subdivision plan. The design and function of zero lot line homes abutting lot lines on two (2) sides shall be graphically indicated an a final subdivision plan prior to review and certification by the Development Review Committee. The plan shall indicate typical home configurations including door and patio locations. In no event shall separations between units be less than ten (10) feet. 
(g)  Use of glass block along zero lot line. The use of glass block or similar translucent materials along the zero lot line shall be subject to the following provisions. 
(i.)  Building code. The glass block shall comply with all building code requirements, including product type, fire rating, energy codes, and other construction standards (refer to approved product list in the Building Division). In addition, manufacturer's specifications regarding maximum area shall be adhered to. 
(ii.)  Translucency. Only translucent glass block, which allows no shapes to be visible through the block, shall be used. 
(iii.)  Light transmission. Only glass block with no more than sixty (60) percent exterior light transmission shall be used. 
(iv.)  Limitation. Use of glass block shall be limited to new construction only, unless permission of the home owners association and neighboring owner is obtained. 
(v.)  Surface area. The use of glass block shall be limited to less than fifty (50) percent of the surface area of the wall abutting the zero lot line. 
(vi.)  Affidavit. The applicant (property owner or contractor) shall submit a notarized affidavit that verifies the degree of light transmission and the translucency of the glass block to be used. 
ii.  Side street home. A side street home may only be located on a lot having a street on two (2) consecutive sides or otherwise located on a corner lot or a lot abutting an open space tract (lake, canal, recreation area, etc.) with a width of fifty (50) feet or greater. This home shall not abut a property line and shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of Table 6.4-8, Zero Lot Line Development Property Development Regulations. It is important to note that a side street home is not required to follow the design standards of Section 6.4.4.103.a.(1), Zero lot line home. 
(a)  Privacy fence. On every side street lot created pursuant to this section a minimum five-foot high wall or privacy fence (or combination thereof) shall be constructed along the side interior lot line. This requirement shall be waived if the adjacent home is required to install a privacy fence along the same lot line. At a minimum, this fence shall be constructed along the interior lot line beginning at a point parallel to the rear of the home and continuing a minimum distance of ten (10) feet toward the rear property line. 
b.  Property development regulations. The property development regulations for zero lot line developments shall be as follows: 
Table 6.4-8 
Zero Lot Line Development 
Property Development Regulations 
INTERIOR LOT CORNER LOT CORNER LOT ZERO LOT LINE HOME SIDE STREET HOME Minimum Lot Size 4,500 s.f. 4,500 s.f. 4,500 s.f. Minimum Lot 
Width and 
Frontage 45 feet 55 feet 60 feet Minimum Lot 
Depth 75 feet 75 feet 75 feet Minimum Front 
Setback Front loading garage 
25 feet 
Side loading garage: 
10 feet 
Living quarters: 
10 feet Front loading garage 
25 feet 
Side loading garage 
10 feet 
Living quarters: 
10 feet Front loading garage 
25 feet 
Side loading garage 
10 feet 
Living quarters: 
10 feet Minimum Side 
Interior Setback Non Zero Lot Line 
10 feet 
Zero Lot Line: 0 feet Zero Lot Line: 0 feet 10 feet Minimum Corner 
Setback n/a 15 feet 15 feet Minimum Rear 
Setback 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet Maximum Building 
Height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet Maximum Lot 
Coverage 50% - building 50% - building 50% - building Minimum Parking 2 spaces per unit 2 spaces per unit 2 spaces per unit  
Notes to Table 6.4-8: 
(1) Lot size. The gross density of the development shall be consistent with the allowable density of the Comprehensive Plan. This allowable density may result in a minimum lot size in excess of the forty-five hundred (4,500) square feet indicated above. 
(2) Minimum frontage and width. Minimum frontage and width may be measured from the front building setback. 
(3) Driveway. The driveway of a front loading garage or a side loading garage shall intersect the street at or near a ninety (90) degree angle to the road center line. At no time shall a street intersection for a driveway be approved which may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(4) Setback reduction. Zero lot line and side street homes which abut a perimeter landscape area or an open space area with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet, (lake, canal, neighborhood park, etc.) may reduce the minimum rear building setback distance by a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent, See Section 6.5.7.F, Setbacks abutting passive open space. This reduction shall not be used in conjunction with other setback reduction regulations. 
(5) Accessory building setbacks. Accessory buildings shall meet the setback requirements for the principal structure. 
(6) Flexible regulations. Zero lot line and side street homes located within a planned development may request flexible regulations for minimum lot dimensions and side and rear building setbacks by applying to the DRC as described in Section 6.8.1. 
(7) Screening. Mechanical equipment shall be appropriately screened and oriented away from the front door and private spaces of the adjacent lot. 
c.  Access. Zero lot line homes and side street homes within a planned development may front on a residential access street subject to Chart 8.22-2, Chart of Minor Streets. Residential subdivisions located outside of a planned development shall provide access to lots as required by Section 8.22, Access and circulation systems. 
d.  Parking. Each zero lot line and side street home shall have a minimum of two (2) parking spaces and shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.2, Parking and loading. 
e.  Replacement. In the event any home built under this section is destroyed or removed by or for any cause, the unit if replaced, shall be replaced with a unit of similar size and type, meeting the minimum requirements of this section. The developer shall include the appropriate deed restrictions and/or covenants so as to require replacement as outlined above. 
120.  Zoo means a place where animals are kept in captivity for the public to view. A zoo use shall comply with the following supplementary use standards: 
a.  Location. An outdoor wildlife preserve or attraction shall have a five hundred-foot buffer from an existing residential development or an area designated as a residential use in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Setback from residential. No animal containment area shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district. 
c.  AR district. In the AR district, a zoo use shall be located on a minimum of ten (10) acres, and shall have a five hundred-foot buffer from residentially occupied or zoned property in addition to the required minimum setbacks of these districts. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02; September 9, 2003; Secs. 6.4.4.104, 6.4.4.105; Ord. No. 2003-06; June 10, 2003; Sec. 6.4.57, Table 6.4-1; Ord. No. 2003-20; September 9, 2003; Sec. 6.4.4.100, Table 6.8-2; Ord. No. 2003-22; October 28, 2003; Table 6.4-1, Secs. 6.4.4.6 & 6.4.4.16; Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Sec. 6.4.4; Ord. No. 2004-24; August 10, 2004; Sec. 6.4.4.1; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2, 2-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 2009-13, § 4, 8-11-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 3, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 3, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 7-10-2012; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 4(Att. C), 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-21, § 2, 1-8-2018) 
CHAPTER 5. - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6.5.1. - Property development regulations schedule. 
    The minimum lot dimensions, minimum and maximum, density, maximum floor area ratio (FAR), maximum building coverage, and minimum building setbacks for uses in each district shall be determined from Table 6.5-1, as may be modified by succeeding provisions of this section. Maximum building height shall be as specified in Section 6.5.8, Building height. Property development regulations for Planned Development Districts shall be as specified in Section 6.8. Planned Development District Regulations. There are no property development regulations for the CF district. A project may be eligible to develop at the maximum density specified in this schedule provided all other property development regulations of this Code are met. 
TABLE 6.5-1 
Property Development Regulations Schedule 
Zoning District Min. Lot Dimensions Density Max 
FAR Max. 
Bldg. 
Cover Min. Bldg. Setbacks (ft.) Size Width Depth Min. Max. Front Side Street Rear RSER 10 ac. 300 800 - 0.1 0.35 20% 25 50 25 50 AR 10 ac. 300 300 - 0.1 0.15 10% 100 50 80 100 CRS 10 ac. 300 300 - 0.1 0.15 10% 100 50 80 100 RE 2.5 ac. 180 200 0.1 0.4 - 20% 50 40 50 50 RTS 14,000 100 125 1.01 3.0 - 25% 25 15 25 25 RS 6,000 65 75 5.01 8.0 - 40% 25 7.5 15 15 RM *1 65 75 8.01 18.0 - 35% 25 15 25 12 RH *1 65 75 18.01 22.0 - 35% 25 15 25 12 CN 1 ac. 100 100 - - 0.35 25% 30 30 30 30 CC 1 ac. 100 200 - - 0.35 25% 30 30 30 30 CRE 3 ac. 200 300 - - 0.50 25% 80 50 80 50 IL 1 ac. 100 200 - - 0.45 45% 40 15 25 20 CF ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  
*Notes: 
(1)  Minimum lot sizes for the RM and RH districts are governed by the density indicated by the Comprehensive Plan, and compliance with property development regulations and design standards including, but not limited to: building setbacks, parking requirements, landscaping requirements, and building coverages. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan dictates that proposed site plans and subdivisions are governed by the permitted density of the applicable land-use category; a lot size which achieves this consistency, and complies with all relevant property development regulations and design standards, is therefore, acceptable minimum lot size. 
(2)  All principal buildings and uses require address signs pursuant to Section 7.14.4 of this Code. 
(3)  Certain nonconforming lots may use the setback provisions in Section 1.9 of this Code. 
(4)  Residential side interior and rear setbacks abutting open space may be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent. (See Section 6.5.7.F) 
Sec. 6.5.2. - General exceptions. 
A.  Single-family development in multifamily districts. Notwithstanding the requirements of Table 6.5-1, the property development regulations for single-family development in the RM and RH districts shall be as specified in Table 6.5-1 for the RS district. 
B.  Townhouse development. Notwithstanding the requirements of Table 6.5-1, the property development regulations, except for density, for townhouses in all districts where they are authorized shall be as specified in Section 6.4.4, Supplementary Use Standards-Townhouse. Density shall be determined according to Table 6.5-1. 
C.  Special density programs. Special density programs for affordable housing are available through the use of VDBP. Site development standards for affordable housing may be in accordance with 6.5.12 of this Code. 
Sec. 6.5.3. - Lot dimensions. 
A.  Lot size. Lot size refers to the total horizontal area included within the lot lines, expressed in acres or square feet. The minimum lot size for each district is provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4, Supplementary Use Standards, or elsewhere in this Code. 
1.  Special Lot Size Requirements in the AR district. 
a.  Antiquated subdivisions. The following standards shall pertain to the further division and recombination of lots in areas designated Rural Residential in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
i.  Parcels within antiquated subdivisions shall not be further divided to form additional parcels unless each parcel created is ten (10) or more acres. 
ii.  Parcels cannot be reduced in size unless the purpose is to enlarge other parcels in the subdivision. The overall number of units of the reconfigured lots shall not exceed the original number of units. 
iii.  Parcels can be enlarged in size by combining with land area not included within the boundaries of the subdivision. The number of dwelling units allowed for the reconfigured area shall not exceed the original number of units. 
iv.  Adjacent lots of record under common ownership shall be required to combine to satisfy density requirements if such combination acts to reduce the nonconformity. 
2.  Maximum lot size in CN district. No lot shall be larger than five (5) acres in the CN district. 
B.  Lot width. Lot width refers to the horizontal distance, in feet, between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. The minimum lot width for each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.4.4, Supplementary Use Standards, or elsewhere in this Code. 
C.  Lot frontage. Lot frontage refers to the length of the front lot line. The minimum lot frontage requirement shall be identical to the minimum lot width requirement as specified in Table 6.5-1, except that on curving streets or cul-de-sacs, the required lot frontage for lots contiguous to and between the points of curvature (P.C.) of said streets may be reduced by forty (40) percent, provided that the centerline radius of the contiguous street is one hundred twenty-five (125) feet or less. 
D.  Lot depth. Lot depth refers to the horizontal length, in feet, of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. The minimum lot depth for each district shall be as provided in Section 6.5.1. except as otherwise provided in Section 6.4.4, Supplementary Use Standards, or elsewhere in this Code. 
Sec. 6.5.4. - Density. 
    Density refers to the number of dwelling units for each acre of land. The minimum and maximum densities permitted in the RE through RH districts shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4, Supplementary Use Standards, or elsewhere in this Code. 
A.  Calculation of density. Density shall be calculated by dividing the number of dwelling units on a lot by the lot area (in acres). When the result is other than a whole number, it shall be rounded down to the nearest hundredths. 
B.  Maximum density. Densities in excess of the maximum permitted by Table 6.5-1 shall be permitted in the RM or RH districts only if one (1) of the following conditions apply. 
1.  The development is consistent with the County's Voluntary Density Bonus Program designed to provide affordable housing. 
2.  The additional dwelling units are located in a Planned Development in accordance with the Planned Development provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 6.5.5. - Floor area ratio (FAR). 
    Floor area ratio refers to the gross floor area of all structures on a site divided by the gross site area, expressed as a decimal. For the purposes of the FAR calculation, both gross floor area and site area are expressed in square feet. The maximum FAR permitted in each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary Use Standards and Definitions), or elsewhere in this Code. 
Sec. 6.5.6. - Building coverage. 
    Building coverage refers to that portion of the area of a lot, expressed as a percentage, occupied by all structures that are roofed or otherwise covered and that extend more than three (3) feet above the ground surface level. The maximum building coverage for each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary use standards), or elsewhere in this Code. (All principal residential, commercial or industrial uses shall have a structure on the lot that is in compliance with the Building Code and other applicable codes.) 
Sec. 6.5.7. - Setbacks. 
    Setback refers to that part of a lot extending open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for permitted obstructions, along the length of a lot line, and from the lot line, or applicable base building line, to a depth set forth in the property development regulations of the district in which the lot is located. 
A.  Front setback. The front setback refers to the setback extending along the full length of the front lot line. The minimum front setback required in each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary Use Standards and Definitions), or elsewhere in this Code. Said setback shall be measured from the base building line as established pursuant to Section 6.5.7.G. 
B.  Interior side setback. The interior side setback refers to the setback extending along an interior side lot line between the front and rear setbacks. The minimum interior side setback required in each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary Use Standards and Definitions), or elsewhere in this Code. 
1.  Accessory structures. An accessory or subordinate structure (except guest cottages, accessory apartments, or structures over ten (10) feet in height) may be constructed in any residential district (except AR), a distance of five (5) feet from the side interior property lines provided it is not within any established easement, and that there is adherence to the side corner yard setback standards. The structure shall not be permitted to occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the distance between property lines. All structures used as dwellings shall meet the required setbacks of the principal use. 
2.  Accessory structures for Townhouses and Zero lot line homes. Setbacks for accessory structures for Townhouses and Zero lot line homes are described in Section 6.4.4. Supplementary Use Standards for Townhouses and Zero lot line homes. 
C.  Street side setback. The street side setback refers to the setback extending along a street side lot line between the front and rear setbacks. The minimum street side setback required in each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary use standards), or elsewhere in this Code. Said setback shall be measured from the base building line as established pursuant to Section 6.5.7.G. 
D.  Rear setback. The rear setback refers to the setback extending along the full length of the rear lot line. The minimum rear setback required in each district shall be as provided in Table 6.5-1, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary use standards), or elsewhere in this Code. 
1.  Alleys. Whenever a lot in either the commercial or industrial districts is contiguous to an alley, one-half (1/2) of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required rear yard, but in no case shall the rear yard be reduced to less than five (5) feet. 
2.  Railroad tracks. Industrial uses that abut railroad trackage may reduce the rear yard setback to zero (0) feet along such trackage. 
3.  Accessory residential structures. An accessory or subordinate structure (except guest cottages, accessory apartments, or structures not over ten (10) feet in height), may be constructed in any residential district (except AR), a distance of five (5) feet from the rear property lines provided it is not within any established easement, and that there is adherence to the side corner yard setback standards. The structure shall not be permitted to occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the distance between property lines. Permitted accessory structures include satellite dishes, utility sheds, or detached garages. All structures used as dwellings shall meet the required setbacks of the principal use. 
4.  Accessory structures for Townhouses and Zero lot line homes. Setbacks for accessory structures for Townhouses and Zero lot line homes are described in Section 6.4.4. Supplementary Use Standards for Townhouses and Zero lot line homes. 
E.  Setbacks from a safe sight corner. Setbacks from a safe sight corner for a residential lot shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The setback shall be measured perpendicular from the interior lot line of the safe sight triangle. 

F.  Setbacks abutting passive open space. The rear or interior side setbacks for structures abutting an open space may be reduced by a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the standard setback distance provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  The entire length of the structure shall be adjacent to open space (lake, canal, preserve area, golf course, etc.) with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet; and, 
2.  All construction and earthwork shall be completed within the boundaries of the owners' lot. 
G.  Base building line. The base building line for any lot shall be established to provide visual buffer along streets as follows: 
1.  Collector and Arterial Streets. The base building line for any lot abutting a collector or arterial street shall be forty (40) feet beyond the existing right-of-way. Provided, however, that the Village Engineer may waive this requirement in whole or in part and establish the base building line at a lesser distance from the existing right-of-way where said distance is deemed adequate to provide the visual buffer. 
2.  Local streets. The base building line for any lot abutting a local street shall be as follows: 
a.  Along deeded or dedicated rights-of-way, the base building line shall be thirty (30) feet from the centerline of the right-of-way unless administratively waived by the Village Engineer, or shall be the existing right-of-way line, which ever greater. 
b.  Along streets established as recorded easements, the base building line shall be thirty (30) feet from the center of the established easement unless administratively waived by the Village Engineer. If the base building line requirement is waived on an easement road, setbacks shall be measured from the inside easement line. 
c.  The base building line for lots within subdivisions platted after February 5, 1973 shall be the right-of-way line of the street as shown on the plat. 
3.  Permitted encroachments. Pursuant to the approval of the Village Engineer, removable non-habitable structures may be placed between the existing right-of-way line and the base building line. Approval of such structures shall be subject to a removal agreement and may include signs, fences, and auto displays. The area must be landscaped in accordance with Section 7.3 (Landscaping and buffering). 
Sec. 6.5.8. - Building height. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  Height of building: the vertical distance from the finished grade of the crown of the adjacent roadway frontage to: 
a.  the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs (Illustration A); 
b.  the peak line for mansard roofs (Illustration B); 
c.  the mean height level of the roof line between the highest eave and the highest ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs (Illustration C); 
d.  the highest point of the roof surface for domed roofs (Illustration D). 
2.  Perimeter Property Lines: those property lines existing along the perimeter of an LSMU zoning district, not including lot lines internal to the district such as those separating pods or parcels contained within the district. 
3.  Perimeter Landscape Area: the portion abutting the adjacent right-of-way of LWDD areas on the south side of Forest Hill Boulevard and areas abutting adjacent residential properties outside the entire LSMU district. 
4.  Pod or Parcel: the individual MUPD with direct frontage on adjacent public road right-of-way as noted on the overall master plan on the entire mall. 
B.  Exclusions from height limits. 
1.  Church spires, ornamental belfries, towers and spires, stage towers or scenery lofts appurtenant to civic or cultural buildings, chimneys, mechanical equipment, mechanical equipment rooms, and parapet screening mechanical equipment need not be included in measuring the height of a building or structure if they: 
a.  do not exceed in gross area, at maximum horizontal section, thirty (30) percent of the roof area, and 
b.  do not exceed by twenty-five (25) percent the maximum building height allowed in the district. 
2.  Freestanding flagpoles; provided, however, that freestanding flagpoles may not exceed twenty (20) feet in residential districts and thirty-five (35) feet in non-residential districts. 
3.  Water towers. 
4.  Wireless communications towers and facilities, including accessory radio towers, amateur radio/TV antennas, and commercial communication towers and antennas may be erected subject to the limitations in Ordinance 98-8 and Section 6.6.1.K and Section 6.6.1.L of the LDR. 
C.  Height Limitations. 
1.  No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered to a height exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in districts with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan designations of Residential A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H, Community Commercial, Office Commercial, Medical Commercial, Park, Institutional/Public Facilities/Utilities, and Industrial. 
2.  No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered to a height exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in districts with a Comprehensive Land Use Plan Category of Conservation, Neighborhood Commercial, and Commercial Recreation. 
3.  No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered to a height exceeding seventy-two (72) feet in districts with a Comprehensive Land Use Plan Category of Regional Commercial/Large Scale & Multiple Use Overlay (LSMU); provided, however, buildings or structures in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall require Village Council approval after a public hearing and shall be subject to additional requirements as listed below: 
a.  An additional one-foot perimeter property setback above the minimum setback for each one (1) foot in building height or fraction thereof above thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  Pods or parcels with building heights in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall provide and maintain within the required perimeter landscape area, in addition to the approved tree planting requirements for the particular MUPD perimeter landscape areas, additional palm tree plantings based upon a ratio of one tree per twenty (20) linear feet, or fraction thereof, of the MUPD Perimeter Landscape Area. Of these trees: 
i.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the palms shall have a gray or brown wood height equal or greater than one-third ( 1/3 ) the overall height of the structure. These palms shall be located within the foundation plantings of the structure. 
ii.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the palms shall have a minimum gray or brown wood height in excess of twelve (12) feet and be placed within the foundation plantings of the structure. 
iii.  Five (5) percent shall be minimum size of eight-foot of gray or brown wood and can be placed anywhere within the MUPD. 
iv.  All the palm tree plantings under this section are credited 1:1 towards the tree planting standards requirements. 
v.  The only palm types to be used are royal palms and coconut palms. Exception can be made for using "Phoenix" palms wherein this palm will receive credit for four (4) palms if: 
(a)  The phoenix palm size (as measured by clear wood below the root remnants) is equal in height to the tallest measurement of the palms that it is replacing; and 
(b)  The phoenix must be placed in the area of the MUPD where the palms it is replacing is located. 
vi.  These required palms remain as a condition of the approval and must remain as long as the structure remains. Any and all palms that die or become diseased or disfigured must be replaced in a reasonable time period and be of the size palm they replaced. 
Sec. 6.5.9. - Exceptions to property development regulations. 
    The following structures or objects of natural growth shall be permitted within required yard setbacks, provided that the standards of Section 7.3 (Safe distance triangles) are met. 
A.  Arbors and trellises. Arbors and trellises, provided there is a minimum three (3) foot setback from property line. 
B.  Awnings. Permanent or retractable awnings or canopies projecting from a building wall over a required yard setback not more than two and one-half (21/2) feet, and having no supports other than provided by the wall or its integral parts. 
C.  Bay windows. 
D.  Chimneys. Chimneys projecting not more than three (3) feet into the required yard setback. 
E.  Clotheslines. Clothes poles or clotheslines in rear yard setbacks of residential districts. 
F.  Driveways. Driveways subject to other specific provisions of this ordinance related directly thereto. 
G.  Fire escapes and staircases. Fire escapes or staircases, the riser of which shall be at least fifty (50) percent open, provided that the vertical projection downward onto a required yard setback shall not project more than three (3) feet into, and shall not exceed ten (10) percent of, the area of the required yard setback. 
H.  Flagpoles. Flagpoles having only one (1) structural ground member. (subject to Section 7.14.9). 
I.  Fountains. 
J.  HVAC units. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning units (including compressors and condensers) for single-family or duplex dwellings, provided the exhaust air from such units is directed vertically or away from the adjacent property line. 
K.  Mailboxes. 
L.  Terraces. Open terraces, including walkways, ground level wooden decks and natural plant landscaping. 
M.  Stoops. Open, uncovered stoops. 
N.  Recreational equipment. Recreational equipment in the rear yard setback in residential districts. 
O.  Roof overhangs. Roof overhangs projecting into the required setback area a maximum of two and one-half (21/2) feet. 
P.  Sculptures. Sculpture or other similar objects of art. 
Q.  Signs. Signs, subject to the provisions of Section 7.14 (Signage). 
R.  Parking areas. Vehicular parking areas, unless otherwise specifically prohibited by applicable sections of this Code. 
S.  Walls and fences. Walls and fences, subject to Section 6.6.4 (Fences, walls, hedges and utility poles). 
T.  Landscaping. Trees, shrubbery or other objects of natural growth. 
U.  Wells. 
V.  Utility transmission. Utility transmission lines and associated structures, such as poles. 
W.  Basketball goals. Basketball goals, provided there is a minimum three (3) feet setback from the rear and side interior property lines and a minimum fifteen (15) feet setback from front and side street property lines. 
X.  Light poles. Light poles having only one (1) structural ground member 
Sec. 6.5.10. - District specific regulations. 
    Additional property development regulations shall apply to the following districts. 
A.  Additional AR district regulations for Accessory structures. 
1.  Conforming lots in AR district. On conforming lots in the AR district, accessory structures such as pens for the keeping of livestock, shade houses and containerized plants may be located within the required minimum side or rear setback, provided that such structures are not located within twenty-five (25) feet of any side or rear property line. 
2.  Non-conforming lots in AR district. On a single non-conforming lot or parcel of land in the AR district, an accessory structure may be constructed a distance of fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line or at least five (5) feet from any established easement in the rear, whichever is the greater distance, and fifteen (15) feet from the interior side property line, provided that the accessory structure is not located within the required front yard and street side yard setbacks. Except as provided elsewhere in this Code, activities accessory to the principal use such as pens for the keeping of livestock, shade houses and containerized plants shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any side or rear property line. 
3.  Storage containers in the AR district. Storage containers or structures, accessory to a bona fide agricultural use are permitted in the AR district provided the container meets Building Code requirements. 
B.  Additional residential district regulations. Residential developments that are required to be approved by the Development Review Committee shall be subject to linked open space regulations as set forth in Section 6.8, Planned Development Districts. 
C.  Additional CN district regulations. The following additional property development regulations shall apply to the CN district. 
1.  Architectural character. Building design of uses allowed in the CN district shall conform to and be compatible with the general architectural character of the neighborhood in which they will be established, pursuant to the requirements of Section 6.6 (Compatibility standards). 
2.  Enclosed uses. All uses, other than incidental storage of merchandise, (incidental storage shall not be long term inventory or stockpiles of merchandise) shall be operated entirely within enclosed buildings, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Air curtain incinerator, temporary 
b.  Communication tower, commercial; 
c.  Electrical power facility; 
d.  Park, passive; 
e.  Recreation facility, accessory; 
f.  Recycling center; 
g.  Recycling drop-off station; 
h.  Solid waste transfer station; 
i.  Utility, minor; and 
j.  Water or wastewater plant. 
3.  Operating hours. No commercial use shall commence business activities (including delivery and stocking operations) prior to 6:00 a.m. nor continue activities later than 11:00 p.m. except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
D.  Additional regulations in all commercial districts. The following additional property development regulation shall apply to all commercially zoned districts: All commercial uses adjacent to residential zoned property shall not commence before 6:00 a.m. daily. 
E.  Additional IL district regulations. The following additional property development regulations shall apply to the IL district. 
1.  Outdoor activities. Outdoor storage or outdoor industrial operations shall be completely screened from view with a combination of fencing and vegetation to a height of six (6) feet. 
Sec. 6.5.11. - Easement encroachment. 
A.  Purpose. This section is intended to establish a means by which construction and/or landscaping which physically encroach, but are not incompatible with the use for which a utility or drainage easement was established, may be permitted. 
B.  Prohibition. No construction or landscape installation shall occur within any public or quasi-public drainage or utility easement where such construction or landscaping is inconsistent with the use for which the easement was established, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this section. 
    No portion of any habitable structure, nor any structure that is not easily removable shall be permitted to encroach an easement. 
C.  Incompatible uses. If the terms of the easement, or the statute, law, ordinance, rule, regulation, or approval pursuant to which the easement was established prohibits or excludes the use, either expressly or by implication, such use shall be considered incompatible for purposes of this section. 
    The determination of whether a use is incompatible with the use for which an easement was established shall be made by the appropriate regulating agency in accordance with the standards of this section. 
D.  Application process for encroachment into utility easements. 
1.  If a building permit application includes construction in any utility easement, the applicant shall obtain and provide to PZB the consent of all easement holders and beneficiaries. The consent shall be specific to the proposed construction. PZB shall require that the consent be in or on a form established by PZ&B. The consent shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all necessary approvals. The PBC Water Utilities Department shall have the authority to effect a consent for utility easements held by PBC or for which PBC is the beneficiary based upon the criteria set forth in this section titled "'Evaluation criteria for drainage easements." 
2.  PZB shall also require that an executed removal and indemnification declaration (with the necessary consents) be recorded at the applicant's expense, or be submitted to PZB for recording at applicant's expense, prior to the issuance of the building permit. Said removal and indemnification declaration shall inure to the benefit of the easement holders and beneficiaries. 
Said declaration shall provide that all direct and indirect costs related to removal shall be borne by the property owner, its heirs, successors, assignees, and grantees; that the aforestated person(s) shall indemnify and hold the Village, its officers, employees, contractors, and agents harmless against any and all claims and liabilities of whatever nature, (including personal injury and wrongful death) arising from any approval granted hereunder or the construction or installation approved hereunder. The removal declaration shall inure to the benefit of the easement holders and beneficiaries. It shall contain such other terms and covenants as PZB or the Village Attorney reasonably deem appropriate. 
3.  Whenever construction is proposed within the overlap of an utility easement and drainage easement, compliance with this section shall not be construed to relieve the applicant from obtaining any required consents and approvals, if applicable, for encroaching into drainage easements. 
4.  Persons desiring to landscape in utility easements need not obtain a permit pursuant to this section. If required by the easement holders or beneficiaries, the consent for landscaping in utility easements shall be obtained prior to planting. The consent of the PBC Water Utilities Department shall be required for any utility easements held by or to which the PBC Water Utilities Department is the beneficiary. 
E.  Application process for encroaching into drainage easements. 
1.  When a permit is required for construction or landscaping within a drainage easement, the applicant shall apply to the DEPW for approval of construction or landscaping. 
2.  The approval of the DEPW for any such construction or landscaping shall be prior to, and a condition precedent to, the issuance of any building permit. 
3.  The application shall be in or on a form established by the DEPW. The application shall include a copy of the recorded deed to the parcel on which the easement is located; the document(s) creating the easements; a certified sketch of survey of the easement; a sketch or plans showing the proposed construction or landscaping in relation to the location of existing drainage improvements in the easement; and such other documentation as the DEPW reasonably deems appropriate. 
F.  Issuance of approval on drainage easements. 
1.  The DEPW may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the construction or landscaping in drainage easements. 
2.  No approval shall be given before the DEPW has received specific written consent from all easement holders, easement beneficiaries, and governmental entities or agencies having jurisdiction of the drainage easement. The DEPW is hereby authorized to effect consent on behalf of the Village when the Village is the easement holder or beneficiary of drainage easements based upon subsection 6.5.11.G (Evaluation criteria for drainage easements) of this section. The DEPW may require that consent be in or on a form established by the DEPW. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all necessary approvals. 
3.  The DEPW shall also have executed in proper form, and shall cause to be recorded against the applicant's land involved, a removal and indemnification declaration (with the necessary consents) on a form approved by the Village Attorney's Office. Said declaration shall provide that all direct and indirect costs related to removal shall be borne by the property owner, its heirs, successors, assignees, and grantees; that the aforestated person(s) shall indemnify and hold the County, its officers, employees, contractors, and agents harmless against any and a claims and liabilities of whatever nature (including personal injury and wrongful death) arising from any approval granted hereunder or the construction or installation approved hereunder. The removal declaration shall inure to the benefit of the easement holders and beneficiaries. It shall contain such other terms and covenants as the DEPW or the Village Attorney deems appropriate. Proof of the recording of the document shall be furnished. In the case of any construction requiring a building permit, proof of recording shall be furnished to the Building Division or be submitted to PZB for recording at applicant's expense prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
G.  Evaluation criteria for construction or landscaping within utility or drainage easements. 
1.  The following items shall be considered in determining whether construction in an easement should be approved: 
a.  The types of uses to which the easement may be put; 
b.  The nature of the construction or landscaping; 
c.  The permanency of the construction or landscaping; 
d.  The anticipated cost or difficulty of removing the construction or landscaping; 
e.  The current use of the easement and the location of all existing structures and plants; 
f.  The impact the construction or plants may have on the current or future use or uses of the easement; and 
g.  The mitigating effects of any conditions which may be imposed. 
i.  The burden shall be on the applicant to affirmatively demonstrate that the proposed construction or landscaping is not or will not become incompatible with the use for which the easement was established, or impair the rights of the easement holders and beneficiaries. 
H.  Fee. To offset the cost of administering this section, a fee shall be charged as established by the Village Council by resolution, or otherwise. 
I.  All other approvals required. 
1.  All other government permits, approvals, or consents necessary for the construction or landscaping shall be obtained prior to commencement of any construction or landscaping. 
2.  Nothing herein shall be construed as effecting any right to construct or landscape except to the limited and strict extent of any approval granted hereunder. An approval hereunder is for the limited purpose of complying with this section. 
J.  Duties of departments. The applicant is responsible to provide correct information, except as specifically set forth herein, no Village official, employee, or agent shall have the duty of (1) reviewing permit applications submitted pursuant to this section, any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, (2) searching the Official Records of the Clerk of the Circuit Court in and for PBC, or (3) any other investigation to determine: (a) whether a permit application or request for Village approval is inconsistent with the use for which an easement was established, (b) whether an easement exists in the area within which a permit for construction/development is sought or (c) whether any other government or private approvals are required for construction or development for which the permit is sought. However, PZB, DEPW or any other department, official employee, or agent may undertake an investigation, search, or inquiry to determine the aforestated. 
K.  Deviation. If construction or landscaping is materially different than that which is approved by PBC Water Utilities Department, DEPW or PZB, then the approval given shall be of no force and effect, unless such deviation is approved by the department having jurisdiction pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 6.5.12. - Flexible Property Development Regulations for Density Bonus Program Development. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide flexibility from traditional property development regulations in order to provide greater opportunity for cost effective development for housing approved in conjunction with density bonus programs. The regulations represent the minimum regulations acceptable without compromising minimum health and safety standards. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section may apply to all proposed residential development that propose to construct affordable housing, as defined explicitly in Article 3, pursuant to Section 6.9, Voluntary Density Bonus Program. 
C.  Exceptions. Flexible Regulations permitted in Planned Development Districts, by DRC or administrative deviation in this Code, shall not be used in conjunction with this Section 6.5.12 (Flexible Property Development Regulations for Density Bonus Program Development). 
D.  Regulating Plan. All developments planned in accordance with this section shall submit a regulating plan consisting of a comprehensive graphic and written description of the function and development of the project. The regulating plan shall include the requirements listed below and the requirements of the individual district: 
1.  Flexible regulations. The applicant may request to deviate from property development regulations as described below. These regulations may be modified as part of the zoning amendment process or DRC review, as set forth in this Code, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Justification report. A proposed modification of property development regulations shall be justified by the applicant in a written report submitted with the development application which shall include, but not be limited to: 
i.  The regulations which are proposed to be modified; 
ii.  The amount of the requested modification; 
iii.  The areas within the development which these modifications shall occur; and, 
iv.  Graphic representations (site plans, sections, elevations, perspectives, etc.) showing how the modifications will meet the intent of the district and the density bonus program in respect to open space, privacy, maintenance, and public health, safety and welfare. 
2.  Review. Flexible regulations are reviewed by the applicable Village of Wellington agencies who provide a recommendation of approval, approval with amendments, or denial. 
3.  Limited use of flexible regulations. Flexible property development regulations are not intended to take the place of variance requests normally reviewed by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. Flexible regulations shall only be granted at the time of approval of the entire project or entire land use zone and shall not be granted on a lot by lot basis. 
Sec. 6.5.13. - Property Development Regulations. 
    Housing, constructed in accordance with a density bonus program described in the applicability section above, may develop in accordance with the traditional property development regulations found in Table 6.5-1. Section 6.4.4; supplementary use standards for zero lot line homes and townhouses or the provisions described herein. 
A.  Minimum lot area and dimensions. The applicant may deviate from minimum lot area and dimensions of the zoning district for all housing, except zero lot line and town homes, found in Table 6.5-1 by the percentage reductions described in Table 6.5-2 below. 
B.  Exceptions to zero lot line minimum lot dimensions. The minimum lot width or lot depth requirement for zero lot line development may be reduced by five (5) feet if the following criteria are satisfied: 
1.  The minimum lot size remains four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
2.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the dwelling units are covenant as affordable housing in accordance with Section 6.9, Voluntary Density Bonus. 
3.  A varied streetscape is provided through, but not limited to: 
a.  Staggering of front yard setbacks to create visual open space along the street. 
b.  Variation of architectural treatment. 
4.  The block length does not exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length and the number and location of driveway access points to the street is approved by the Village Engineer. 
C.  Maximum building intensity and building location standards. The applicant may deviate from the maximum lot coverage, maximum floor area ratio and minimum building setbacks and separations of the zoning district for all housing, except zero lot line and town homes, found in table 6.5-1, by a maximum percentage reduction of twenty (20) percent except for the front yard setback in the RS, RM and RH district which may be reduce by a maximum of forty (40) percent. 
D.  Building height. Building height limitations shall be in accordance with Section 6.5.8 (Building Height Regulations). 
Table 6.5-2 
Permitted Lot Area and Dimensions Deviations 
Zoning District Maximum Percentage Reduction AR 40%  
Sec. 6.5.14. - Minimum recreation requirements. 
A.  Minimum recreation area. A minimum of one hundred ten (110) square feet of open recreation area shall be provided per capita. Adequate provisions shall be made for recreation areas to accommodate the neighborhood and community park level recreational needs of the residents of the development. The recreation areas shall consist of a developed recreation parcel and include recreational facilities of a type consistent with the needs of the residents. The recreation parcel shall be located so as to provide convenient pedestrian access for the residents of the development. The residents of the development, the owner of the land or a property owner's association, and their successors in interest, shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the recreation area. The location of the recreational tract(s) shall be determined at the time of final site plan/subdivision plan submission. 
    In the event of a phased development each subsequent site plan shall show how minimum recreation requirements are being satisfied. The minimum dollar amount to be spent on recreation facilities shall be determined based on the Community Park Impact Fee Schedule in use at the time of the site plan submission. The requirements contained in this section may be waived if adequate guarantee is provided prior to platting that the intent of this subsection's recreation requirement and this section's affordable housing provisions are met; and. 
    This land area recreation requirement, described above, may be waived if the applicant provides an equivalent cash value for the on-site recreational requirement in accordance-with Section 17. 1 of this Code, and; 
1.  The proposed development is single family and located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing Village owned neighborhood, community, district or regional park or community school and has continuous pedestrian access thereto that does not require crossing a street that has greater than a sixty (60) foot right-of-way. 
2.  The proposed development is single family and located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a municipal park, with pedestrian access that does not require crossing a street greater than a sixty (60) foot right-of-way, and the applicant enters into an agreement, subject to Village review and approval, with the municipality for use of such park by the residents of the proposed development. 
    If the single family housing units defined as very low/low comprise no more than twenty (20) percent of the development, are dispersed throughout the development, and the proposed recreation is available for the use of all residents of the development, the on-site square footage recreational requirements allocated to the number of affordable housing units may be reduced by fifty (50) percent. 
Sec. 6.5.15. - Parking requirements. 
    Minimum parking standards shall be in accordance with Section 7.2 of this Code. 
Sec. 6.5.16. - Accessory uses and residential structures. 
    Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in accordance with Section 6.6. An accessory or subordinate structure (except guest cottages, accessory apartments or structures of ten (10) feet in height) may be constructed a distance of five (5) feet from the rear or side interior property line provided there is adherence to the side corner yard setback standards and there is not encroachment into an easement or buffer. 
Sec. 6.5.17. - Minimum dwelling unit size. 
    The minimum size of each dwelling unit shall be in accordance with federal, state and local building codes. 
Sec. 6.5.18. - Minimum landscape and buffer requirements. 
    The development shall be subject to the minimum landscaping and buffering requirements of Section 7.3 of this Code. Except for those provisions specifically described below. In case of conflict with regulations of this Code, the more restrictive shall apply, unless otherwise specifically provided or clearly intended. 
A.  Minimum tree planting requirement. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross lot area. The planting of trees is encouraged to be dispersed throughout the lot and planted on the south and west sides of habitable structures, to promote energy efficiency. To promote energy and water resource efficiency the following landscape techniques are encouraged: 
1.  Planting of shrubs around the foundation of the structure. 
2.  Planting of shrubs, and ground covers in accordance with good xeriscape principles. 
B.  Minimum buffer requirement. 
1.  Compatibility buffer. A ten-foot perimeter compatibility buffer shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to existing commercial or industrial uses where there is no existing buffer. Six-foot high opaque wall or fence and eight-foot trees planted forty (40) feet on center shall be installed within the ten-foot perimeter compatibility buffer. The wall or fence shall have an opening to allow easy access for pedestrians. 
Sec. 6.5.19. - Development and Design Standards. 
A.  Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of the subsection to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Wellington by establishing minimum development and design standards for development within the Village. Additionally, the intent of these regulations are to preserve and protect the distinctive characteristics of the individual communities within the Village by ensuring that new development is compatible with the existing character of the individual neighborhoods that make up the community. 
B.  Definitions: The following words and terms, when used in this ordinance, have the meanings specified herein: 
    Architectural detailing: the use of any one of the design features enumerated below in the front facade of the proposed structure. 
    Belt banding: a raised stucco surface no less than six (6) inches in width and one-half (1/2) inch in depth which is typically painted on a contrasting color and is used as an architectural enhancement on the exterior of the structure. 
    Columns: no less than two pillars complete with decorative capital, base and shaft. 
    Quoins: a raised stucco surface typically found at the building corners or when used as a keystone over entryways or other focal points of the building. 
    Decorative shutters: a non-functioning shutter that will be permanently displayed on the exterior of the building adjacent to the windows on the front elevation. 
    Window banding: a raised stucco surface no less than six (6) inches in width and one-half (1/2) inch in depth which is painted a contrasting color and encompasses windows, doors or other architectural elements on the front and side facades of the structure. 
    Window with architectural character: a window, such as a bay window, which substantially improves the architectural character of the structure. 
    Certification of Compliance: the certification provided by the Village to a property owner for the proposed construction or alteration of a structure or building indicating conformance to the standards contained herein. 
    Entry feature: a pitched roof, ten (10) feet or higher to the eaves, that provides cover over an eight (8) square foot or larger stoop or other paved area in front of the main entrance, or a front porch of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or more under cover with a railing. 
    Front facade: that elevation of the structure which is visible from and or oriented toward the front street and into which the main entrance of the building is constructed. 
    Front elevation planes: the various wall surfaces in the front elevation that are horizontally separated by a minimum of a three (3) foot offset from the principle front elevation. 
    Identical facade: a facade shall be considered to be identical if the fenestration or major architectural elements of the front facade such as roof line, window types and placement, entry type and placement, exterior materials, exterior colors and the vertical planes of the front facade are located in the same location or if major elements, materials and colors of the front facade are repeated to such an extent as to appear to be the same building. For purposes of this definition, a reversed or flipped elevation shall be considered to be an identical facade. 
    Mansard: an extension of the roof system a minimum of three (3) feet in height constructed of the same materials as the principal structure and used to screen a flat roof surface. 
    Mechanical equipment: shall include air cooling and heating equipment, fuel tanks, irrigation pumps, pool pumps, water softeners and similar equipment. 
    Parapet: a wall a minimum of two (2) feet in height constructed of the same materials and painted the same color as the principal structure and used to screen a flat roof surface or mechanical equipment. 
    Paver fabricated driveway: a driveway constructed of at least sixty (60) percent paver block or high quality stamped concrete. 
    Roof plane: the plane of a roof visible in elevation from the street, not including truncated hip roof planes and clipped gables. Roof planes over entry features shall not be counted if points are awarded for the front entry. Roof planes shall have a minimum of a three-foot offset to be considered a separate roof plane. 
    Roof tiles: tiles fabricated from clay or cement for use on a roof. 
    Side entry garage: garages with vehicular access only from the side of the residential structure of which they are a part so that they are not visible when the structure is viewed in elevation from the street. 
    Shutters, permanent: permanently installed shutters shall be those shutters that are designed to be permanently attached to the building and are an architectural feature of the home or are designed to retract into an inconspicuous housing. 
    Under air living area: the fully enclosed portion of a structure that is air conditioned or sufficiently weather tight to make air conditioning practical, not including garages or storage areas. 
C.  Review Process. 
1.  General Requirements. No building or structure shall be constructed, erected, enlarged, structurally altered, converted, relocated, or painted and no use converted to another classification of use unless a Certificate of Compliance has first been issued by the Village. 
2.  Certification of Compliance. An application for a Certification of Compliance shall be submitted to the Planning, Zoning & Building Department in a form prescribed by the Village, along with required fees. In addition to the information required for the building permit, the applicant shall submit information in a form acceptable to the Planning, Zoning & Building Department identifying or illustrating: 
a.  Exterior and roofing colors and materials 
b.  Front, side and rear elevations of the proposed structure 
c.  Roof pitch 
d.  Landscape plan 
e.  Complete application including affidavit for minimum design and material standards 
f.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Planning, Zoning & Building Department to effectively enforce this section. 
For multifamily and nonresidential development, the following shall also be submitted: 
g.  Color renderings or elevations, of all sides of a structure to be visible from a public or private right-of-way. 
h.  Color samples of roof materials; exterior paints to be used as primary, trim, or accent colors; and exterior materials. 
i.  A sign plan. 
j.  Plans or details for screening, landscaping, and buffering of dumpsters, ground-, wall-, and roof-mounted mechanical equipment, compactors, and similar facilities. 
k.  An outdoor lighting plan, including photometric diagrams and associated data. 
l.  A site plan. 
3.  Issuance. A Certification of Compliance shall only be provided after the department determines that the proposed development is in compliance with all requirements of these regulations and all other applicable regulations of the Village or an alternative design or development standard has been approved by the Architectural Review Board. A written Certification shall be provided to the applicant. 
4.  Appeals. Any substantially affected person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning, Zoning & Building Department may appeal the decision to the Architectural Review Board, by filing a written appeal with the Planning, Zoning & Building Department within ten (10) days of the decision of the department. 
5.  Time Limitations. A Certification of Compliance shall be effective as long as a building permit remains in effect for the project or in the absence of a building permit, for one (1) year from the date of the Certification. 
D.  Criteria for Alternative Design and Development. The applicant may request that alternative design or development under criteria as described below be approved. All other requests for deviations from the standards of this subsection shall be considered requests for variances as defined in the Land Development Regulations. Where there is conflict or overlap between the standards contained herein and Land Development Regulations the more restrictive shall apply. 
1.  From Development Standards of Section 6.5.19.E and 6.5.19.F. Alternatives may be allowed by the Architectural Review Board for buildings and structures that do not meet the minimum development standards if: 
a.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and 
b.  The approval of alternative development standards will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, and 
c.  The approval of alternative development standards, if granted, is the minimum alternative that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
2.  From Design Standards of Section 6.5.19.H. Alternatives may be allowed by the Architectural Review Board for buildings and structures that do not meet the minimum design quality point requirements if: 
a.  The total design quality points of the dwelling equals or exceeds the average for the four (4) nearest structures of the same type on the same street and in the same plat. 
b.  The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that the structure contains other architectural features, which produce a design quality substantially equal to or greater than, that which would be achieved by the strict application of the design quality standards. 
3.  From Design Standards of Section 6.5 19.G. The ARB may approve use of alternate materials based on such criteria as materials used in adjacent structures, materials which provide a similar appearance, unique circumstances due to use or location, or use of new materials that will perform in the same manner as approved materials. 
E.  Development standards for residential development. 
1.  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all single-family and two-family residential dwellings located in Land Use Category Type B (within the Urban Service Area), C, D, E, or F as designated on the Future Land Use Map. 
These standards shall not apply to those properties located in the Type A or Type B (rural) land use category. 
The standards of the following paragraphs shall apply to all multifamily dwellings: 
a.  (Windows) 
b.  (awnings) 
c.  (screen enclosures) 
d.  (solar heating panels) 
e.  (shutter, storm panel and storm rollups) 
f.  (utilities) 
g.  (mechanical equipment) 
h.  (docks) 
i.  (accessory buildings and structures) 
j.  (compost bins and livestock waste storage areas) 
k.  (maintenance of construction sites) 
l.  (above-ground pools) 
2.  Approved materials and colors. 
a.  All exterior walls, exterior trim, driveways and roofs shall be consistent with the materials schedules and color charts adopted by the Architectural Review Committee. 
b.  The Architectural Review Committee may, at the request of an applicant, approve additional materials, colors or designs provided the Committee finds that the proposed material, color and design is compatible with the approved materials schedules and color charts, and at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the code in quality, effectiveness or durability. 
3.  Roofs. All roofs shall be constructed in the following manner: 
a.  At least seventy (70) percent of the footprint of air conditionable space plus attached garage space must be covered by a roof with a minimum 5:12 pitch. Subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  The exterior surfaces under a flat roof shall match exterior surfaces of the building in design, color and material or consist of screening. 
ii.  No flat roof shall be visible from the street adjacent to a front yard. 
iii.  The edge of a built-up flat roof shall be concealed behind a parapet or mansard or finished with the same material and color as the edge of the sloped roof of the principal structure except that flat insulated aluminum roof edges shall only be required to be painted to match the principal structure. 
4.  Windows. The installation of reflective glass and/or reflective window films is prohibited. This prohibition shall not be interpreted to prohibit the installation of non-reflective window film designed to protect glass from wind damage. 
Windows used in front facade shall be of a consistent type and shall be placed in a manner to create a unified architectural design. 
5.  Awnings. Awnings may be installed subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The material and colors shall be consistent with the materials schedules and color charts adopted by the Architectural Review Board. 
b.  Awnings may project up to three (3) feet into any required setback that is more than ten (10) feet deep or up to thirty (30) percent of the depth of any required setback that is less than ten (10) feet deep. 
c.  Awnings shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the front of the building. 
6.  Screen enclosure. Screen enclosures are permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Screens shall be either gray or charcoal 
b.  All screens on any one structure shall be the same color 
c.  The screen superstructure shall be either black, bronze, white or the color of the window frames of the structure. 
7.  Solar heating panels. Solar heating panels are permitted only if mounted flush to the roof surface, except that solar heating panels may be mounted at an angle on a flat room if completely screened from view by a parapet. All piping and other equipment leading to and from solar heating panels shall be completely concealed behind parapets or inside roofs and walls or painted to match the color of the material to which they are affixed. Tanks, pumps and other associated mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from streets and adjoining properties. 
8.  Shutters, storm panels and storm rollups. Storm shutters, storm panels and storm rollups shall meet the following design standards: 
a.  Permanently installed shutters: 
i.  Shutters shall be painted to match either the principle color or the trim color of the structure to which they are attached. 
ii.  Permanently installed hardware for storm panels and storm rollups shall be painted to match the principle color or the trim color of the structure to which is attached, according to which will make such hardware the least noticeable. 
iii.  No permanently installed plywood panels are permitted. 
b.  Storm shutters and panels which are not permanently installed shall meet the following utilization standards: 
i.  They may be put in place or closed not more than seventy-two (72) hours before and seventy-two (72) hours after a storm event; 
ii.  They may be put in place or closed for two (2) periods of up to fifteen (15) days each between June 1 and November 30 (the hurricane season) when the owner is absent; and 
iii.  They may be put in place on first floor rear windows during any period of time. 
9.  Utilities. 
a.  Utility meters and related conduits shall be located on side or rear walls and conduits shall be painted to match either the wall or trim color. 
b.  Onsite utility services shall be installed underground. 
10.  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be installed inside a building, underground, or above ground in a side or rear setback. When installed above ground in a side or rear yard, such mechanical equipment shall be: 
a.  Located no closer than five (5) feet to the front facade of the structure; and 
b.  Be completely screened from streets and adjacent properties by walls, fences, or hedges. 
11.  Basketball backboards. Permanently installed basketball backboards and hoops shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Backboards and hoops may be mounted only on a freestanding pole in a front or side yard: 
b.  Backboards and hoops shall not be mounted on a wall or roof of a building; 
c.  Backboards and hoops shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to the front property line and three (3) feet from the side property line; 
d.  Backboards shall be mounted perpendicular to the front property line; 
e.  Backboards and the poles on which they are mounted shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height measured from the grade level at the point on the front property line nearest to the pole; 
f.  Freestanding poles and backboards shall be not be painted or otherwise modified from the original manufactured finish or structure. 
These regulations shall not prohibit the use of portable basketball backboards subject to whatever regulations may be imposed by other sections of this ordinance or by other ordinances. 
12.  Site standards. Single-family and two-family residential lots shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Impervious surfaces shall be limited to buildings, driveways, walkways, patios and pool aprons or other approved structures or surfaces; 
b.  Driveways, walkways and patios in the front yard shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the surface of the required front yard. 
13.  Docks: Docks may be erected subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Docks may extend up to six (6) feet over the surface of the water from the water's edge of a lake. 
b.  Docks may extend up three (3) feet over the surface of the water from the water's edge of a canal. 
c.  Docks that extend over the surface of a canal shall be cantilevered from supports totally located on dry land above the mean high water line and no pilings or other supports shall be permitted in the water. 
d.  The top of the horizontal dock surface shall be no higher than two (2) feet above the mean high water level. 
e.  Docks shall not be located closer to a side lot line than the required side yard setback for the principle building. 
f.  Docks may be constructed of wood or other materials approved by resolution of the Architectural Review Board. 
g.  Permits to construct docks shall be issued by the Village conditioned upon the applicant obtaining any approvals required by other governmental agencies. 
14.  Tennis courts: Tennis courts may be erected subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Tennis courts may not be located in front of the principle structure. 
b.  A tennis court may be located in a required rear setback or side setback provided that the court and its fencing are located no closer than five (5) feet to any property line; 
c.  Tennis courts may be surrounded with a chain link fence not greater than ten (10) feet in height; 
d.  The fence mesh shall be coated with black, brown or dark green vinyl and the rails and the stiles shall be coated or painted black, brown or dark green to match; 
e.  If the court is lighted for night play, then each light pole shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height measured from the natural elevation at the property line at the nearest point to the pole and lighting fixtures shall be screened so that not more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of a foot candle will cross property lines. 
f.  The tennis court fence, and/or the tennis court itself if there is no fence, shall be surrounded by hedge plants that are planted not more than twenty-four (24) inches on center; the hedge plans shall be at least three (3) gallons and thirty-six (36) inches high at planting; and the hedge plants shall be allowed to grow and shall be maintained at a height of not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet. Hedge plants shall be selected from species approved by the Architectural Review Board. 
g.  Tennis courts are permitted as common facilities in zero lot line single family developments, but not on individual zero lot line lots. 
15.  Accessory building and structures. 
a.  Accessory buildings and structures (such as freestanding garages, tool houses, barns, cabanas) shall conform to the same color and material standards applicable to principle buildings. The materials and colors shall match that of the principle building. The provisions of this section shall not apply to freestanding play equipment less than eight (8) feet in height. 
b.  Prefabricated sheds shall be allowed so long as it is demonstrated that the shed is to be screened from view from adjoining properties and abutting rights-of-way in a manner approved by the Planning, Zoning & Building Department. At a minimum, sheds shall be screened by a hedge, native or other vegetation, buildings, fence or other obstructions. Sheds shall be finished to match the primary color of residence or a neutral color and shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in total floor area and eight and one-half (8.5) feet in height. 
16.  Compost bins and livestock waste storage areas. Compost bins and livestock waste storage areas shall meet the same setback requirements applicable to accessory buildings. They shall be completely screened to a height of at least five (5) feet from the street and surrounding properties by walls, fences or hedges. Livestock waste storage areas shall be permitted only on lots of one (1) acre or more. 
17.  Identical Facades. No two (2) identical facades may be placed next to each other in any single family or two-family residential land use category, or across the street from each other in the B and C land use categories. 
18.  Above-ground pools. No above-ground pools shall be permitted. 
F.  Additional Development Standards for Multifamily and non-residential property: 
1.  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all multifamily residential dwellings and non-residential development. 
2.  Site Design. All multifamily dwellings and non-residential development shall provide: 
a.  Safe and effective means of pedestrian access. 
b.  Safe and effective means of vehicular ingress and egress. 
c.  An adequate roadway system adjacent to and in front of the site. 
d.  Safe and efficient on-site traffic circulation, parking, and overall control. 
e.  Adequate access for public safety purposes, including fire and police protection. 
3.  Screening and buffering. Impacts on surrounding properties shall be mitigated by landscaping, screening, buffering, and site or building design. 
G.  Design standards for multifamily and non-residential development. The intent of the design standards is to provide buildings and structures that reflect good design, utilize proper design concepts, and are appropriate to the Village of Wellington. All multifamily dwellings and non-residential development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The proposed building or buildings must be appropriate to the character of the area in which they are proposed to be located, compatible with area land uses, and utilize materials, design, and architecture that are compatible with the design, character, and style of area development. 
2.  The exterior design and appearance of the proposed building or buildings must not adversely affect the value of adjacent developed or vacant properties. 
3.  Projects involving proposed construction of multiple buildings shall provide an overall unity of character and design. The use of architecture, design, materials, and colors must produce a complete development that is both harmonious and internally consistent. 
4.  Buildings shall be designed in a manner that is compatible with the character, mass, bulk, and scale of surrounding structures. 
5.  Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the design, materials, colors, and style of the principal structures. Accessory buildings and structures should be clearly subordinate and complementary to the principal structures. 
6.  Signs shall be compatible with the architectural style, design, colors, and materials of the proposed building or buildings, and shall comply with the Village sign regulations. 
7.  All exterior-building finishes shall comply with the materials, schedules, and color palettes that may be adopted by resolution of the Architectural Review Board. 
H.  Design Standards for Single-Family and Two-Family Lots: 
1.  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all proposed single-family and two-family residential dwellings in the Type B (suburban), C, D, E, and F Land Use Plan categories. 
2.  Design quality points. The features for which design quality points are assigned and the points assigned shall be as described in Table 1-A at the end of this section. 
3.  Minimum design quality points required for approval. No building permit shall be issued for initial construction until it is demonstrated that the building has achieved the following minimum design quality points or the Architectural Review Board has approved an alternative design. 
a.  Type A residential: not applicable 
b.  Type B (rural) residential: not applicable 
c.  Type B (suburban) residential: 80 design quality points 
d.  Type C residential: 70 design quality points 
e.  Type D residential: 60 design quality points 
f.  Type E residential: 55 design quality points 
g.  Type F residential: 55 design quality points 
4.  Additions and renovations. Additional and renovations shall be architecturally compatible with the primary structure and utilize the same colors and materials, design elements as the principal structure. 
5.  Setbacks. 
a.  All structures shall comply with the setback requirements established in the Land Development Regulations except Land Use Category Residential B which shall meet a fifty (50) foot front street setback and a twenty-five (25) foot side setback - except as noted below. 
b.  The side interior setback requirements for the Wellington Aero Club of the Landings at Wellington PUD are hereby established as follows: 
i.  For principle and accessory dwellings - twenty (20) feet. 
ii.  For hangers - fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  All principal and accessory dwellings located in Land Use Category Residential B with Certificates of Occupancy or Building Permits issued prior to July 28, 1998, shall comply with the setback requirements established below: 
i.  For principal and accessory dwellings - twenty-five (25) foot front setback. 
ii.  For principal and accessory dwellings - seven and one-half (7.5) foot side (interior) setback. 
iii.  For principal and accessory dwellings - fifteen (15) foot side (street side) setback. 
d.  Not withstanding the standards of Table 6.5-1 (Property Development Regulations Schedule), in the Palm Beach Little Ranches No. 2 and Palm Beach Little Ranches East of Wellington Subdivisions, the following setbacks shall apply: 
Front setback 50 feet Side setback 25 feet Street side setback 50 feet Rear setback 25 feet  
Table 1.A 
Design Standards for Single-Family and Two-Family Lots 
Design Quality Criteria Residential Land Use Category B 
(Suburban) C D E F More than 3,000 sq. ft. of under air living area or 20 2,500 - 3,000 sq. ft. of under air living area 15 More than 2, 000 sq. ft. of under air living area 20 1,800 - 2,000 sq. ft. of under air living area 15 More than 1,800 sq. ft. of under air living area 20 1,500 - 1,800 sq. ft. of under air living area 15 More than 1,500 sq. ft. of under air living area 20 1,200 - 1,500 sq. ft. of under air living area 15 More than 1,200 sq. ft. 20 Entry feature 10 10 10 10 10 First floor tie beam 9 feet or higher 10 10 10 10 10 Front elevation planes, 2 or more 10 10 10 10 Front elevation planes, 3 or more 10 15 Garage, two cars per dwelling unit 10 10 Paver fabricated driveway 10 10 10 10 10 Roof planes, 2 or 10 10 10 10 Roof planes, 3 or more 15 15 15 15 Roof planes, 4 or more 10 Roof slope greater than or equal to 6:12 10 10 10 10 10 Roof tiles of clay or cement 10 10 10 10 10 Side entry garage 10 10 10 10 10 Landscaping 20% in excess of minimum 10 10 10 10 10 Architectural detailing maximum possible 15 15 15 15 15  belt banding, at least 6" wide and 1/2" deep 3 3 3 3 3  columns, two or more freestanding or engaged 4 4 4 4 4  column taper or entasis 2 2 2 2 2  quoins, at least 18" on one side and 1/2" deep 3 3 3 3 3  shutters, decorative 2 2 2 2 2  shutters, operable 3 3 3 3 3  window banding, at least 6" wide and 1/2" deep 3 3 3 3 3  window boxing, at least 12" wide and 1" deep 3 3 3 3 3  window with architectural character, such as Palladian, arched and/or clear story windows 5 5 5 5 5 Maximum points obtainable 125 135 130 140 140 Minimum points required 80 70 60 55 55 Points obtainable/points required .64 .51 .43 .39 .39 Patio homes in the C or D land use category may use the E design quality points.  
I.  Design Standards for Commercial and Industrial Projects over 15,000 square feet in size or larger and Prohibition of Free-Standing Retail Buildings over 75,000 square feet in size or larger: 
1.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide additional design standards and guidelines for commercial and industrial projects fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size or larger to supplement existing development standards with specific additional regulations that apply to the design of these very large-fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet (or larger) buildings and also to groupings of structures which, in combined total, meet the fifteen thousand (15,000) square-foot threshold required for applicability of this section to such projects and to prohibit free-standing retail buildings over seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet in size or larger. The design of commercial and industrial building(s) and projects determines much of the image and attractiveness of the streetscape and character of a community. Massive and/or generic developments that do not contribute to, or integrate with, the community in a positive manner can be detrimental to a community's image and sense of place. The goal is to create and maintain a positive ambiance and strong community image and identity by providing for architectural and site design treatments which will enhance the visual appearance of commercial and industrial development in the Village of Wellington, while still providing for design flexibility in accordance with the goals, policies and objectives of the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan and the purpose and intent of this Code. These regulations are also intended to promote the use of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (C.P.T.E.D.) principles including: 
• Visibility-Visibility for law enforcement and other people in the area; 
• Natural surveillance-Placing areas of activity where they can be seen by law enforcement and the public; and 
• Defensible space-Designing areas which people will take as their own and not be willing to relinquish this space to other undesirable activities. 
2.  Applicability. Provisions of this division are applicable for all new construction in all Village commercial and industrial zoning districts as well as for commercial components of PUD's and developments of regional impact (DRI's) which meet the size criteria; additionally, these provisions are applicable for existing structures meeting the size criteria as provided below: 
a.  Renovations and redevelopment: In the case of additions, renovations or redevelopment of an existing building or project where the cost of such addition, renovation or redevelopment exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the existing structure(s), or twenty (20) percent of the square footage of the existing structure, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
b.  Discontinuance: Where the use of a structure ceases for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days for any reason, except where governmental action impedes access to the premises or has otherwise caused the cessation of the use, the provisions of this section which may require structural alterations shall be adhered to prior to the use of the structure. With respect to vehicular use and required landscape areas, the provisions of this section shall apply where the use of a structure ceases for any reason, except where governmental action impedes access to the premises or has otherwise caused the cessation of the use, for a period of more than ninety (90) consecutive days. 
c.  Required site development or improvement plan: Compliance with the standards set forth in this division shall be demonstrated by submittal of architectural drawings and a site development plan or site improvement plan in accordance with Article 5 of this Code. 
3.  Limitations on Size of Retail Building. 
a.  No free-standing retail building, utilized by a single tenant, shall exceed seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Retail building shall mean a retail establishment (store) with any commercial retail uses or a combination of such commercial retail which includes gross floor area and ancillary outdoor storage or merchandise display areas. The floor area does not include motor vehicle parking or loading areas. For the purpose of determining the applicability of the seventy-five thousand (75,000) square foot of floor area, the aggregate square footage of all adjacent stores which share common check stands, management, a controlling ownership interest, and storage areas, shall be considered one establishment, e.g. a plant nursery associated with a general merchandise area such as a home improvement area. 
c.  In buildings larger than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet, no single tenant may occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the structure. 
4.  Architectural and site design standards and guidelines. 
a.  Lighting. 
i.  Consistency. Lighting shall be designed in a consistent and coordinated manner for the entire site. The lighting and lighting fixtures shall be integrated and designed so as to enhance the visual impact of the project on the community and/or to blend into the landscape. 
ii.  Shielding standards. Lighting shall be designed so as to prevent direct glare, light spillage and hazardous interference with automotive and pedestrian traffic on adjacent streets and all adjacent properties. 
iii.  Fixture height standards. Lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of thirty (30) feet in height within the parking lot and shall be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height within non-vehicular pedestrian areas. 
iv.  Design standards. Lighting shall be used to provide safety while accenting key architectural elements and/or to emphasize landscape features. Light fixtures shall be designed as an integral design element that complements the design of the project. This can be accomplished through style, material or color (excluding fluorescent, primary and/or secondary colors) or be designed to blend into the landscape through the use of dark colors such as bronze. 
b.  Service Function Areas (SFA's) including, but not limited, to loading, storage, mechanical equipment and solid waste disposal. 
i.  Buffering and screening standards. Loading areas or docks, trash collection, mechanical equipment, trash compaction, vehicular storage, (excluding new and used cars) recycling, roof top equipment and other service function areas shall be fully screened from view of adjacent properties and roadways at ground view level. 
ii.  Materials and design standards. Screening material and design shall be consistent with design treatment of the primary facades of the structure on site. 
iii.  Fencing standards. Chain link and wood fencing are prohibited forward of the primary facade and must be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a public right-of-way. Chain link and wood fencing facing a public right-of-way shall provide, at a minimum, an irrigated hedge directly in front of the fence on the side of the right-of-way. Plant material shall be a minimum of three (3) gallons and planted two (2) feet on center at time of installation. This plant material shall be maintained at the height of the fence. Fencing forward of the primary facade is permitted under the following conditions: 
(a)  Fencing does not exceed four (4) feet in height 
(b)  The fencing provides either an open view at a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of its length or provides variation in its height for a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of its length with a deviation of at least twelve (12) inches. 
(c)  The fence style must complement building style through material, color and/or design. 
(d)  The fence, if chain link in design, shall be black vinyl coated. 
c.  If drive thru window(s) and/or lane(s) are placed facing a public right-of-way, alternative design modifications shall be provided to the property to mitigate the visual impact of the drive-thru. Modifications may include one or more of the following: additional landscaping, landscape berms three (3) feet or higher, fencing and/or any other alternative design approved by the Planning and Zoning Director or his/her designee. 
d.  Pedestrian Walkway 
i.  Pedestrian access standards. Pedestrian ways, linkages and paths shall be provided from the building entry(ies) to surrounding streets, external sidewalks and outparcels. Pedestrian ways shall be designed to provide access between parking areas and the building entrance(s) in a coordinated and safe manner. Pedestrian ways may be incorporated within a required landscape perimeter buffer, provided said buffer is not less than ten (10) feet in width on average. Shared pedestrian walkways are encouraged between adjacent projects. 
ii.  Minimum ratios. Pedestrian ways shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one for each public vehicular entrance to a project, excluding ingress and egress points intended primarily for service, delivery or employee vehicles. 
iii.  Minimum dimensions. Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide. 
iv.  Materials. Pedestrian walkways shall be consistent with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Accessibility Guidelines. Materials may include specialty pavers, concrete, colored concrete or stamped pattern concrete. 
v.  Pedestrian crosswalks at building perimeter. Building perimeter crosswalks shall be designed and coordinated to move people safely to and from buildings and parking areas by identifying pedestrian crossings with signage and variations in pavement materials or markings. 
vi  Shade. Pedestrian walkways shall provide intermittent shaded areas when the walkway exceeds one hundred (100) linear feet in length at a minimum ratio of one hundred (100) square feet of shaded area per every one hundred (100) linear feet of walkway. Shade structures may be natural, manmade or a combination of both. 
e.  Building Design 
i.  Industrial 
(a)  Building design is required on the front facade. 
(b)  Building design is required on the side facades only when abutting an arterial or collector road or abutting any non-industrial zoning district. 
(c)  Building design is required on the rear facade only when abutting an arterial or collector road or abutting any non-industrial zoning district. 
ii.  Commercial. Building design shall apply to all four (4) sides of the facade in all commercial areas. 
iii.  Building orientation standards. Facades/elevations shall have two (2) of the following design features; 
(a)  Windows at a minimum of forty (40) percent of the affected facade; projected covered public entry with a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the wall space devoted to windows. 
(b)  Projected covered public entry with a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the wall space devoted to windows. 
(c)  Covered walkway (excluding canvas type) unless provided with six (6) inch columns or better attached to the building at a minimum of eight (8) feet wide with a sixty (60) percent minimum coverage for the affected facade. 
iv.  Facade/wall height transition. New developments that are located within three hundred (300) feet of an existing building and are more than twice the height of any existing building within three hundred (300) feet shall provide transitional massing elements to transition between the existing buildings of lower height within three hundred (300) feet, and the proposed development. The transitional massing element can be no more than the average height of adjacent structures and maximum height of zoning district where the structure is located. 
v.  Facade standard. All facades of a building shall be designed with consistent architectural style, detail and trim features. In the case of outparcel buildings, all exterior facades shall adhere to the requirements of this division with respect to architectural design treatments for primary facades. 
(a)  Window standards: Windows shall not appear to be false or applied. 
(b)  Awning standards: Awnings which constitute more than ninety (90) percent of a facade or those that connect two (2) facades shall adhere to all roof standards set forth in the building codes. Additionally, awnings may be backlit with a white light only; multi-colored shade awning structures are prohibited, the use of fluorescent colors is prohibited, and muted colors are encouraged. 
vi.  Massing standards. Exterior facades shall be designed to employ the following design treatments on the ground floor: 
(a)  No horizontal length or uninterrupted curve of a building facade shall exceed one hundred (100) linear feet. For arcaded facades, no horizontal length or uninterrupted curve of the arcaded facade shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet, but varied lengths are desirable. Projections and recesses shall have a minimum depth of three (3) feet with twenty-five (25) percent of these having a varied length with a minimum differential of one (1) foot. 
(b)  Exterior wall planes shall not constitute more than sixty (60) percent of each affected ground floor facade. The wall plane shall be measured at one (1) foot off the exterior wall surface on each side of the wall. 
(c)  Primary facades on the ground floor shall have features along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of their horizontal length per affected side. These features include, but are not limited to: arcades, a minimum of six (6) feet clear in width; display windows; entry areas; or other such design elements. Awnings are included in this calculation at 1.5 times the window width when associated with windows/doors and are in increments of twenty (20) feet in length or less. 
vii.  Adaptability for Reuse/Compartmentalization. The building design shall include specific elements for adaptation for multi-tenant reuse. Such elements may include but are not limited to compartmentalized construction, including plumbing, electrical service, heating, ventilation and air conditioning. The building design shall also allow for: 
(a)  The interior subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies. 
(b)  Facades that readily adapt to multiple entrances and adapt to entrances on all but one side of the building 
(c)  Parking lot schemes that are shared by establishments or are linked by safe and functional pedestrian connections; and 
(d)  Landscaping schemes that complement the multiple entrance design. 
f.  Project standards. Both single and multi-use buildings and projects shall also be required to provide a minimum of four (4) of the following building design treatments. 
i.  Canopies or portico, integrated with the buildings massing and style; 
ii.  Overhangs, minimum of three (3) feet; 
iii.  Arcades, minimum of eight (8) feet clear in width; 
iv.  Sculptured artwork; 
v.  Raised cornice or building banding with a minimum of two (2) reliefs; 
vi.  Peaked roof forms; 
vii.  Arches; 
viii.  Display windows; 
ix.  Ornamental and structural architectural details, other than cornices; which are integrated into the building structure and overall design; 
x.  Clock bell towers or other such roof treatment (i.e. dormers, belvederes, cupolas); 
xi.  Projected and covered entry, five (5) foot minimum; 
xii.  Additional roof articulation above the minimum standards: (see roof section); 
xiii.  Metal or tile roof as the dominant roof material; or 
xiv.  Any other treatment which, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Director, meets the intent of this section; 
xv.  And one (1) of the following design elements: 
(a)  Decorative landscape planters or planting areas, a minimum of five (5) feet wide, and areas for shaded seating consisting of a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet; 
(b)  Integration of specialty pavers, or stamped concrete along the building's walkway. Said treatment shall constitute a minimum of sixty (60) percent of walkway area; or 
(c)  Water elements, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area; or 
(d)  Two (2) accent or specimen trees (above the minimum landscape code requirements) along the front facade with a minimum height of eighteen (18) feet at planting. 
g.  Detail features 
i.  Blank wall areas. Blank wall areas shall not exceed ten (10) feet in vertical direction nor twenty (20) feet in the horizontal direction of any primary facade. For facades connected to a primary facade this shall apply to a minimum of thirty-three (33) percent of the attached facade measured from the connection point. Control and expansion joints within this area shall constitute blank wall area unless used as a decorative pattern and spaced at intervals of six (6) feet or less. Relief and reveal work depth must be a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch. Blank wall area may utilize landscaping to assist in reducing the blank wall area. Landscaping shall not be in lieu of architectural treatment. 
ii.  Repeating facade treatments. Building facades shall include a repeating pattern and shall include no less than three (3) of the design elements listed below. At least one (1) of these design elements shall repeat horizontally. All design elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet, horizontally and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet vertically. 
(a)  Color Change; 
(b)  Texture Change; 
(c)  Material Module Change; 
(d)  Expression of architectural or structural bays, through a change in plane of no less than twelve (12) inches in width, such as a reveal, an offset, or a projecting rib; 
(e)  Architectural Banding; 
(f)  Building setbacks or projections, a minimum of three (3) feet in width on upper level(s); or 
(g)  Pattern Change. 
iii.  Additional facade design treatments for multiple use buildings 
(a)  First floor primary facade treatments. The first floor of the primary facades shall, at a minimum, utilize windows between the heights of three (3) feet and eight (8) feet above the walkway grade for no less than thirty (30) percent of the horizontal length of the building facade. 
(b)  Windows. Windows shall be recessed, a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch, and shall include visually prominent sills, shutters, stucco reliefs, or other such forms of framing. 
h.  Outparcels. Outparcel design. All exterior facades of an outparcel structure shall be considered primary facades and shall employ architectural, site, and landscaping design elements which are integrated with and common to those used on the primary structure on site. These common design elements shall include colors and materials associated with the main structure. When the use of common wall, side by side development occurs, continuity of facades and consolidated parking for several businesses on one (1) parking lot may be used. Outparcel structures that are adjacent to each other shall provide for vehicular connection between their respective parking lots and provide for interconnection of pedestrian walkway. 
i.  Roof Treatment 
i.  Roof edge and parapet treatment. At a minimum of two (2) locations, the roof edge and/or parapet shall have a vertical change from the dominant roof condition, a minimum of three (3) feet. At least one (1) such change shall be located on a primary facade adjacent to a collector or arterial right-of-way. One (1) additional roof change must be provided for every twenty-five thousand (25,000) square foot increment over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of ground floor space. 
ii.  Roof shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Parapets shall be used to conceal roof top equipment and flat roofs. 
(b)  Where overhanging eaves are used, overhangs shall be no less than three (3) feet beyond the supporting walls. Where overhangs are less than three (3) feet they shall be provided with a band or cornice, a minimum of eight (8) inches under the soffit at the wall; 
(c)  Fascia shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches; and 
(d)  Tile or metal as the dominant roof material. 
iii.  Prohibited roof types and materials. The following types of materials are prohibited: 
(a)  Asphalt shingles, except laminated, three hundred twenty (320) pound, thirty (30) year architectural grade asphalt shingles or better; 
(b)  Mansard roofs and canopies without a minimum vertical distance of eight (8) feet and at an angle not less than twenty-five (25) degrees, and not greater than seventy (70) degrees; 
(c)  Roofs utilizing less than or equal to a two (2) to twelve (12) pitch unless utilizing full parapet coverage; and 
(d)  Back-lit awnings used as a mansard or canopy roof. 
j.  Entryways/customer entrance standards 
i.  Single-use buildings. Single-use buildings shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances which shall include an outdoor patio area adjacent to the customer entrance, a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in area which incorporates the following: 
(a)  Benches or other seating components; 
(b)  Decorative landscape planters or wing walls which incorporate landscaped areas; 
(c)  Structural or vegetative shading; and 
(d)  Front entry shall be setback from the drive a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet. 
ii.  Multiple-use buildings and projects. Multi-use structures shall include the following: 
(a)  Anchor tenants shall provide clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances. 
(b)  A provision for intermittent, shaded outdoor community space at a minimum of one (1) percent of the total gross floor area of the building or commercial project. Said community space shall be located off or adjacent to the circulation path of the complex or main structure, and shall incorporate benches or other seating components. 
k.  Exterior building materials standards 
i.  Predominant exterior building materials shall include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Stucco; 
(b)  Brick; 
(c)  Tinted, textured, other than smooth or ribbed, concrete masonry units; or 
(d)  Stone, excluding an ashlar or rubble construction look. 
ii.  Predominant exterior building materials that are prohibited include: 
(a)  Plastic Siding; 
(b)  Corrugated or reflective metal panels; 
(c)  Tile; 
(d)  Smooth or rib-faced concrete block; and 
(e)  Applied stone in an ashlar or rubble look. 
iii.  Automotive and other special type service buildings may utilize prefabricated metal buildings under the following conditions 
(a)  Metal buildings must be located more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from any right-of-way; 
(b)  Metal buildings must be located directly behind the main showroom/sales center so as not to be a dominant facade along the street; and 
(c)  No more than twenty (20) percent of the building can be situated beyond the main auto sales center and showroom. 
iv.  Predominant exterior color(s) 
(a)  Primary exterior color(s). The use of black or fluorescent, primary and/or secondary colors is prohibited as the predominant exterior building or roof color(s). Earth-tone colors shall be required. 
(b)  Building trim color(s). Building trim and accent areas may feature any color(s), limited to ten (10) percent of the affected facade segment, with a maximum trim height of twenty-four (24) inches total for its shortest distance. Exposed neon or neon type tubing is prohibited. 
l.  Landscaping. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 7, Landscaping, the following requirements shall apply. 
The following landscaping requirements shall be counted toward the required green space requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
i.  At the time of planting, trees in vehicular use areas shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in height with a six (6) foot spread and a two and one-half (21/2) inch caliper and shall have a clear trunk area to a height of seven (7) feet. 
ii.  The first row of landscape islands located closest to the building front and sides shall be landscaped with trees, palms, shrubs and groundcovers and shall have a clear trunk area to a height of seven (7) feet. 
iii.  Tree and lighting locations shall be designed so as not to conflict with one another. 
iv.  Parking lots divider strips and terminal islands shall meet the dimensional requirements of Article 7, and shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  Terminal islands at the end of each parking strip. 
(b)  Continuous divider strips perpendicular to the long dimension of the parking space between each facing row of parking. 
(c)  Divider strips parallel to the long dimension of the parking space every twelve (12) spaces. 
v.  Perimeter buffers: As an express exemption to the buffering requirements enumerated in Article 7, perimeter buffers for structures subject to the supplemental regulations as set forth in this section shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  In order to promote landscaping that matches the scale of the building, berming shall be limited to fifty (50) percent of frontage, and shall vary in height from four (4) feet to eight (8) feet. 
(b)  Landscaping shall be provided in the same numbers as required in Article 7; however, trees shall be clustered in the areas between berms. Minimum tree height shall be sixteen (16) feet. 
(c)  Planting between berms, except tree clusters, shall be limited to hedges and shrubs planted in tiers not exceeding six (6) feet in height. 
m.  Locational requirements for building perimeter plantings. Building perimeter plantings shall not be counted toward the required green space requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
i.  Perimeter landscape plantings shall be located adjacent to the primary building facade, including building entrance areas, plazas, and courtyards. These areas shall be landscaped with any combination of trees, palms, shrubs and ground covers. 
ii.  Building perimeters shall include plantings at a ratio of one hundred (100) square feet of planters per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building ground floor area. Planters shall either be raised or at ground level and be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide. Seating courtyards, eating areas and plazas may be incorporated within them. 
n.  Natural and manmade bodies of water including wet and dry retention areas 
i.  The shape of a manmade body of water, including wet and dry retention areas, shall be designed to appear natural by having off-sets in edge alignment that are a minimum of ten (10) feet and spaced fifty (50) feet apart. All bodies of water including wet and dry retention areas, exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area, and which are located adjacent to a public right-of-way, shall incorporate into the overall design of the project at least two (2) of the following: 
(a)  A five-foot wide walkway with trees an average of fifty (50) feet on center and shaded benches a minimum of six (6) feet in length or picnic tables with one located every one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(b)  An intermittent shaded plaza/courtyard, a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in area, with benches and/or picnic tables adjacent to the water body. 
(c)  A permanent fountain structure. 
(Ord. No. 2003-22; October 28, 2003; Table 6.5-1; Ord. No. 2004-10; April 13, 2004; Sec. 6.5.19.I; Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Sec. 6.5.8; Ord. No. 2005-14; April 12, 2005; Sec. 6.5.I; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 1, 8-22-2017) 
CHAPTER 6. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6.6.1. - Accessory uses and structures. 
A.  General. All accessory uses and structures shall be subject to the following regulations. 
1.  Accessory uses. Principal uses listed in the Use Regulations Schedule (Table 6.4-1) are deemed to include accessory uses identified by this Code where such other accessory uses that are necessarily and customarily associated with and are incidental and subordinate to such principal uses. An accessory use shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to the principal use in each district, except as otherwise provided. For the purposes of this section the following uses shall be exempt from the thirty percent size limitation: 
a.  Aircraft hangers 
b.  Barns and stables 
2.  Location. All accessory uses, buildings and structures, except for approved off-site parking, shall be located on the same lot as the principal or main use. 
3.  Floor area. In total, all accessory use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the floor area or business receipts of the principal use, or uses. 
B.  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of merchandise in all commercial, industrial and non residential districts shall be subject to the following standards, unless the use is specifically regulated in another district or section. 
1.  Outdoor storage of merchandise shall be permitted only when incidental to the use located on the premises. 
2.  The storage area shall not be located in any of the required setbacks or yards. 
3.  The stored merchandise shall be within an area surrounded by walls or buildings, and shall not protrude above the height of the enclosing walls or buildings. 
4.  Outdoor storage of material used for road construction when: 
a.  The lot is directly adjacent to the roadway under construction; 
b.  The material is stored for no longer than ninety (90) days unless approved by the Planning & Zoning Director for a period not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days; 
c.  The lot meets the requirements of Natural Resource Protection Regulations. 
C.  Fuel, gas, or chemical storage tanks. Fuel, gas or chemical storage tanks accessory to a primary commercial or industrial use which stores fuel, gas or chemicals which is sold to the public (retail) shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee. To ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses, adequate setbacks, fencing, and screening around the perimeter of the storage tanks shall be required at the time the structure is approved. Fuel, gas or chemical storage tanks that are a primary use shall be subject to regulations of the district. 
D.  Dumpsters. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal when individual collection or indoor storage is not provided. All areas or receptacles for the storage and disposal of trash, garbage or vegetation, such as dumpsters and trash compactors, shall meet the following standards. These provisions shall not apply to litter containers provided for the convenience of pedestrians. 
1.  Access. Access to indoor or outdoor collection stations shall be such that the removal vehicle need not make unnecessary turning or backing movements. 
2.  Setback. The minimum setback for dumpsters from property in a residential district or from other residential property lines shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  Screening. All dumpsters or receptacles for the storage and disposal of trash or garbage shall be screened by a solid opaque enclosure constructed of brick, concrete, concrete block, or other decorative masonry, or comparable wood or steel, consistent with the architectural character of the development or principal building. The open end of the enclosure shall have an obscure, opaque gate. All exterior sides of such enclosures, except the open end, shall be landscaped with shrub material, a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height, spaced twenty-four (24) inches on center at planting, or an alternative acceptable to the Zoning Division. 
E.  Multifamily recyclable material storage areas. Recyclable material collection and storage areas shall be provided on the site of all multifamily developments that include ten (10) or more dwelling units, in accordance with the following standards. 
1.  Exemptions. Multifamily developments that receive curbside recyclable materials collection service on at least a weekly basis shall be exempt from the standards of this section. 
2.  Location. Recyclable material collection and storage areas shall be located within the building containing the multifamily dwelling units or within or adjacent to the disposable material dumpster area used by residents of the multifamily development. 
3.  Access. Access to recyclable material collection and storage areas shall be designed so as not require unnecessary turning or backing movements by pick-up and removal vehicles. 
4.  Setback. The minimum setback for recyclable material collection and storage areas that are located on the exterior of buildings shall be twenty-five (25) feet from residential districts or residential properties. 
5.  Screening. All recyclable material collection and storage areas that are located on the exterior of buildings shall be screened by a solid opaque enclosure constructed of brick, concrete, concrete block, or other decorative masonry, or comparable wood or steel, consistent with the architectural character of the development or principal building. The open end of the enclosure shall have an obscure, opaque gate. All exterior sides of such enclosures, except the open end, shall be landscaped with twenty-four (24) inch high shrub material spaced twenty-four (24) inches on center at planting, or an alternative acceptable to the Zoning Division. 
6.  Storage area. The following minimum recyclable material storage area standards shall apply to multifamily developments. 
Number of Dwelling Units Minimum Storage (Floor) Area 10-30 40 square feet 31-99 100 square feet 100-159 160 square feet 160-240 240 square feet Over 240 240 square feet, plus one (1) square 
foot per dwelling unit for each 
dwelling unit over 240.  
7.  Alternative compliance. Applicants shall be entitled to demonstrate that recyclable material storage space needs can be more effectively met through an Alternative Recyclable Materials Collection and Storage Plan. An Alternative Recyclable Materials Collection and Storage Plan shall be reviewed by the Solid Waste Authority, and, if approved, shall be substituted for a recyclable materials storage and collection plan meeting the express storage area standards of this section. 
8.  Review. Recyclable material storage and collection area plans shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee pursuant to Section 5.6. Information necessary to evaluate proposed plans for compliance with the standards of this section shall be shown on the site plan. 
9.  Retrofitting of existing multifamily developments. The retrofitting of existing multifamily developments to comply with the standards of this section shall be encouraged. As a means of encouraging retrofitting, developers shall be entitled to convert existing off-street parking spaces to accommodate a recyclable material storage area in accordance with the following standards. 
a.  Number of spaces to be converted. A maximum of one (1) existing off-street parking space may be converted to accommodate each one hundred eighty (180) square feet of recyclable material storage and collection area or fraction thereof that is provided on the exterior of a building. Conversion of off-street parking spaces to accommodate more recyclable materials collection and storage area than specified in Section 6.6 (Storage area) shall be prohibited. 
b.  Automatic waiver. The conversion of existing off-street parking spaces to accommodate recyclable material storage and collection areas pursuant to the standards of this section shall be permitted by right, without resort to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. 
F.  Commercial recyclable material storage area. Recyclable material collection and storage areas shall be provided on the site of all occupied non-residential buildings or developments in accordance with the following standards. 
1.  Storage Area. At a minimum, at least one (1) recyclable material collection and storage area with a ten (10) foot by ten (10) foot pad, shall be designated on each site plan. 
2.  Location. All accessory uses, buildings and structures, except for approved off-site parking, shall be located on the same lot as the principal or main use. 
3.  Access. Access to recyclable material collection and storage areas shall be designed so as not to require unnecessary turning or backing movements by pick-up and removal vehicles. There shall be a fifty (50) foot access area for trucks. 
4.  Setback. The minimum setback for recyclable material collection and storage areas that are located on the exterior of buildings shall be twenty-five (25) feet from residential districts or residential properties. 
5.  Screening. All recyclable material collection and storage areas that are located on the exterior of buildings shall be screened by a solid opaque enclosure. The open end of the enclosure shall have an opaque gate. All exterior sides of the enclosure, shall be landscaped with twenty-four (24) inch high shrub material spaced twenty-four (24) inches on center at planting, or an alternative acceptable to the Zoning Division. Recycling enclosures may be connected to or be a section of garbage and trash enclosures. 
6.  Alternative compliance. Applicants shall be entitled to demonstrate that recyclable material storage space needs can be more effectively met through an Alternative Recyclable Materials Collection and Storage Plan. An Alternative Recyclable Materials Collection and Storage Plan shall be reviewed by the Solid Waste Authority, and, if approved, shall be substituted for standards of this section. 
7.  Review. Recyclable material storage and collection area plans shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee pursuant to Section 5.6., or administrative site plan amendment pursuant to Section 5.6.4.L as applicable. Information necessary to evaluate proposed plans for compliance with the standards of this section shall be shown on the site plan. 
8.  Retrofitting of existing non-residential developments. The retrofitting of existing non-residential developments to comply with the standards of this section is permitted at a ratio of one parking space for each recycling material storage and collection area, not to exceed ten (10) percent of the total parking spaces. 
G.  Accessory outdoor recreation. Accessory outdoor recreational facilities are primarily designed and intended for use by occupants and their guests of a residential development or nonresidential development. Accessory outdoor recreational facilities shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations. 
1.  Setbacks. Active outdoor accessory recreational facilities shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting a residential district. Passive outdoor accessory recreational facilities shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line abutting a residential district. 
2.  Screening. If deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses the Development Review Committee may require buffer consisting of a six-foot fence or masonry wall and landscape screen of at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity around an active or passive outdoor accessory recreational facility. 
H.  Swimming pools and spas. 
1.  Principal and accessory use. 
a.  Principal use. Any swimming pool or spa or screen enclosure owned and operated as a commercial enterprise existing singularly or in combination with other commercial recreation uses on the same property shall be considered as a principal use subject to the property development regulations of the applicable district. 
b.  Accessory use. Any swimming pool or spa or screen enclosure operated by a non profit assembly, social, civic organization, residential homeowners association, or resident of a single family dwelling shall be considered as an accessory use and shall exist in conjunction with the principal use regulations stated herein. The accessory use shall be located on the same lot of the principal use except if operated by a residential homeowners association. If operated by a residential homeowners association then the accessory use shall be located within the development boundary, as applicable. 
2.  Setbacks for accessory pools or spas. 
a.  Setbacks for Swimming Pools. Setbacks shall be measured to the water's edge: 
Setbacks Front Side interior Side corner Rear Single family 28 feet 10.5 feet 18 feet 10.5 feet Zero lot line 13 feet 0 lot line - 3 feet 
Opposite lot line - 5 feet 13 feet 5 feet Townhouse, 
Row house and Quad 13 feet 3 feet From property line - 
5 feet 
From r.o.w. - 18 feet 5 feet Other Multifamily 
Home Owners Assoc., 
Non-profit assembly, 
Social, Civic 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet  
b.  Setbacks for Spas. Spas shall meet the following setbacks: 
i.  Front and Side Corner - twenty-five (25) feet 
ii.  Side Interior and Rear - five (5) feet 
c.  Setback Reductions. 
i.  General. Swimming pools or spas may be constructed with a three (3) foot rear or side interior setback for single family or zero lot line dwelling units provided the entire rear or side interior property line is adjacent to open space (lake, natural preserve or golf course) a minimum of fifty (50) feet in depth and all construction and earthwork is completed within the owner's lot. 
ii.  Planned Developments. Setbacks for swimming pools or spas may be reduced in accordance with the flexible regulations in Section 6.8.1 and administrative deviations in Section 6.8.1. 
iii.  Building coverage. Swimming pools or spas located at finished grade shall not be included in the building coverage calculation unless contained in a building or within a screen enclosure with a solid roof. 
iv.  Fencing, screening and access. Every swimming pool or spa shall be enclosed by a barrier, retaining wall, fence or other structure in accordance with Palm Beach County Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as amended. 
v.  Easement encroachment. Pools or spas shall not encroach any utility, drainage or lake maintenance easement. 
vi.  Swimming Pools and Spas In Common Areas. The construction of private swimming pools and spas for individual households within a common area is prohibited, unless the swimming pools and spas were legally constructed within a specified development pod prior to April 21, 1995. If any of the existing dwelling units have exiting swimming pools or spas in the common area of a development pod, the remaining dwelling units within the same development pod may construct a swimming pool or spa as shown on the final subdivision plan or final site plan. 
If the final subdivision plan or final site plan does not graphically depict the placement of swimming pools or spas in common area, application shall be made to Development Review Committee to amend the final subdivision plan or final site plan to depict the placement of the swimming pool or spa if: 
(a)  Legally permitted. The applicant demonstrates that existing swimming pools and spas were legally permitted and constructed in common areas; 
(b)  Joint applicant. The landowner or homeowner's association must be a joint applicant on the building permit application; 
(c)  Setbacks. The structure must comply with all setback requirements measured from the outer boundary of the common area or have a fifteen (15) foot separation between primary structures, whichever is greater. 
(d)  Private structures. No private structures are proposed to be erected in a required perimeter landscape area; 
(e)  Open space. The entire development must continue to meet open space requirements; 
(f)  Documents. The homeowners' documents shall be amended to include provisions that allow private use of the common area upon association approval; and 
(g)  Prohibitions. Structures will not be permitted in a common area that is designed as a water management tract. 
I.  Screen Enclosures. 
1.  General. Screen enclosures may be roofed with a screened roof or solid roof. Property development regulations vary based on the type of roof covering. 
2.  Screen Enclosures with Screened Roofs. Screen enclosures with screened roofs shall be subject to the following property development regulation 
a.  Setbacks for screen enclosure with screen roofs. Setbacks shall be measured as specified in the chart below: 
Setbacks Front Side Interior Side Corner Rear Single Family 25 feet 7.5 feet 15 feet 7.5 feet Zero lot line Zero lot line side 25 feet 0 feet 10 feet 2 feet Opposite lot line 25 feet 2 feet 10 feet 2 feet Townhouse, Row house Measured from lot 
boundary 25 feet 0 feet From lot line - 
5 feet 
From r.o.w. line - 
15 feet 0 feet Measured from inside edge of buffer of PUD or Tract boundary 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet Separation between groups 25 feet 15 feet N/A 15 feet Townhouse, Quad Measured from lot boundary 0 feet 0 feet From lot line - 
0 feet 
From r.o.w. line - 
15 feet 0 feet Measured from inside edge of buffer of PUD or Tract boundary 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet Separation between groups 25 feet 15 feet N/A 15 feet Other Multifamily, 
Homeowners 
Association, Non-profit, 
Social, Civic 50 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet  
i.  Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured from the property line of the dwelling to the closest edge of the screen enclosure. 
b.  Rear and side interior setback reductions. Screen roof enclosures may be constructed with a zero (0) foot rear setback for single family or zero lot line dwelling units provided the following conditions are met: 
i.  Open space. The entire rear or side interior property line is adjacent to open space (lake, natural preserve or golf course) a minimum of fifty (50) feet in depth; 
ii.  Construction. All construction and earthwork is completed within the owner's lot; 
iii.  Maintenance. All maintenance can be conducted from within the owner's lot; and 
iv.  Overhang. Roof eaves or structures shall not overhang the property line or encroach any utility, drainage or lake maintenance easement. 
(a)  Setback reductions in Planned Developments. Setbacks for screen enclosures may be reduced in accordance with the flexible regulations in Section 6.8.1. and administrative deviations in Section 6.8.1. 
(b)  Special Provisions for Zero Lot Line Developments. A minimum five (5) foot high opaque fence or wall shall be provided on the zero side of zero lot line extending from the rear of the structure to the rear edge of the screen enclosure. Such wall shall be masonry or wood. The screen enclosure shall may be attached to the fence or wall. 
(c)  Special Setback Provisions for Townhouses. No setbacks are required from individual property lines of units, if applicable. Setbacks are required to be measured from perimeter property lines of the development pod in compliance with Section 6.4.4.110. of the LDR. 
In cases where the townhouse and accessory screen enclosure covers one hundred (100) percent of the lot, the screen enclosure shall maintain a minimum separation between other screen enclosures or the principal structure of townhouse groups, as specified in the table above. 
Separations between two townhouse groups shall be measured by drawing a center line between the two adjacent groups and measuring a minimum distance of 7.5 feet from the centerline between the proposed enclosures to ensure an equidistant separation of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  Building coverage. Screen enclosures with screen roofs shall not be included in the building coverage calculation. 
d.  Maximum Allowable Size. Screen enclosures shall be permitted to cover a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the total lot area except for townhouses. Screen enclosures for townhouses may cover one hundred (100) percent of the total lot area provided minimum separations between groups are met. 
e.  Height. The height of the screen enclosure shall not exceed the highest point of the peak of the roof. 
f.  Easement encroachment. Roof eaves or structures shall not overhang the rear property line or encroach any utility, drainage or lake maintenance easement. 
g.  Screen enclosures within common areas of residential developments. The construction of private screen enclosures, for use by individual households, is prohibited in common areas, unless screen enclosures were legally constructed within the same development pod prior to April 21, 1995. If any of the existing dwelling units within the development pod have existing screen enclosures in the common area, the remaining dwelling units within the development pod may construct screen enclosures as shown on the final subdivision plan or final site plan. 
If the final subdivision plan or final site plan does not graphically depict the placement of screen enclosures in the common area, application shall be made to Development Review Committee to amend the final subdivision plan or final site plan to depict the placement of the screen enclosures, if compliance with criteria set forth in 6.6.1.I can be demonstrated. 
3.  Screen enclosures with solid roofs. 
a.  Setbacks. Screen enclosures shall meet the minimum setbacks of the principal use of the lot. Setbacks may be reduced in accordance with the flexible regulations in Section 6.8.1. and administrative deviations in Section 6.8.1. 
b.  Building coverage. Screen enclosures with solid roofs shall be included in the building coverage calculation. 
c.  Special provisions for Zero Lot Line Developments. A minimum eight (8) foot minimum height wall shall be provided on the zero lot line extending at least to the rear edge of the enclosure. Such wall shall be of masonry or wood. The screen enclosure shall be attached to the fence or wall. 
d.  Special provisions for townhouse developments. If the roof of the enclosure is solid, there shall be a minimum eight (8) foot high wall on the shared lot line, extending from the dwelling to the rear edge of the portion of the enclosure that is roofed. The wall shall be fire-rated in accordance with standard building codes. The screen enclosure may be attached to the masonry wall. 
e.  Height. The height of the screen enclosure with a solid roof shall not exceed the highest point of the peak of the roof. 
f.  Easement encroachment. Roof eaves or structures shall not overhang the rear property line or encroach any utility, drainage or lake maintenance easement. 
g.  Screen enclosures with solid roofs within common areas of residential developments. The construction of private screen enclosures, for use by individual households, is prohibited in common areas, unless screen enclosures were legally constructed within the same development pod prior to April 21, 1995. If any of the existing dwelling units within the same development pod have exiting screen enclosures in the common area, the remaining dwelling units within the development pod may construct screen enclosures as shown on the final subdivision plan or final site plan. If the final subdivision plan or final site plan does not graphically depict the placement of screen enclosures in the common area, application shall be made to Development Review Committee to amend the final subdivision plan or final site plan to depict the placement of the screen enclosures, if compliance with criteria set forth in 6.6.1.I can be demonstrated. 
J.  Accessory radio tower. A radio tower for noncommercial electronic communication purposes may be permitted as an accessory use to a permitted principal school or bona fide agricultural use, subject to the following supplementary regulations. 
1.  Height. The radio tower shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height from ground level. 
2.  Setbacks. Setbacks measured from the base of the radio tower to the property line shall equal a distance of not less than twenty (20) percent of the height of the tower. In addition, the radio tower shall be located in such a manner that it will not fall on any power line. 
K.  Amateur radio, television antennas and satellite dish antennas. 
1.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for the safe and effective installation and operation of amateur radio, citizens band radio, and television antenna support structures and the beam antennas installed on those support structures as well as satellite dish antennas. It is also the purpose and intent of this section to provide for a reasonable accommodation of amateur radio communications, in accordance with Parts 95 and 97 of Chapter 1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, while reflecting Palm Beach Village's legitimate interest of protecting and promoting the health, safety, welfare, neighborhood aesthetics, and morals of its citizens. The standards in this section are intended to place reasonable safety and aesthetic precautions on the installation and erection of such antennas and antenna support structures, and to represent the minimum practicable regulation necessary to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the public. The regulations are not, however, intended to unduly restrict or preclude amateur radio communications. 
2.  Applicability. All amateur and citizens band radio and television transmission and receiving antennas, including satellite dish antennas but excluding satellite earth stations, shall be governed by the standards of this section. 
3.  Approval of antennas and antenna support structures. All antenna support structures and the beam antenna installed on those antenna support structures, shall be considered accessory uses, and shall comply with the provisions of this section, and Section 5-23 (Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations) of the Palm Beach County Code of Laws and Ordinances. 
4.  Conditional use. In addition to the requirements of this section, all antenna support structures and the beam antennas installed on those support structures, extending greater than seventy (70) feet above grade level or fifteen (15) feet above building height, whichever is greater, shall be a Class "B" Conditional use. 
5.  Exemptions. 
a.  Exemption. All antenna support structures and the beam antennas, installed on these support structures that do not extend greater than seventy (70) feet above grade, shall be exempt from conditional use approval. 
b.  Use. All antenna support structures and the beam antennas installed on these support structures which have been constructed, installed, and are operational as of February 1, 1990 shall be considered legal, nonconforming uses. 
c.  Certification. All legal nonconforming antenna support structures and the beam antennas installed on these support structures that extend greater than seventy (70) feet above grade level or fifteen (15) feet above building height, whichever is greater, shall acquire written certification from the Planning & Zoning Director. Such registration shall reflect the height and location of the antenna support structure, the beam antennas installed on the support structure, the date of installation, and documentation of installation. 
6.  Location. 
a.  Setbacks. All antenna support structures and the beam antennas installed on those support structures, including all elements or parts thereof, shall conform to the minimum yard setback standards of the district in which it is to be located. A satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted in front yards and shall meet all accessory structure setbacks. 
b.  Support structure location. In addition to complying with the district setback standards, antenna support structures shall be located on the property so as to provide a minimum distance equal to fifty (50) percent of the height of the tower from above-ground utility power lines other than applicants' service lines, or a break point calculation certified by a professional engineer or as evidenced by the manufacturers' specifications that demonstrate a clear fall radius. In addition, no antenna support structure shall be located in the front yard. 
c.  Beam array antennas. In addition to complying with the district setback standards, beam array antennas shall be mounted so as to provide for removal at approach of hurricanes, if necessary, or provide for the lowering of such beam, and in no event shall the beam or any element thereof extend closer than ten (10) feet to an official right-of-way line and/or easement, or property under different ownership. 
d.  Anchor location. All antenna support structures and peripheral anchors shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the property. If said supports and anchors are closer than five (5) feet to property under different ownership and if such support or anchor extends greater than three (3) feet above the ground, it shall be effectively screened against direct view from abutting properties and shall extend no greater than six (6) feet above ground. 
e.  Limitation. No more than one (1) antenna support structure that exceeds forty (40) feet in height shall be allowed on any lot. 
L.  Seaplanes. 
1.  Location. If the seaplane facility use is limited to the immediate residential population, who jointly own and maintain the aircraft facility, it may be located in a residential district and not be of a commercial nature, provided that the facility is not within four hundred (400) feet of a residential structure. If the facility is a commercial venture, it shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential district. 
2.  Minimum land area. The minimum required land area for any type of seaplane operation shall be two (2) acres. 
3.  Water area. All seaplane operations shall comply with the following minimum standards for water landing area: 
Length 3,500 feet Width 300 feet Depth 4 feet  
4.  Airport approach. No seaplane operation shall be considered unless the airport approach to the water landing area is at a slope of 40:1 or flatter for a distance of at least two (2) miles from both ends of the water landing area and is clear of any building structure or portion thereof that extends through and above the airport approach plane. 
5.  Setbacks. All buildings, structures and aircraft parked on shore shall be located a minimum distance from all property lines of at least fifty (50) feet. 
6.  Landing operations. All aircraft landings shall be performed under visual flying rules (VFR) and shall not be conducted during the hours between sunset and sunrise. 
7.  Vehicle parking requirements. Shore facilities shall provide one (1) automobile parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of hangar or tie-down area, or one (1) space per craft, whichever is greater. All shore facilities shall provide a minimum of five (5) parking spaces. 
8.  Certification. Applications for seaplane operation facilities shall be accompanied by a complete "Airspace Analysis" report for the Federal Aviation Administration as well as a copy of the "Preliminary License Report" from the Florida Department of Transportation. 
M.  Accessory Commercial Development. 
1.  General. It is the purpose of this section to allow a limited amount of commercial development in certain residential developments which developed prior to the establishment of planned development regulations in Ordinance 3-57 (1969). Residential developments which meet the criteria in this section will allow a limited amount of commercial development within the project and internalize an amount of traffic without rezoning to a planned development district. 
2.  Procedure. Residential developments which meet the criteria in this section may create a Preliminary Development Plan showing existing development and the proposed commercial use. The use shall be subject to Village Council review and approval as a Conditional Use "A". 
3.  Residential Criteria. 
a.  Property owners association. A property owners association for the residential development shall be formed and shall support the proposed commercial development. 
b.  Minimum number. The residential development must contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) residents. 
c.  Boundaries. The residential development must be self-contained, having private streets, controlled and limited access, and have obviously identifiable boundaries by design. 
4.  Commercial development criteria. 
a.  Number. Only one (1) commercial area shall be developed in each residential development. 
b.  Limitation. Uses shall be limited to the regulations of the CN district. 
c.  Basis. The amount of commercial development allowed shall be based on table 6.8-5, Table of PUD Commercial acreage. 

Sec. 6.6.2. - Temporary structures. 
    The following supplementary regulations apply to certain types of temporary structures. 
A.  Temporary emergency structures. This section is intended to allow placement or erection of temporary structures that address immediate public needs while permanent solutions are being pursued, including but not limited to temporary fire stations, hurricane shelters, utility facilities. 
1.  Determination of public emergency. The Director of Community Services may authorize, in any district, the issuance of a building permit for a temporary structure upon determination that a public emergency exists or an overwhelming public purpose is served by the temporary permit. 
2.  Duration. The use shall be approved as a special use for a period of six (6) months, with one three-month extension, or until the emergency is determined to have ceased. The Village Council may extend this time frame under extenuating circumstances at any regularly scheduled public hearing. Copies of all special use permits approved under this subsection shall be forwarded to the Village Attorney's Office and the Village Council. 
B.  Tents accessory to non-retail use. A tent may be used as a temporary structure for non-retail purposes accessory to the principal use subject to the Planning & Zoning Director's approval as a special use and the standards of this subsection. Tents used for retail purposes are subject to Section 6.4.4 (Retail sales, mobile or temporary). 
1.  Frequency. The use of the tent and the proposed non-retail use or event shall be a one-time occurrence at any given lot per year. 
2.  Duration. The tent may be used for a maximum period of ninety (90) days, provided that an additional thirty-day administrative extension may be approved subject to the Planning & Zoning Director's finding that the tent and use continue to meet all the applicable requirements of this Code and the Building Code and are in harmony with the surrounding area. 
3.  Setbacks. All setback requirements of the underlying district shall be met. 
4.  On-site Location. The tent shall be located on the lot so as not to adversely interfere with on-site circulation and shall not be located in any required parking space. 
5.  Access. The primary access for the use shall be from an arterial road and shall not cause traffic to flow through nearby residential areas. Back out parking directly onto a public street shall be prohibited. 
6.  Lighting. Lighting to illuminate the premises of any temporary tent structure for advertisement or direction shall be extinguished no later than 12:00 midnight. 
7.  Noise. Sounds emanating from the temporary use shall not adversely affect surrounding residential lands. 
C.  Temporary facilities during development activity. During development of planned developments, subdivisions and multiple family projects requiring DRC approval, temporary structures and facilities may be allowed in platted developments under the following conditions and uses: 
1.  Temporary construction trailer. Use of this facility shall be limited to storage and on-site office work with no overnight habitation and provided that: 
a.  Duration. The construction trailer remain on site only for the duration of the permitting and building of the primary structures. 
b.  Location. The construction trailer and attendant parking and storage areas be located on site so as not to interfere with safe ingress and egress to developed areas or areas under construction. 
c.  Removal. The construction trailer be removed if construction ceases for more than five (5) months unless it can be demonstrated that construction will proceed within thirty (30) days. 
d.  Certificate of occupancy. The construction trailer be removed no later than thirty (30) days after the final Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 
e.  Abandonment. Abandoned trailers shall not be permitted on the site. 
f.  Unsafe structure. If the building permit for the primary structures have expired, and no further permits have been issued for six (6) months, the trailer shall be removed from the property immediately. Any trailers which have been abandoned under these provisions shall be considered an unsafe structure and shall be abated pursuant to the Village Building Code Enforcement Administrative Code. 
2.  Watchman mobile home. Use of this facility allows overnight habitation if, under the following conditions: 
a.  Conditions. Use of this facility allows overnight habitation if, under the following conditions: 
i.  Mobility. The mobility of the vehicle is maintained and it is used as a mobile home or house trailer; 
ii.  Permits. Permits and inspections for trailer tie-down and electric, water supply and sewage disposal facilities are approved by all governmental agencies having appropriate jurisdiction. 
b.  Additional conditions. The watchman mobile home is also subject to the following: 
i.  Special permit. A special permit valid for one year shall be obtained. Requests for extensions of time beyond the initial one-year approval be made on forms prescribed by PZB. In no case shall the total time exceed a maximum of two (2) years for the initial approval and subsequent extension. 
ii.  Removal agreement. A notarized mobile home removal agreement shall be executed. 
iii.  No additions. No additions or adjuncts shall be permitted to the mobile home except PZB approved awnings, demountable screen panels, stairs, decks and trellises. 
iv.  Parking. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided. 
3.  Mobile home real estate sales and management office. Use of this facility shall be limited to on-site office work with no overnight habitation and subject to the following: 
a.  Mobility. The mobility of the vehicle is maintained; 
b.  Site plan. The Master plan, final site plan, or final subdivision plan that has been certified by DRC; and, 
c.  Permits. Permits and inspections for trailer tie-down and, electric, water supply and sewage disposal facilities are approved by all governmental agencies having appropriate jurisdiction. 
d.  Location. The facility shall be located so as not to interfere with on site construction operations, safe ingress and egress to the proposed development. 
e.  Setbacks. The facility shall meet the minimum setbacks of the applicable zoning district. 
f.  Handicap spaces. Handicap spaces and access shall be provided in accordance with Sections 316.1955, 316.1956, and 553.48, Fla. Stat. 
g.  Parking. A minimum of six (6) parking spaces, plus one for each employee on the shift of greatest employment shall be provided. The temporary parking associated with the temporary mobile home, with the exception of the handicap parking and access, may be provided on hard surface pavement, shell rock or mulch, provided that there is a compacted sub-grade. A minimum twenty-four (24) inch hedge shall be planted around the perimeter of the parking lot. 
h.  Special permit. A special permit to be valid for a period of one (1) year shall be obtained. Requests for extensions of time beyond the initial one (1) year approval shall be made on forms prescribed by PZB. Permits may be renewed annually provided that: 
i.  Affidavit. A notarized affidavit indicating that the approved development is in compliance with the platting requirements of this Code, or any other time specific code provisions or conditions of approval of the development order and further specifying the number of unbuilt or unsold units; 
ii.  Building permit. There is evidence indicating that a building permit for a single family dwelling has been obtained within the last year; and 
iii.  Removal agreement. A notarized mobile home removal agreement shall be executed. 
iv.  Agent's authorization. Agent's authorization is obtained from the developer. 
v.  Construction. The Planned Development continues to be under construction. 
D.  Tents accessory to residential use. Tents, temporary screen rooms, and portable shade canopies for residential use are defined as a collapsible shelter of fabric (ex. Nylon or canvas) stretched over a supported framework of poles with ropes and pegs and used for camping outdoors, as temporary shelter, or a temporary building. Tents, temporary screen rooms and portable shade canopies for residential use are permitted under the following conditions: 
1.  Duration. They are erected for no more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
2.  Setback. They are setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any property line. 
3.  On site Location. They are not allowed in the front yard of a lot. 
4.  Anchoring. They are properly tied down according to manufacturers' specifications. 
5.  Tie Down. They are not tied to any portion of a permanent building/structure. The tie down does not encroach into the setback area. 
6.  Installation and Removal. The installation and removal of these temporary screen rooms, party tents, and portable shade canopies is the responsibility of the property owner. The structure shall be removed immediately upon the declaration of any weather emergency, including a "hurricane watch" or "hurricane warning." 
7.  Special Use Permit Required. Properties with tent(s) over three hundred (300) square feet in total size are required to have a Special Use Permit. 
Sec. 6.6.3. - Compatibility standards. 
    All commercial and industrial uses subject to review by the Development Review Committee and proposed to be located adjacent to or across the street from residential districts of the lot perimeter, and all the uses specifically required by other with these standards, shall demonstrate compliance with the following architectural compatibility standards. The design of the buildings should provide variety and visual interest and create an overall unified image through the following and other appropriate means. 
A.  Unified image. An overall unified image shall be created by the use of common elements such as consistent forms, colors, architectural details and landscape materials. 
B.  Uniform treatment. Similar architectural character and treatment shall be provided on all sides of the building. 
C.  Entrances. Unit and building entries shall be easily identifiable. Entries shall be integrated into the building architecture. Entries in exterior stairs shall be designed to provide shelter from inclement weather. 
D.  Roof top equipment. All roof top mechanical and electrical equipment, including satellite dish antennas, shall be screened so as not to be visible from any point up to ten (10) feet above the ground from any point within a two hundred-foot radius of the building on which it is mounted. 
E.  Storage areas. No exterior storage areas shall be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district. 
1.  Loading docks, bay doors, and accessory equipment. Loading docks, bay doors, and accessory equipment such as dumpsters, shall be located and oriented away from residential property lines. 
Sec. 6.6.4. - Fences, walls, and hedges. 
A.  Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to establish minimum standards for fences, walls, and hedges erected within the Village and to provide maintenance standards to preserve the established aesthetic values of the community. Additionally, it is the intent of this section to ensure that walls, fences, and hedges adjacent to roads be erected and maintained in a manner which provides visual harmony and to the extent practicable, uniformity within a neighborhood community. Additionally, the intent of these regulations is to preserve and protect the distinctive characteristics of the individual communities within the Village. 
B.  Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this Ordinance, have the meanings specified herein: 
    Director shall mean the Director of the Community Services Department or designee. 
    Fence shall mean an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
    Field wire fence shall mean woven wire fencing meeting the standards of ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials Standards) A116-05, entitled "Standard Specification for Metallic-Coated, Steel Woven Wire Fence Fabric." 
    Hedge shall mean shrubs planted in a continuous line which will block at least eighty (80) percent of a view in a maximum of two (2) growing seasons after installation. 
    Irrigated, irrigation or irrigation system shall mean an operational, permanent, and artificial watering system designed to transport and deliver water to vegetation, landscaping, and landscaped areas. 
    Major Thoroughfare shall mean any road within the Village which is designated as a major thoroughfare by this section. 
    Legally or lawfully permitted or established shall mean a fence, wall or hedge that complied with all applicable governmental regulations when it was built, installed or planted, and received permits from the county or Village if a permit was required at the time of construction, installation or planting. 
    Open Weave Fencing shall mean chain link, aluminum rail, picket, or similar types of non-opaque fences approved by the Architectural Review Board (ARB). 
    Side or side of fence or wall shall mean the lineal portion of a wall, fence or hedge located along or parallel to a front, side, side interior, or rear property line. 
    Village Engineer shall mean the Director of Environmental and Engineering Services or designee. 
    Walls shall mean only those walls serving as a barrier and shall not include walls associated with a habitable structure. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  Application. These regulations shall apply to all property within the Village. 
2.  Exemption. Fences, walls, and hedges installed by the Village of Wellington are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
3.  Legally established nonconforming walls, fences and hedges. 
a.  Lawfully permitted walls, fences, and hedges existing as April 10, 2007 that do not comply with the requirements of this section shall be considered as legally established minor nonconforming improvements for the purposes of repair or replacement. 
b.  Any repair or replacement of a legally established minor nonconforming wall, fence, or hedge shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
c.  Any wall, fence or hedge that is damaged shall be repaired or replaced in compliance with the requirements of this Section 1.7.2 of these land development regulations, unless otherwise provided herein. 
d.  For the purposes of repair or replacement, a minor nonconforming wall, fence or hedge shall comply with the requirements of this section if more than sixty (60) percent of the lineal length of such wall, fence or hedge must be replaced or repaired due to damage, structural deterioration, or death or removal of vegetation. 
4.  Illegally established walls, fences and hedges. 
a.  Existing walls, fences, or hedges that were not lawfully permitted or were not lawfully installed and that do not comply with the requirements of this section shall be considered as illegal structures or plantings for the purposes of enforcement. 
b.  Existing fences, walls or hedges that were not lawfully permitted or were not lawfully installed and that do not comply with the requirements of this section shall be replaced not later than June 30, 2007, unless otherwise provided herein. 
c.  Replacement of a hedge that does not comply with the requirements of this section and exists as of the effective date of this section is not required, subject to the following: 
(1).  if a hedge is damaged to an extent that more than sixty (60) percent of the lineal length of the hedge must be replaced; 
(2).  if removal of all or a portion of a hedge is required for public improvements, including widening or expansion of adjacent roads or installation or replacement of sidewalks, potable water lines, sanitary sewer lines, or other public utilities; or 
(3).  if the roots of a hedge are damaging public improvements such as sidewalks and utility lines and the property owner fails to take such remedial action as required by the Village Engineer. 
5.  Maintenance of nonconforming hedges. All nonconforming hedges shall be maintained in conformance with the requirements of this section, including maximum height limits and encroachment into public sidewalks and rights-of-way. 
6.  Root barriers and root pruning. The owner of property associated with a nonconforming hedges shall be responsible for installation of root barriers or root pruning, as required by the Village Engineer, if damage to public improvements including sidewalks and utility lines is caused by the roots of such hedges. 
D.  Appeals. Any property owner aggrieved by a determination of the Director regarding the applicability of these regulations may file an appeal to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board (PZAB) within thirty (30) days following such determination. The appeal shall be filed in a manner established by the Director. 
E.  Height of fences, walls, and hedges. 
1.  Measurement of fence, wall, or hedge height. As illustrated in Figure 1, the height of a fence, wall, or hedge shall be measured from the lower of the average grade of property line on which the fence, wall or hedge is located when the elevation of the property has been increased. 

2.  Maximum height of hedges. 
a.  Hedges up to a maximum height of 10 feet are permitted in front, rear, and side setbacks except as otherwise noted herein. 
b.  Zero lot line single family properties, multifamily properties, duplexes and villas are restricted to a hedge up to a maximum height of six feet. 
c.  A waiver for an increase in hedge height may be granted by the ARB as provided in Section 6.4.4.E.4. 
3.  Exception. Fences, walls or hedges installed along a major thoroughfare may be measured from the higher of the average grade of property line. 
4.  Waiver required and recognized prior approvals. 
a.  Except for hedges in excess of eight feet as provided in this subsection, approval of a waiver by the ARB shall be required for any fence, wall, or hedge in excess of the height requirements permitted by these land development regulations. 
b.  Prior to acceptance of an application for a hedge height waiver, an applicant shall obtain approval from the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall not approve a waiver when there is actual or potential damage to public facilities including underground or overhead utility lines, sidewalks or roads. The Village Engineer may require such conditions of approval as are necessary to protect public facilities, including installation of root barriers, additional setbacks, and limitation on types of hedge materials to be installed. 
c.  An appeal of a decision by the Village Engineer shall be requested as provided in Section 6.6.4.D of the section. 
d.  For the purposes of this section, the ARB shall determine that a request for a hedge height waiver shall comply with each of the following standards: 
(1).  the increase in hedge height will provide additional screening and buffering for residences adjacent to a major thoroughfare or other public or private road right-of-way; 
(2).  the increase in hedge height will provide additional screening and buffering from adjacent incompatibilities such commercial or industrial structures or uses, overhead power lines, lighting associated with athletic fields, security lighting associated with public or private facilities, and similar uses or activities; 
(3).  the increase in hedge height will not adversely affect public improvements, including utilities, roads, and sidewalks; 
(4).  the increase in hedge height will not allow overhead or underground encroachment into and damage to public improvements including utilities, roads, and sidewalks; and 
(5).  the increase in hedge height will not cause adverse impacts on public safety, including visibility at intersections. 
e.  The owner of property applying for a hedge height waiver shall execute, as part of the application for waiver, an affidavit which states that such owner shall comply with all applicable requirements of Section 6.6.4 relating to hedges. 
f.  For the purposes of these land development regulations, specific increases in hedge height previously granted by the ARB shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of this Section. 
5.  Fence, wall, or hedge height exceptions. 
a.  Ornamental decorations and light fixtures not exceeding 18 inches in height above the maximum height limit may be allowed on pillars or supports for any fence or wall. The ornamental decoration may not be more than 20% of the length of the hedge. 
b.  The height of a portion of a hedge may exceed the maximum height limit to allow arches or other ornamental features associated with: 
(1).  the location of an opening in a wall or fence to allow a gate; 
(2).  the screening and buffering of residential utility facilities such as lift stations, 
(3).  the screening and buffering of utility poles, and 
(4).  similar ornamental or aesthetic purposes. 
c.  The height of arches or ornamental hedge features shall not exceed: 
(1)  12 feet for properties greater than one acre. 
(2)  10 feet for properties one acre or less. 
(3)  Zero lot line properties: 
i.  Maximum height of eight feet. 
ii.  The arch above a gate opening shall extend up to two and a half feet from each side of the gate. 
6.  Minimum and maximum fence and wall height. Unless otherwise specified, fences and walls shall be not less than four feet high and not more than six feet in height. 
F.  Design and exterior appearance of fences, fences, and hedges. 
1.  Exterior appearance of walls and fences. The finished side of all fences and walls shall face the street or adjoining property. 
2.  Fence designs, materials, and colors. 
a.  The ARB shall adopt schedules of approved fence designs, materials, and colors. Alternative designs, materials, and colors for fences may be used only after review and approval by the ARB. 
b.  For the purposes of this section, PVC, metal, composite, or other fencing designed to simulate wooden fencing shall be considered wooden fencing. 
3.  Wall design and required materials. 
a.  Walls shall be either masonry or brick. 
b.  All masonry walls shall have smooth finished coating on both sides and shall be painted on the street or adjoining property side. 
c.  For purposes of this section, materials designed to look like masonry or brick walls shall be considered masonry or brick walls. 
G.  Location of fences, walls and hedges. 
1.  Front plane. 
a.  Except as provided elsewhere within this Code, fences, walls and hedges may not be located closer than five feet to the front plane on either side of the principal structure. 
b.  The Director may allow a reduction in the front plane setback requirement to accommodate one or more of the following: 
(1).  existing vegetation such as trees, shrubs, hedges, or plants; 
(2).  existing air conditioning, heating and ventilation equipment; 
(3).  existing pool equipment; or 
(4).  other similar existing mechanical equipment. 
c.  The reduction in front plane setback shall not exceed four feet, unless a variance is granted for such further reduction by the PZAB. 
2.  Rights-of-way, easements and encroachments. Fences and walls shall not be located closer than three feet to any street right-of-way. A hedge or required landscaping associated with a fence or wall shall not encroach upon the public right-of-way or easements. 
3.  Fences, walls, and hedges in front setback prohibited. 
a.  Fences, walls, and hedges in residential districts, except properties of at least one acre in size that possess FLUM designations of Residential "A" or "B" and except as provided in Section 7.14.16, shall not be installed within any front building setbacks. Except as provided in Section 7.14.16, opaque fences or walls shall not be allowed in the front building setbacks. 
b.  The ARB may develop standards for the installation of hedges within the front setback of any residential structure, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1).  the hedge shall not exceed three feet in height; 
(2).  the hedge shall not be located within an easement; and 
(3).  the hedge shall utilize materials approved by the ARB. 
4.  Location of fences, walls and hedges within a safe sight triangle. 
a.  For all fences, walls and hedges, a safe sight triangle shall be provided at all intersections of driveways and public or private roads. The apex of the safe sight triangle is to be located at the intersection of the driveway and the extension of the proposed hedge or fence. This requirement shall be applied to all new or replacement hedges and fences installed on or after October 1, 2005. 
b.  The Village Engineer shall establish minimum standards for safe sight triangles. 
5.  Location of hedges and replacement hedges. 
a.  As of September 1, 2005, all new hedges and all replacement hedges if approved for an ultimate height in excess of six feet shall comply with the locational criteria provided herein. A new hedge in excess of six feet shall be located along a line that is the greater of: 
(1).  the required safe sight triangle; 
(2).  five feet or more from the property line when located at a front property line or when adjacent to a utility easement; 
(3).  five feet or more from any road right-of-way line; or 
(4).  five feet or more from any existing or planned utility easement. 
b.  A root barrier in association with a hedge in excess of six feet shall be installed when requested by the Village Engineer. 
c.  Hedges shall be maintained in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
H.  Chain link or wire fences. 
1.  Within the Urban Service Boundary. Inside the Urban Services Boundary (USB) wire fencing must be of the vinyl coated chain link type. 
2.  Outside the urban service boundary. Outside of the USB, galvanized or vinyl coated chain link fences or field wire fences may be used. The fencing shall comply with the requirements of Section 16.10.9.C.1 regarding the installation of a hedge or three or four board wooden fencing. 
I.  Major thoroughfare fencing. 
1.  Designation of major thoroughfares. For the purposes of this section, the following roads and streets are designated major thoroughfares: 
a.  Aero Club Drive; 
b.  Big Blue Trace; 
c.  Bink's Forest Drive; 
d.  Birkdale Drive; 
e.  Fairlane Farms Road; 
f.  Forest Hill Boulevard; 
g.  Greenbriar Boulevard 
h.  Greenview Shores Boulevard; 
i.  Lake Worth Road; 
j.  Paddock Drive west of Big Blue Trace; 
k.  Pierson Road; 
l.  South Shore Boulevard; and 
m.  Wellington Trace. 
2.  Fences within the Urban Services Boundary. Within the USB, but excluding properties located within the Equestrian Preserve Area, major thoroughfare fencing shall comply with the standard listed below. 
a.  The fence shall be a minimum of five feet in height and a maximum of six feet height. 
b.  The fence may consist of wood, PVC, vinyl coated chain link, aluminum or other material as permitted by this section. 
c.  The fence type shall comply with all applicable requirements of this section. 
d.  The fence shall be located a minimum of three feet from the property line. 
e.  A thoroughfare fence may include a gate and an opening in the hedge to allow use of the gate, as provided in Section 6.6.4.M.6. 
f.  A gate shall consist of wood or the same material as the fence. 
g.  A gate opening shall be not more than four feet in width. 
h.  A gate opening in excess of four feet in width shall be approved by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall consider a variety of factors, including those listed below, when determining if a gate in excess of four feet shall be allowed. 
(1)  The presence of a limited access easement or other limit on crossing a property line established by an approved plat. 
(2)  The location of the proposed gate in relation to a public or private roadway and existing or proposed traffic and pedestrian circulation patterns. 
(3)  The presence of vegetation, irrigation, sidewalks, and other public improvements. 
3.  Hedges for major thoroughfare fences within the USB. 
a.  A hedge that is consistent with the requirements of this section shall be planted between the fence and the property line. 
b.  A hedge shall not be installed within an easement or right-of-way unless such installation is approved by the Village Engineer. 
c.  The hedge shall be maintained at a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of 10 feet provided the installation and maintenance complies with the requirements of Section 6.6.4.G.5 or as otherwise provided in Section 6.6.4.E.2.b. 
d.  All hedges shall be irrigated with a permanent irrigation system. The irrigation system must be installed in a manner to guarantee irrigation of hedges outside fences or walls along major thoroughfares. 
4.  Major thoroughfare fences within the Equestrian Preserve Area (EPA). Within any portion of the EPA, major thoroughfare fencing shall comply with the standards listed below. 
a.  Fences shall be a three or four board wooden fence. 
b.  Fences shall be finished with natural, clear-coat or be painted black, gray, or white. 
c.  The fence shall be a minimum of four feet in height and a maximum of six feet height. 
d.  Hedges are not required for thoroughfare fences within the EPA. 
5.  Neighborhood alternative thoroughfare fencing. Other types of fences, walls, or landscaping or any combination thereof may be used subject to compliances with each of the standards listed below. 
a.  A request for a neighborhood alternative thoroughfare fence or wall is received from either: 
(1).  A duly constituted home owners' association (HOA) or property owners' association (POA) on behalf of the neighborhood; or 
(2).  All owners of property adjacent to the thoroughfare, if a HOA or POA for the area does not exist. 
b.  The perpetual maintenance of the fence or wall is assured by a HOA or POA or, if a HOA or POA does not exist, the perpetual maintenance is assured in a manner acceptable to the Village Attorney. 
c.  The use of alternative materials, design and associated land shall comply with each of the standards listed. 
(1).  The wall or fence type, material and design and associated landscaping are approved by the ARB. 
(2).  A determination that the alternative wall or fence design and associated landscaping produces a design quality substantially equal to or greater than that which would be achieved by the strict application of the major thoroughfare fence standards. 
(3).  All alternative thoroughfare wall, fence and landscape designs previously approved by the ARB are conforming to the requirements of this section. 
(4).  Alternative thoroughfare fence, wall or landscape designs shall be maintained as approved and as required by this section and all applicable sections of this Code. 
6.  Exempt fences and walls. An existing alternative fencing design permitted by a previously issued development order or an approval granted by the ARB shall be considered conforming to the requirements of this section. 
7.  Individual alternative thoroughfare fencing. Other types of fences or walls may be used if the following conditions are met: 
a.  A request for individual alternative thoroughfare fence or wall is received from a property owner. 
b.  The wall or fence type, material, design and associated landscaping is approved by the ARB based on a determination that the proposed alternative produces a design quality equal or greater than that which would be achieved by the strict application of the thoroughfare fence standards. 
8.  Exception for fences adjacent to water features. 
a.  For any property that directly abuts a canal, lake or other water feature maintained by the Village, only open weave fencing, in such locations as permitted by this section, shall be installed when such fencing is located within a utility, drainage, maintenance or similar easement. 
b.  Landscaping, including hedges, trees, shrubs and flowering plants shall not be installed along the inside or outside of any open weave fencing located along a lake, canal or water feature maintained by the Village when such fencing and hedging is to be installed within a utility, drainage, maintenance or similar easement. 
J.  Landscaping for walls and fences adjacent to streets not considered a major thoroughfare. 
1.  Landscaping required. Property owners shall install a hedge along the outside fences and walls which are adjacent to streets to reduce the visual impact of the fence or wall. 
2.  Landscaping of chain link fences. 
a.  Property owners shall install a hedge along the area inside or outside of all vinyl coated chain link fences, including side and back yards, unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  A hedge shall not be required for vinyl coated chain link fence when utilized as an approved pool barrier fence and located immediately adjacent to the pool or pool deck. 
3.  Irrigation required. The hedge shall be irrigated. The irrigation system must be installed in a manner to guarantee irrigation of hedges outside fences or walls. 
K.  Landscaping standards for walls and fences. 
1.  Hedges planted along the exterior of a fence or wall shall comply with the standards listed below. 
a.  Hedge material shall be a minimum of three (3) gallons and a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches high at time of planting, provided the Director and the Landscape Architect with the approval of the ARB may require hedge material of a minimum of five (5) to seven (7) gallons based upon the type of hedge material to be planted. Plants shall be installed two (2) feet on center, or as otherwise is appropriate based upon commonly accepted professional landscaping practices. The Director may waive these minimum size requirements if there is a scarcity of plant material due to hurricane, drought, or other natural disaster. 
b.  Hedges shall be selected from the species list approved by the ARB. 
c.  The property owner shall be responsible to maintain the landscaping at a height that complies with the requirements of this section. 
d.  The height of the hedge shall be five (5) feet in height within twelve (12) months of planting and six (6) feet in height within twenty-four (24) months of planting. Once the appropriate height is attained, the hedge shall be maintained at the height of the fence or wall, or as otherwise provided herein. 
e.  Landscaping adjacent to fences surrounding schools, parks, and other public properties shall include trees planted at a minimum height of twelve (12) feet spaced a maximum of thirty (30) feet on center along the entire length of the fence. 
f.  All landscaping shall be irrigated. The irrigation system shall be installed in a manner to ensure irrigation of hedges located outside fences or walls. 
g.  All landscaped areas, trees and hedges shall be maintained in a neat and healthy condition free of weeds, litter, diseased, dead, or bare areas. 
2.  Standards for landscaping and hedges. Landscaping and hedges installed in front of or in association with a fence or wall shall comply with the following: 
a.  the landscaping and hedges shall be maintained in a healthy condition in accordance with standard horticultural practices; 
b.  the landscaping and hedges shall be trimmed in a neat and orderly condition consist with standard landscape practices and in accordance with the ANSI standard horticultural practices; and 
c.  the landscaping and hedges shall not extend onto, under or over public properties, rights-of-way, or easements. 
The Village may allow landscaping and hedges to encroach into an easement subject to approval by any party with an interest in the easement and the Village Engineer. 
L.  Wall and fence maintenance. 
1.  Maintenance. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good order and repair and shall be subject to the standards of this section. 
2.  Painted surfaces. Painted surfaces of fences and walls shall not be faded and shall be free of discoloration, staining, or peeling. Other surfaces associated with a wall or fence shall not be faded, discolored, stained, peeling, chipped, or broken. 
3.  Cleaning or repainting. Surfaces of a wall or fence shall be cleaned or repainted if either of the following occurs: 
a.  when more than ten (10) percent of a surface is stained or discolored; or 
b.  if more than five (5) percent of the paint is peeling over any surface. 
4.  Fence repair. Any broken, missing, deteriorated, dilapidated, or otherwise damaged portion of a wall, including boards, posts, slats, rails, stiles, structural members or elements, or fittings shall be replaced immediately. 
5.  Wall repair. Any broken, chipped, missing, deteriorated, dilapidated, or otherwise damaged portion of a wall, including the foundation, the exterior, piers, arches, lintels, pilasters, columns, coping, or other structural elements or walls, shall be replaced immediately. 
6.  Vertical position. Fences and walls shall be maintained in an upright and vertical position and shall not be allowed to lean or to otherwise be out of plumb. 
7.  Structural soundness and appearance. Fence rails and fence posts shall be structurally sound and shall not be bent, twisted, warped or otherwise misshaped. 
8.  Fabric and fittings. Fabric, rails, posts, fittings, and gates that become more than ten percent discolored shall be cleaned or replaced. 
9.  Temporary supports. 
a.  Excluding the period of fence or wall construction, temporary supports for a fence or wall shall not extend into a public right-of-way. 
b.  Excluding the period of fence or wall construction, temporary supports for a fence or wall shall be utilized only in the event of an accident or damage associated with severe weather conditions. 
c.  Temporary supports shall be utilized for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. The Director may authorize a greater period of time based upon the affects of hurricanes or other natural disasters. 
M.  General Requirements for fences, walls and hedges. 
1.  Building permit required. 
a.  A building permit shall be issued prior to installation of a fence or wall. 
b.  A building permit is required for repair to a wall or fence when the damage exceeds twenty (20) percent or more of the length of the side of a fence or wall. 
2.  Electric charging. With the exception of a fence or wall installed and maintained on property with a FLUM designation of Residential "A" or "B," a fence or wall shall not be electrically charged. 
3.  Safe sight distances. Fences, walls, and hedges in proximity to the intersection of public or private roads, driveways, access ways, or rights-of-way shall conform to the safe distance triangle provisions of these land development regulations. The apex of the safe sight triangle is to be located at the intersection of the driveway and the extension of the proposed hedge or fence. This requirement shall be applied to all new or replacement hedges and fences installed on or after October 1, 2005. 
4.  Barbed wire prohibited. The use of barbed wire as any part of a fence, wall, or hedge is prohibited. This prohibition may be waived by the Village Engineer for any installation requiring additional security by virtue of federal, state, county or Village laws or regulations. 
5.  Irrigation. 
a.  Unless otherwise provided in this section, all hedges, plants, trees or other planted materials or vegetation shall be irrigated. 
b.  The irrigation system must be installed in a manner to ensure irrigation of all required or installed plant materials and vegetation. 
c.  With respect to hedges and other plants installed outside of a solid fence or wall, irrigation shall be provided in a manner to allow irrigation of installed hedges and associated plant material. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02; September 9, 2003; Sec. 6.6.1.1; Ord. No. 2004-35; August 24, 2004; Sec. 6.6.2.D; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-25, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 3-24-2015) 
CHAPTER 8. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6.8.1. - General. 
    The following provisions are applicable to all Planned Development Districts. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The application of flexible land use regulations to the development of land is often difficult or impossible within traditional zoning district standards. In order to permit the use of more flexible land use regulations and to facilitate use of the most advantageous techniques of land development, it is often necessary to establish a Planned Development District designation in which development is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. The objective of a Planned Development District is to encourage ingenuity, imagination and design efforts on the part of builders, architects, site planners and developers, to produce development that is in keeping with overall land use intensity and open space objectives of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan, while departing from the strict application of the dimensional standards of traditional Districts. Planned Development Districts are intended to allow design flexibility and provide performance standards that: 
1.  Ensure that future growth and development occurs in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Minimize adverse impacts of development on the environment by preserving native vegetation, wetlands and protected animal species to the greatest extent possible; 
3.  Increase and promote the use of mass transit, bicycle routes and other non-vehicular modes of transportation; 
4.  Result in a desirable environment with more amenities than would be possible through the strict application of the minimum standards of a standard zoning district; 
5.  Provide for an efficient use of land, and public resources, resulting in co-location of harmonious uses to share facilities and services and a logical network of utilities and streets, thereby lowering development costs; 
6.  Foster the safe, efficient and economic use of land, transportation, public facilities and services; 
7.  Encourage concentrated land use patterns which decrease the length of automobile travel, allow trip consolidation and encourage pedestrian circulation between land uses; 
8.  Enhance the appearance of the land through preservation of natural features, the provision of underground utilities, where possible, and the provision of recreation areas and open space in excess of existing standards; 
9.  Avoid the inappropriate development of lands and provide for adequate drainage and reduction of flood damage; 
10.  Ensure a more rational and compatible relationship between residential and non-residential uses for the mutual benefit of all; 
11.  Protect existing residential and commercial neighborhoods from harmful encroachment by intrusive or disruptive development; 
12.  Provide an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding areas; and 
13.  Provide for innovations in land development, especially for affordable housing and infill development; 
B.  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all Planned Development Districts and previously approved planned developments, whether new or amended within The Village. 
1.  General. All Planned Development Districts and previously planned developments shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.8.1.B, Applicability and Section 1.5, Exemptions and the Effect of Code and Amendments on Previously Approved Development Orders. 
a.  Thresholds. Planned Development Districts except for previously approved planned developments shall exceed the maximum development thresholds established in Table 6.4-3, Zoning District Maximum Intensity Thresholds, and the minimum threshold requirements of the applicable Planned Development District. 
b.  Conflicts. If conflicts exist between the provisions of this section and other regulations found in the LDR, the provisions of this section shall control to the extent of the conflict. 
c.  Zoning. Before any land shall be designated as a Planned Development District on the Future Land Use Map, it shall receive approval pursuant to procedures and standards of this section. 
d.  Site Development. Site development shall not occur within a Planned Development District or previously approved planned development until the approval of a Final Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
2.  Modifications to previous planned developments. Modifications to previously approved planned developments shall comply with Section 1.5, the requirements of this section and the requirements of the applicable planned development section. 
a.  Nonconforming uses. Previously approved planned developments which are now considered as planned development shall not be classified as nonconforming uses. 
b.  Zoning. Previously approved planned developments whether built or unbuilt, may be amended pursuant to the standards and procedures of this section by the DRC or the Village Council without rezoning to a Planned Development District provided the project has a valid initial development order according to Article 3, Definitions. 
c.  DRC. Modifications to previously approved planned developments, which do not require Village Council approval shall comply with the modification regulations of Section 6.8.1. 
d.  Land uses. Previously approved planned developments shall be governed by the underlying land use category (as determined by Table 6.8-1) or pod designation and Village Council conditions of approval for purposes of determining allowed uses and applicability of the supplementary use standards in Table 6.8-2. 
e.  Property development regulation. Previously approved planned developments shall be governed by the development regulations of this section, the regulations within Village Council conditions, and the regulations indicated on the latest certified master plan or site plan as allowed in Section 1.5. 
C.  Residential Density and Comprehensive Plan Land Uses Categories . The residential densities and corresponding Comprehensive Plan land use categories for planned developments districts and previously approved planned developments shall be determined by the following: 
1.  Table 6.8-1. Table 6.8-1, Planned Development District Densities and Corresponding Land Use Categories, indicates the minimum density, the standard density, and the planned development density, and the Comprehensive Plan land use categories which correspond to the various Planned Development Districts. 
a.  Computation of density. The residential density for planned developments shall be based on gross site acreage. 
b.  Minimum development density. The minimum residential density required by the Comprehensive Plan for a particular land use category. 
c.  Standard development density. Standard development density is defined as the maximum density allowed without a planned development for a land use category. A planned development which meets the minimum performance standards of the Comprehensive Plan, the minimum standards of Section 6.8.1 Planned Development District Regulations, and the minimum standards of the applicable Planned Development District, shall receive a standard density allocation as indicated on the Land Use Atlas. 
d.  Planned development density. A planned development may qualify for a density bonus, in addition to the standard density, by meeting and exceeding the following standards: 
i.  The performance and density standards of the Land Use Element of the Village Comprehensive Plan shall be met for the total density to be permitted; and, 
ii.  The Planned Development District shall be consistent with and exceed the requirements of Section 6.8, Planned Development District Regulations including but not limited to the design criteria, vegetation preservation, transportation program and recreation requirements of the applicable Planned Development District. 
The density bonus shall not be considered an entitlement for the use of a Planned Development District, and shall only be granted for exemplary projects that exceed the minimum requirements of this section. The Village Council has the option of granting standard density, a partial planned development density bonus, or the maximum planned development density bonus. 
e.  Affordable housing. In addition to the standard density and the planned development density, a Planned Development District may qualify for an affordable housing bonus pursuant to Section 6.10, Voluntary Density Bonus, or other Comprehensive Plan affordable housing programs. 
TABLE 6.8-1 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT DENSITIES AND CORRESPONDING LAND USE CATEGORIES 
Planned 
Development 
District Density Range In "Dwelling Units Per Acre (Du/Ac.)" 
By Comprehensive Plan Land Use Category CLO CL CHO CH IND AGR* CRE PUD Min - None 
Std - None 
PDD - 1 
? TND MXPD ? ? ? ? MUPD ? ? ? ? ? ? PIPD ? MHPD RVPD ? SWPD ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  
Legend: Check (check) indicates that the Planned Development District corresponds to the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Category. 
Planned Development Zone Districts Comprehensive Plan Land Use Categories Density Range PUD - Planned Unit Development Density CLO - Commercial Low Office Min - Minimum Development Density TND - Traditional Neighborhood District Development Density CL - Commercial Low Std - Standard Development Density CHO - Commercial High Office PDD - Planned Development District Bonus Density MXPD - Mixed Use Planned Development CH - Commercial High MUPD - Multiple Use Planned Development PIPD - Planned Industrial Park Development ND - Industrial MHPD - Mobile Home Park Planned Development AGR - Agricultural Reserve RVPD - Recreational Vehicle Park Planned Development CRE - Commercial Recreation SWPD - Solid Waste Disposal Planned Development  
TABLE 6.8-1, NOTES: 
This chart indicates the Comprehensive Plan land use categories which correspond to Planned Development Districts. For previously approved planned developments, the Planning & Zoning Director shall use the land use category which most closely reflects the existing Zoning district and development order. For example, a development previously approved as a planned office business park in the CHO zoning district most closely corresponds to the CHO land use category. A complete listing of land use categories available in unincorporated The Village is located within the Comprehensive Plan. 
Actual maximum density granted to a Planned Development is based upon meeting performance goals and Comprehensive Plan objectives. Actual density granted by the Village Council to a Planned Development may be less than the maximum density indicated. 
Gross densities above eight (8) dwelling units per acre (based on entire area of a Planned Development) shall be limited to affordable housing programs included in the Village Comprehensive Plan and may apply for property development regulations for density bonus programs. 
Densities indicated in Table 6.8-1 shall be calculated based upon the gross area of a Planned Development. 
Maximum density for a Traditional Neighborhood District (TND) is calculated by adding the maximum underlying density of a residential land use category to the maximum density bonus available, up to two (2) dwelling units per acre, granted through the rezoning process. 
Residential density for a MXPD shall be determined by the underlying residential land use category of the commercial or industrial land use category indicated on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Atlas. Land with a commercial or industrial land use designation without an underlying residential land use category shall be assigned a residential density by PZB based on the residential density of land surrounding the proposed district. 
Until such time as the Agricultural Reserve study is complete, PUDs shall not be developed within this land use category. 
TABLE 6.8-1 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT DENSITIES AND CORRESPONDING 
LAND USE CATEGORIES 
PLANNED 
DEVELOPMENT 
DISTRICT DENSITY RANGE IN "DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE (DU/AC.)" 
BY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN LAND USE CATEGORY RR10 LR1 LR2 LR3 MR5 HR8 HR12 HR18 PUD Min - None 
Std - None 
PDD - .1 
? Min - None 
Std - None 
PDD - 1 
? Min - 1 
Std - 1.5 
PDD - 2 
? Min - 1 
Std - 2 
PDD - 3 
? Min - 3 
Std - 4 
PDD - 5 
? Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 8 
? Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD -8 
? Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 8 
? TND Min - None 
Std - None 
PDD - 3 Min - 1 
Std - 1.5 
PDD - 4 Min - 1 
Std - 2 
PDD - 5 Min - 3 
Std - 4 
PDD - 7 Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 10 Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 14 Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 18 MXPD MUPD PIPD MHPD Min - None 
Std - None 
PDD - .1 
? Min - None 
Std - None 
PDD - 1 
? Min - 1 
Std - 1.5 
PDD - 2 
? Min - 1 
Std - 2 
PDD - 3 
? Min - 3 
Std - 4 
PDD - 5 
? Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 8 
? Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 8 
? Min - 5 
Std - 6 
PDD - 8 
? RVPD ? SWPD ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  
LEGEND: Check (?) indicates that the Planned Development District corresponds to the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Category. 
Planned Development Zone Districts Comprehensive Plan Land Use Categories Density Range PUD - Planned Unit Development RR 10 - Rural Residential 10 Min - Minimum Development Density TND - Traditional Neighborhood District RR 10 - Rural Residential 10 Std - Standard Development Density PDD - Planned Development District Bonus Density MXPD - Mixed Use Planned Development LR 2 - Low Residential 2 MUPD - Multiple Use Planned Development LR 3 - Low Residential 3 PIPD - Planned Industrial Park Development MR 5 - Medium Residential 5 MHPD - Mobile Home Park Planned Development HR 8 - High Residential 8 RVPD - Recreational Vehicle Park Planned Development HR 12 - High Residential 12 SWPD - Solid Waste Disposal Planned Development HR 18 - High Residential 18  
TABLE 6.8-1, NOTES: 
This chart indicates the Comprehensive Plan land use categories which correspond to Planned Development Districts. For previously approved planned developments, the Planning & Zoning Director shall use the land use category which most closely reflects the existing Zoning district and development order. For example, a development previously approved as a planned office business park in the CHO zoning district most closely corresponds to the CHO land use category. A complete listing of land use categories available in unincorporated The Village is located within the Comprehensive Plan. 
Actual maximum density granted to a Planned Development is based upon meeting performance goals and Comprehensive Plan objectives. Actual density granted by the Village Council to a Planned Development may be less than the maximum density indicated. 
Gross densities above eight (8) dwelling units per acre (based on entire area of a Planned Development) shall be limited to affordable housing programs included in the Village Comprehensive Plan and may apply for property development regulations for density bonus programs. 
Densities indicated in Table 6.8-1 shall be calculated based upon the gross area of a Planned Development. 
Maximum density for a Traditional Neighborhood District (TND) is calculated by adding the maximum underlying density of a residential land use category to the maximum density bonus available, up to two (2) dwelling units per acre, granted through the rezoning process. 
Residential density for a MXPD shall be determined by the underlying residential land use category of the commercial or industrial land use category indicated on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Atlas. Land with a commercial or industrial land use designation without an underlying residential land use category shall be assigned a residential density by PZB based on the residential density of land surrounding the proposed district. 
Until such time as the Agricultural Reserve study is complete, PUDs shall not be developed within this land use category. ;rn0;0; Ord. No. 2010-10, section 2 states Article 6 "Zoning District" of the Wellington Land Development Regulations is hereby amended by amending Table 6.4.1 to provide that pain management clinics are a conditional use in the Medical Arts Planned Development District, Medical Center Planned Development District, Mixed Use Planned Development District, Multiple Use Planned Development District and Community Commercial District and are prohibited in all other districts listed within that table and Table 6.8.1 is hereby amended to reflect that pain management clinics are prohibited within all land use zones and categories contemplated by that Table. 
D.  Use Regulations. Planned Development District or previously approved planned development shall provide land uses as indicated in Table 6.8-2, (Use Regulations Schedule), unless otherwise restricted by the conditions included in the final development order and subject to the provisions below: 
1.  Administrative categories. All land uses shall be classified into one (1) of the following administrative categories established by this section and Table 6.8-2, Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule: general land uses; special land uses; or conditional land uses. These land uses are regulated according to pod or land use category as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Atlas. 
2.  General land uses. These uses are allowed in conjunction with an approved Preliminary Development Plan, master plan or site plan and do not require further Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board or Village Council approval prior to approval of a Final Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan for a building permit; 
a.  Special land uses. These uses require an administrative approval and issuance of a special permit. Special land uses may also require approval by the Development Review Committee; and, 
b.  Conditional land uses. These uses are required to be indicated on a Preliminary Development Plan, master plan or site plan and shall receive Village Council approval. 
3.  Supplementary use standards. A number in the "Note" column of Table 6.8-2, (Planned Development Use Regulation Schedule) refers to supplementary land use standards applicable to a particular land use in one (1) or more of the pods or Comprehensive Plan land use categories in which such use is allowed. These standards are located in Section 6.4.4. (Supplementary use standards). 
4.  Additional conditional uses. Additional uses may be designated as requested land uses by complying with the following: 
a.  Justification. These uses shall be listed and justified in the land use justification report for the Planned Development District or previously approved planned development; and, 
b.  Location. These uses shall be located in pods of Planned Development Districts which are similar and comparable to a standard zoning district in which these uses are allowed. 
5.  Accessory uses. Principal uses listed in the Use Regulations Schedule (Table 6.8-2) are deemed to include accessory uses identified by this Code and such other accessory uses that are necessarily and customarily associated with and are incidental and subordinate to such principal uses. An accessory use shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to the principal use, except as otherwise provided. 
a.  Location. All accessory uses, buildings and structures, except for approved off-site parking, shall be located on the same lot as the principal use in each district, except as otherwise provided. 
b.  Floor area. The permitted accessory use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area or business receipts of the principal use, or uses. 
Table 6.8-2
Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule 
Use Type Planned Development - Zoning District 
(<blank> = Not Permitted; A = Accessory Use Only; C = Conditional Use; D = Development Review Committee; 
P = Permitted Use; S = Special Permit) N 
O 
T 
E 
§ 
6. 
4. 
4 PUD MAPD MXPD MUPD FLEX MCPD Land Use 
Category (LUC) LUC LUC LUC LUC LUC OS & 
REC RES CIV/P COM CONS MC MU CC MU NC OC CC CR IND IND MC CR NC CC OC Accessory dwelling S P P 1 Agriculture, bona fide 6 Agricultural food processing Agricultural related manufacturing, light Agricultural research/development P P P P 3 Agricultural sales & service P P 4 Agricultural stand S P 106 Agricultural transshipment P P 5 Air curtain incinerator, permanent C 7 Air curtain incinerator, temporary S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 8 Air stripper, remedial 9 Airplane landing strip, accessory C C C 10 Airport Amusements, temporary or special events S S S S S S S S S S S S S 12 Arena, auditorium or stadium C C C 13 Assembly, nonprofit C P C P P P P C P P P P 15 Auction, enclosed C P P 16 Auction, outdoor C C C S 16 Automotive paint or body shop C C C P 17 Automotive service station C C C C P 18 Bed and breakfast P P P S S S S 20 Bioinformatics P P P P 19.1 Bioscience, light P P P P 19.2 Broadcasting studio C P P C P P P P Building supplies, retail P C P Building supplies, wholesale P P Car wash and auto detailing C C C C P P 23 Catering service P P P P P Cemetery or mausoleum C 24 Chipping and mulching P 25 Church or place of worship C C C C C P P C C C P P 26 College or university C C C C C P P C C C C Communication panels, antennas, commercial P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Communication tower, commercial C C C C C P 27 Community vegetable garden P P 28 Congregate living facility, Type 1 P P P P P P 30 Congregate living facility, Type 2 C S C P P C C 30 Congregate living facility, Type 3 C C C C P P C C C C C 30 Contractor's storage yard P P 31 Convenience store P C C P P A 32 Convenience store with gas sales C C 33 Data Information processing P P P P Day care center, general C C C C C C C C C P C 34 Day care center, limited P P P P P P C P P P P P P P 34 Day labor, employment service C C C 35 Dispatching office C P 36 Dog day-care C P Electrical power facility C C C C C C 38 Entertainment, adult S 2 Entertainment, indoor C C C C C P C 39 Entertainment, outdoor C C C P 40 Equestrian arena, commercial C 41 Farmer's market P Financial institution P P C P P C P P A P 46 Fitness center P C P C P P C P P P P P 47 Flea market, enclosed C 48 Flea market, open C 49 Flex space D 49.1 Freestanding kiosk P P P P Fruit and vegetable market P P P P P P P 50 Funeral home or crematory C P P C C 51 Garage sale P S P P P 51 Gas and fuel, wholesale C P Golf course C C C C C C 53 Government services P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 54 Green market P P P P Grooms quarters P 55 Groves/row crops 56 Guest cottage P 57 Gun club, enclosed C C C P 58 Gun range, open C 58 Gun range, private P 59 Heliport or helipad, accessory P C C C C C P 11 Home occupation P P P P 60 Hospital or medical center C C P C C C C P P 62 Hotel, motel, boarding & rooming house C C C C C C C C C 61 Kennel, commercial C P 63 Laboratory, industrial research, testing and experimental uses P P C P Landscape installation service P 65 Landscape maintenance service C C C P P 65 Laundry services C P P P P P 66 Lounge, cocktail C C C C P P P 68 Machine or welding shop P P 69 Manufacturing and processing P P P 69.1 Marine facility C C C C C C 70 Medical office or dental clinic P P P P P P P C P P P P 71 Medical or dental laboratory P P P P C P P P Mobile home dwelling 73 Monument sales, retail P P P P Motion picture production studio P P C P P 74 Multifamily dwelling P P P P 75 Newsstand or gift shop P P P P P P P P P A P 76 Nursery, retail P P P 77 Nursery, wholesale 78 Nursing or convalescent facility C P P P C C P 79 Office, business or professional P P P P P P C P P P 80 Park, passive P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 82 Park, public P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 83 Parking garage, commercial C C C C C P P 84 Parking lot, commercial C C C C C P P 84 Personal services P P P P P P P P A P 85 Pottery shop, custom P P P P P Printing and copying services P P P P P P P P P P P P Recycling center P P P Recycling collection station S P 87 Recycling drop off bin S S S S S S P P S S S S S S P S 88 Repair and maintenance, general C C P P 90 Repair services, limited P C C P P P P P P P 91 Restaurant, fast food P C C C C C C 92 Restaurant, general C P P P P P P P P 93 Restaurant, specialty P P P P P P P P P P A P 94 Retail sales, automotive accessories and parts P P P A Retail sales, general P P P P P P P P 95 Retail sales, mobile or temporary S S S S S S S S 96 School, primary or secondary C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C 98 Security or caretaker quarters S D S S S P P S S S S S S S S 99 Self-service storage C C C C P P 100 Single-family dwelling P 102 Stable, commercial 104 Stable, private P 105 Theater, indoor C C C C P Towing service and storage P P Townhouse P P P P 110 Transportation facility C Upholstery shop P P P P P P P P Utility, minor P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 111 Vehicle sales and rental C C C C 112 Veterinary clinic C C P P P C P P P 114 Vocational school C C C C C C C C C C C 115 Warehousing P P 116 Water or wastewater treatment plant C P C C C C C P C 117 Wholesaling, general P P 118 Woodworking or cabinet making C P P P Zero lot line dwelling P P P 119 Zoo C C 120  
E.  Design Objectives. Planned Developments shall forward the goals of the Comprehensive Plan by complying with the following design guidelines. 
1.  General objectives. 
a.  Land shall contain sufficient width, depth, and frontage on a publicly dedicated arterial or major street or appropriate access thereto as shown on the Village or Palm Beach County Thoroughfare Plan to adequately accommodate its proposed use and design. 
b.  The proposal shall provide a continuous, non-vehicular circulation system and perimeter landscape areas to connect buildings and other land improvements. 
c.  The proposal shall conveniently design and locate parking to encourage pedestrian circulation between land uses. 
d.  The proposal shall preserve existing trees and other natural features of the site to the greatest possible extent. 
e.  The proposal shall enhance the appearance of the buildings and grounds with supplemental plantings to screen objectionable features and to control noise from areas or activities beyond the control of the Planned Development. 
f.  The elements of the Final Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to the size and shape of the tract, the character of the adjoining property, and the type and size of the buildings, in order to produce a compatible, functional, and economical land use pattern. 
g.  The arrangements of buildings shall be in favorable relation to the natural topography, existing desirable trees, views within and beyond the site, and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the site. 
h.  The Final Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan shall provide for adequate surface water management and soil conservation. 
i.  The proposal shall not be detrimental to the established land use patterns in the surrounding area. 
j.  The proposed land uses shall provide needed housing or services to the surrounding land uses. 
2.  Perimeter landscape and edge areas. Perimeter landscape or edge areas shall be located along the entire perimeter of a Planned Development and shall buffer incompatible pods and land uses. All perimeter landscape areas shall be designated on the Preliminary Development Plan, Master Plan and Site Plan. 
a.  Development order condition. A recommendation shall be made by PZB to the Village Council in the form of a development order condition as to the required location and type of perimeter landscape areas based upon the site design and the compatibility of surrounding land uses. Applicants for modifications to previously approved planned developments which do not require Village Council approval shall apply to the DRC for approval of the location and type of perimeter landscape area. 
b.  Design standards. All perimeter landscape areas shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Land use. Perimeter landscape areas may be crossed by streets, and may support non-vehicular circulation systems and may be encroached upon by the following site features up to a maximum width of five (5) in width: water bodies, dry retention or other similar land uses which do not result in the removal or destruction of native plant or animal species or habitat. The minimum tree and shrub requirements shall be based on the entire surface area (length × width) of the perimeter landscape area including any of the encroachments listed above. 
ii.  Landscape. Perimeter landscape areas shall be landscaped in accordance with: Section 7.3, Landscape and buffering; and, the individual Planned Development District regulations. 
iii.  Building setbacks. Residential setbacks shall be measured from the inside edge of the required perimeter landscape area. Nonresidential setbacks shall be measured from the property line. 
iv.  Dedication. The landowner shall receive written permission from PZB prior to any abandonment or modification of a perimeter landscape area. 
(a)  The perimeter landscape areas shall be dedicated for landscaping and buffering including the installation and maintenance of any structural landscape elements such as a wall, fence, berm, etc. 
v.  Fences or walls. Fences or walls located within any perimeter landscape area may be required by the Village Council in the form of a development order condition to provide openings to allow easy access for pedestrians, bicycles, and wildlife migration. 
vi.  Easements. Utility or drainage easements may cross a perimeter landscape area or edge area but shall not be located entirely within one. A maximum of five (5) feet of the width of a perimeter landscape area may contain a utility or drainage easement. The planting of any landscape material within this overlap shall comply with Section 6.5.11., Easement encroachment. 
vii.  Perimeter landscape area width credits. 
(a)  Perimeter landscape areas adjacent to existing required landscape buffers may receive a reduction in the minimum required width of a perimeter landscape area from the DRC. A perimeter landscape area may be reduced by one (1) foot in width for each one (1) foot if width of the existing buffer, up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the perimeter landscape area width. Credit may also be granted for vertical elements within a perimeter landscape area by the DRC for existing buffer features such as fences or walls, (see Section 6.8.1), 
(b)  Spatial separation. A fifty (50) percent credit may be granted for water bodies, canals, and other similar land uses which provide a spatial separation, but not necessarily a vertical buffer and have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet or greater. 
viii.  Native tree credits. Native plant material that is preserved within perimeter landscape areas may be credited toward complying with the minimum planting requirements. Perimeter landscape areas which receive credits for preserved vegetation shall comply with the maximum spacing requirements for landscaping. 
ix.  Circulation paths. The construction of a circulation path within perimeter landscape area is encouraged to promote non-vehicular circulation. A minimum width of ten (10) feet shall be added to the minimum width of a perimeter landscape area to accommodate the path's construction. The circulation path shall have a stabilized subsurface and shall be mulched or paved. 
3.  Access and circulation. 
a.  Planned Development Districts shall have legal access and a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of frontage along an arterial or collector. 
b.  Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow and minimize hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Merging and turning lanes and traffic medians shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy traffic flows indicate needed controls. 
c.  Minor streets within the development shall connect with minor streets in adjacent developments in such a way so as to encourage through traffic. 
d.  Corner visibility triangles shall be maintained at all intersections. 
e.  Access to the uses and circulation between buildings and other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be safe, comfortable and convenient for the users. 
f.  Streets shall not be designed or constructed as to interfere with desirable drainage in or adjacent to the development. 
g.  Arterial and collector streets whether public or private shall connect with similarly classified streets in adjacent developments. If no streets exist, the Village Engineer shall determine whether future connections are likely and desirable and shall have the authority to alter the design according to the criteria established in Art. 8. Subdivision. 
h.  Circulation systems (walking paths, bike paths or bike lanes, mass transit and vehicular access ways) shall be designed to connect and provide access between all land uses within and adjacent to planned developments. 
i.  All road rights-of-way, pavement widths, locations and designs shall encourage pedestrian circulation and shall conform to the standards of the Village, as adopted and as may be amended from time to time. 
4.  Road improvements. The Village Council may condition Planned Developments to provide certain road improvements within the road right-of-way or elsewhere within a Planned Development District in addition to the land development improvements required for the subdivision or platting of land. These conditional improvements are intended to forward certain goals of the Comprehensive Plan such as: assuring the public health, safety and welfare; facilitating non-vehicular circulation; implementing the Linked Open Space Study and other applicable Village programs; and improving the neighborhood aesthetics. (The Traditional Neighborhood Development District-TND requires the road improvements listed in this section for all TND districts.) These conditional road improvements may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Street lighting. Street lights a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be installed along all platted road rights-of-way with a platted width of thirty-two (32) feet or greater. The street lights shall be sized and spaced to provide a minimum sidewalk and pavement illumination of point four (.4) foot-candles. The light fixture shall be designed to direct light away from residences and onto the sidewalk and street and shall comply with Section 7.8 2., Outdoor lighting standards. 
b.  Median landscaping. Median landscaping shall be provided within road rights-of-way designed with medians which are part of the County's Thoroughfare Plan and other roads adjacent to or penetrating the perimeter of the Planned Development which are designed with a median. These roads shall be landscaped at a minimum, with the following: 
i.  Permit. As required by Village Council condition and as stipulated below, the petitioner shall apply for a permit to the Village Engineering and Public Works Department to landscape abutting road rights-of-way with median. When permitted by the Village Department of Engineering and Public Works, landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) fourteen (14) foot tall native tree for each thirty (30) linear feet of the adjacent median and appropriate ground cover. Trees may be planted singly or in clusters. All landscaping and maintenance shall be subject to the standards as set forth by Village Engineering and Public Works Department. All landscape material shall be classified as drought tolerant or very drought tolerant as indicated in the latest South Florida Water Management District Xeriscape Manual. 
All planting shall be done in accordance with detailed planting plans and specifications to be submitted and approved by the Village Engineer concurrent with DRC certification of a preliminary development plan or a final site plan/final subdivision plan. 
All required median landscaping, including watering, shall be the perpetual maintenance obligation of the petitioner and its successors, legal heirs or assignees, or duly established Property Owner's Association or Homeowner's Association. Median landscaping shall be installed as required by Village Council conditions and land development permits. If Village Council conditions do not state a completion date for median landscaping, the landscaping shall be completed prior to the final release of the performance bonds for the road intended for the median landscaping. Median landscaping for roads within the development or roads which must be constructed as a condition of development, shall be installed concurrent with the construction of the road in which the landscaping will be located. 
c.  Street trees. Shade trees a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height with a minimum spread of five (5) and a minimum clear trunk of five (5) feet shall be spaced an average distance of fifty (50) feet or less along both sides of the street within all platted road rights-of-way of thirty-two (32) feet in width or greater. Palm trees may be used as street trees by complying with a minimum spacing requirement of forty (40) feet. 
d.  Street bike lanes. Bike lanes may be required within the road rights-of-way which are part of the Village's or County's Thoroughfare Plan or within road rights-of-way which are adjacent to, or penetrate the perimeter of the Planned Development. The location, destination, and design specifications of street bike lanes shall be reviewed for approval by PZB and Engineering and Public Works prior to DRC certification and after approval by the Village Council. 
e.  Underground utilities. All utilities including telephone, television cable, and electrical systems shall be installed under the ground. Primary facilities providing service to the Planned Development District and high voltage wires may be exempted from this requirement by the Planning & Zoning Director. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and contained within pad mounts, enclosures, or vaults. These utilities shall be landscaped with trees and hedges to provide compatibility and screening from adjacent uses. 
Street cross sections commonly used for road construction may not provide sufficient width to accommodate these improvements. Therefore, design modifications to these road section widths shall be made as required and approved by the Engineering Department. 
5.  Parking and loading. Parking shall comply with Section 7.2, (Off-street parking regulations) and the parking and loading requirements of the applicable Planned Development District. If conflicts exist between the parking and loading regulations of each District and the regulations found elsewhere in the LDR, the parking regulations of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. Parking areas shall be designed to accommodate pedestrian access points on the site and encourage the use of pedestrian circulation and a sharing of parking spaces. 
6.  Garbage and refuse collection. 
a.  Dumpsters. Outdoor collection dumpsters shall be provided for garbage and trash removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage is not provided. 
b.  Enclosure. Outdoor collection dumpsters shall not be offensive and shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least as high as the containers and in no case less than five (5) feet high on at least three (3) sides. A minimum two (2) high hedge, planted a minimum two (2) feet on center shall be planted along the fence or wall. The side of the station not fenced or walled shall be screened with a minimum five (5) feet high gate. Dry storage compactors or similar receptacles located beside loading areas shall be screened from adjacent road rights-of-way and residential land uses but are not required to install a hedge around the screening. 
c.  Access. Access to indoor or outdoor collection dumpsters shall be designed to allow the removal of the dumpster contents in a safe and efficient manner. 
7.  Environmentally sensitive lands and preserve areas. Planned developments shall be designed to mitigate the negative impacts of development intensity and density away from sites designated "A" or "B" on the Inventory of Native Ecosystems map, as amended, Section 7.4, and sites designated as preserve areas according to the Natural Resource Protection Regulations. Proposed development shall not negatively impact the native ecosystem of these adjacent environmentally sensitive sites and shall comply with the criteria established in Art. 9 for Environmental Sensitive Lands and other applicable environmental ordinances. The applicant shall work in cooperation with the PZB and ERM to establish mutually acceptable alternatives to protect the environmentally sensitive lands, including but not limited to: 
a.  Prohibition. The prohibition of certain land uses; 
b.  Buffer. A reduction in the building intensity near environmentally sensitive land and preserve areas by the creation of a minimum fifty (50) feet buffer zone; or, 
c.  Clustering. The clustering of development away from the environmentally sensitive lands or preserve areas; or, 
d.  Combination. A combination of these alternatives. Additionally, all efforts shall be made to minimize site alterations near environmentally sensitive lands and preserve areas. 
8.  Landscaping. Planned developments shall be landscaped and irrigated in accordance with Section 7.3, (Landscaping and buffering), the requirements of each District and the requirements listed below. The landscaping within a planned development shall be subject to extraordinary standards including: 
a.  Irrigation quality water. The incorporation of irrigation quality water from wastewater treatment facilities, if available from the applicable Water Control District, for irrigation purposes. When this irrigation quality water is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of a Planned Development District, any existing, developing or future land uses shall connect to the system, when approved by the applicable Water Control District; 
b.  Landscape standards. Special use areas within a Planned Development District shall comply with the requirements of this section. Special use areas shall include street corridors (if required by a development order condition), pedestrian and bicycle pathways (located outside of road rights-of-way) and non-residential pods including, but not limited to, commercial, civic, industrial and recreation areas. The landscaping for special use areas shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Drought tolerance. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the required landscape plantings of trees, shrubs and groundcovers shall be listed as drought tolerant or very drought tolerant in the South Florida Water Management District's latest approved Xeriscape Plant Guide. 
ii.  Criteria. Trees shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Exceed minimum landscape requirements. Exceed minimum landscape requirements of standard Zoning Districts for size, height and canopy spread by twenty (20) percent (perimeter landscape area spacing requirements are found in Table 6.8-3); and 
(b)  Native species. Be seventy-five (75) percent native species, drought tolerant species or very drought tolerant species as listed in the latest South Florida Water Management District Xeriscape Manual; 
(c)  Minimum trunk diameter. Provide a minimum trunk diameter of three (3.0) inches measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade. 
9.  Signage. All signage within Planned Developments shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.14, Signage. 
10.  Environmental preservation. All Planned Developments shall comply with the requirements of the Natural Resource Protection Regulations and other applicable Village, County, State and Federal environmental regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-13, § 2, 8-11-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 2, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 2, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2010-21, § 2, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2010-22, § 1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 3, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 2013-03, §§ 5(Att. D), 6(Att. E), 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 6.8.2. - PUD, Residential Planned Unit Development District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the PUD district is to offer a residential development alternative which provides a complete living environment consisting of a range of living opportunities, recreation and civic uses and a limited amount of commercial uses. Residential PUDs shall correspond to a range of land uses in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    The intent of the PUD is to promote the design of largely residential living environments which provide enlightened and imaginative approaches to community planning and shelter design. These approaches include but are not limited to: 
1.  The preservation of natural features and scenic areas; 
2.  The integration and connection of land uses with perimeter landscape areas which provide vegetation preservation, buffering, and circulation areas; 
3.  The creation of a continuous non-vehicular circulation system; 
4.  The establishment of private civic and or public civic and recreation uses to serve the PUD. 
5.  Provide for a limited amount of commercial uses to serve the residents of the PUD. 
6.  Provide for efficient use of land and public resources by co-locating harmonious uses to share civic uses and public facilities and services for the residents of The Village. 
7.  The reduction of land consumption by roads and other impervious surface areas; and, 
8.  The provision for flexible property development regulations to promote innovative and quality site design. 
B.  Applicability. The requirements of this section, Section 6.8.1.B, Applicability and Section 1.5, Exemptions: Effect of code on previously approved development orders, shall apply to all PUD districts and PUD special exceptions, whether new or amended, within The Village. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the LDR, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
C.  Previous approvals. Modifications to previously approved PUD special exceptions shall be consistent with the character of the land uses approved for the area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Modification of PUD special exceptions. Requests for modifications to PUD special exceptions shall comply with Section 1.5, Exemptions and Effect of Code and Amendments on Previously Approved Development Orders; and, 
2.  Modification of planned development zoning conditions. Requests for modifications of planned development zoning conditions shall comply with the application and procedural requirements of Section 6.8.1., Planned Development District Regulations. 
D.  Application. The applicant shall provide a Preliminary Development Plan, a Regulating Plan, a Justification Report, and other information as required by PZB for processing a rezoning, rezoning amendment or Village Council modification to an existing PUD special exception. These documents shall demonstrate compliance with Section 6.8, Planned Development District Regulations, and this section. 
1.  Preliminary Development Plan. A PUD shall be governed by a Preliminary Development Plan approved by the Village Council which illustrates, in a graphic, written and tabular form, the density, intensity and conceptual design of the PUD. The requirements of a Preliminary Development Plan are found below, in Section 6.8.1., and the rezoning application form. 
a.  Minimum thresholds. A PUD shall meet the following minimum acreage or number of dwelling units threshold as indicated in Table 6.8-4, below. The minimum thresholds for a PUD may vary according to a particular site's designation on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Atlas. 
TABLE 6.8-4 
PUD MINIMUM THRESHOLDS 
Land Use 
Category Minimum 
Acreage Minimum Number 
Of Dwelling Units AGR 40 Not Applicable RR 10 40 Not Applicable LR 1 30 30 LR 2 30 60 LR 3 30 90 MR 5 20 100 HR 8 10 80 HR 12 10 120 HR 18 10 180  
Legend: 
Comprehensive Plan Land Use Categories 
AGR Agricultural Reserve MR5 Medium Residential 5 RR 10 Rural Residential 10 HR8 High Residential 8 LR 1 Low Residential I HR12 High Residential 12 LR 2 Low Residential 2 HR18 High Residential 18 LR 3 Low Residential 3  
Notes for Table 6.84: 
All PUDs shall comply with either the minimum acreage threshold or the minimum number of dwelling units threshold listed above for the applicable Comprehensive Plan Land Use Category. PUDs within the AGR or the RR 10 Land Use Category shall comply with the minimum acreage requirement in Table 6.8-4, above. PUDs within the AGR Land Use Category shall comply with the special development criteria as set forth in this section and in the Comprehensive Plan. 
PUDs may have a gross area less than the minimum acreage threshold listed above by receiving bonus density through a Comprehensive Plan density program. 
i.  Agricultural Reserve (AGR) land use category. The minimum threshold of a PUD located in the AGR land use category shall be forty (40) acres pending the results of a study of the long-term viability of agriculture within this area. The results of this study may require the revision of policies and regulations in the LDR. Until such time as the study is complete, PUDs shall not be developed within this land use category. 
ii.  Design requirements for PUDs within the AGR land use category. The net buildable area, excluding streets, of a PUD within the AGR land use category shall be grouped in one (1) contiguous parcel and shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the gross acreage of the PUD. The remaining area of the PUD shall be maintained in agricultural uses or recreational, preservation, or other types of open space uses. 
(a)  Cluster requirements in AR designation. In the Agricultural Reserve (AR) land use designation, a PUD's net buildable area, excluding streets, shall be clustered in one contiguous part of the parcel and shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the gross acreage of the PUD. The remaining area of the PUD shall be maintained in bona fide agricultural uses or recreational, preservation or other types of open space uses. 
b.  Contiguous land. Land may be added to a PUD provided the land is contiguous and the resulting PUD meets the intent of Section 6.8, Planned Development District Regulations, and this section. 
c.  Density. Table 6.8-1, Planned Development District Densities and Corresponding Land Use Categories, indicates the minimum density, standard density, the planned development density, and the land use categories which correspond to a PUD. Additional density requirements are listed in Section 6.8.1.C, Residential density and land use categories. 
d.  Pods. A PUD allows a limited amount of flexibility in establishing the proper amounts of pods. The land area of pods may vary for each PUD depending upon the findings of Section 6.8.2.D.3, Land use justification report, the amount of Village Council approved dwelling units, the land use requirements provided in Table 6.8-4, PUD Mix of Land Uses, and the requirements listed below: 
i.  Design intent. PUDs shall be designed to: 
(a)  Be a predominantly residential district; 
(b)  Provide a continuous non-vehicular circulation system for pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles; 
(c)  Provide perimeter landscape areas to connect or buffer land uses within and outside the perimeter of the PUD; 
(d)  May offer limited commercial uses for the population of the PUD; 
(e)  Establish neighborhood character and identity; and, 
(f)  Preserve the natural environment. 
(g)  Provide incentives for public civic uses to reduce public capital improvements and expenditures by encouraging joint acquisition, development and operation of publicly owned and operated facilities to serve residents of the PUD and The Village. 
(h)  Provide incentives for private civic uses offering services typically provided by the public to reduce public capital improvements and expenditures by allowing joint acquisition, development and operation of facilities to serve residents of the PUD and The Village. 
ii.  Land use mix percentages. The applicant shall provide a mix of land uses by designating pods of a PUD as residential, commercial, civic (private), civic (public), or recreation pod, on the Preliminary Development Plan. The percentages in Figure 6.8-4 indicate the ranges of each pod allowed within a PUD. 
iii.  Other land use designations. The acreage for open space tracts, water management tracts, rights-of-way and perimeter landscape areas shall be provided on the preliminary development plan. 
iv.  Land use percentage calculations. General land use percentages (Residential, Civic, Commercial and Recreation) shall be calculated based on the gross area of the PUD, except as provided in Section 6.8.2.D.1 below. Recreation uses, lakes and local roads which are internal to a residential pod rather than a separate pod or tract may be credited toward the minimum sixty (60) percent residential land area requirement as identified in Figure 6.8-4. 
Figure 6.8-4 
PUD MIX OF LAND USES 
General Pods Minimum Maximum 1. Residential 60% - 2. Civic 2% - 3. Commercial 0 Per capita based on population 4. Recreation 
(see Section 6.8.2.6.1.1) 110 s.f. area/person  
e.  Special Provisions for the designation of Civic Pods which uses benefit the public. The Village Council may permit the land area allocated to public civic uses or private civic uses to be deleted from the gross acreage of the PUD when determining the residential land use percentage. Such reduction may occur if an explicit public benefit is demonstrated meeting the criteria in this subsection. 
The applicant may include with a submittal of a rezoning application a request to exclude the public civic or private civic acreage from the gross acreage of the PUD. The justification statement, required in accordance with Section 6.8.2.D.3 shall clearly demonstrate an explicit public benefit and meet the criteria herein. 
Prior to certification of an application, the Planning & Zoning Director may obtain confirmation from the Village Council that the justification and proposed mix of land uses meets the applicable criteria. The Village Council shall make a finding of fact supported by substantial competent evidence that the criteria has been satisfied. 
i.  Evaluation Criteria. Public civic sites shall meet criteria a-f below. Private civic sites shall meet criteria b-g below. 
(a)  There is a reduced cost to the public for site acquisition, development or operation of civic uses; 
(b)  Public civic or private civic uses required to provide services to meet recreational, fire rescue or mass transit concurrency requirements in accordance with Chapter 163, Florida Statutes or accommodate impacts of development on educational facilities such as schools, or regional libraries; 
(c)  The proposed civic use shall fulfill a direct service and immediate need, as projected in the Village's capital improvement element or, if applicable, further the Village's goal to provide adequate primary and secondary education facilities. 
(d)  Land uses within the PUD shall be located and designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses both internal and external to the PUD. 
(e)  The resulting mix of land uses further the goals to integrate and share facilities, thereby encouraging efficient use of land and reduction in use of public funding sources; 
(f)  The residents of the PUD can directly benefit from the location and layout of the civic use and the civic use satisfies the design criteria in Section 6.8.1. and 6.8.2. 
(g)  Private civic uses which provide education in accordance with Chapter 623, Florida Statutes. 
ii.  Maximum Civic Land Area Percentage. The maximum percentage of civic pods to gross area of the PUD shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent. 
iii.  Density calculations. Density for the PUD may be calculated on the gross acreage of the PUD in accordance with 6.8.1.C.2.a. of this Code. 
iv.  Commercial pod. PUDs have the option of providing limited commercial service, retail and professional office uses for the PUD's population, if these uses are supported in Land use justification report as provided in Section 6.8.2.D.3. 
f.  Perimeter landscape areas. Perimeter landscape areas shall be part of a network of connecting open space corridors. 
i.  Required locations. A perimeter landscape area shall be provided around the entire perimeter of a PUD. A perimeter landscape area shall also be located between incompatible land uses and pods within the PUD. 
g.  Design criteria. PUDs shall comply with the following objectives and requirements, in addition to those specified in Section 6.8.1.E (Design Objectives). 
i.  Commercial pod. A commercial pod shall be designed for the convenience and service of the PUD's residents. The architectural design criteria of Section 6.6.3 (Architectural Compatibility Standards) and the locational criteria of Section 6.8.2 shall apply to all non-residential development within a commercial pod. 
ii.  Pedestrian orientation and scale. PUDs shall be pedestrian oriented and developed at a human scale: 
(a)  Size and shape. PUD residential pods with a designation of medium density or high density shall be limited in size and shape to allow residents to walk along a continuous non-vehicular circulation system to one (1) or more of the following land uses in one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet or less: recreational, civic (public or private) or commercial uses. This requirement shall be met by ninety-five (95) percent of the housing units within the PUD. 
(b)  Connections. A PUD's residences, shopping, civic and recreational uses shall be connected by a continuous circulation system. Each residential unit and non-residential land use shall have access to this continuous non-vehicular circulation system. 
iii.  Range of housing. PUDs in excess of seventy-five (75) acres and three hundred (300) dwelling units shall provide a minimum of two (2) housing types to offer a range of housing opportunities within the development to people of different social and economic backgrounds. The housing types shall include but not be limited to: single family; zero lot line; townhouse; multiple family; or congregate living facility. 
iv.  Circulation system. PUDs shall be designed with a circulation system based upon a hierarchy of transportation methods, including but not limited to, pedestrian, cyclist, mass transit and automobile. At points of intersection between these circulation systems, the hierarchy shall consider pedestrians as the most important, followed by cyclists, mass transit and automobiles. This system shall be designed to connect and provide access between land uses within the PUD and to link with systems in the surrounding communities by providing: 
(a)  Pedestrian and bicycle pathway systems, including but not limited to, sidewalks or pedestrian paths, or bicycle lanes or bicycle paths and driveways; and, 
(b)  Parking areas for multiple commercial or civic uses (two or more uses) shall be designed to encourage the pedestrian nature of the community by facilitating a reduction in parking through a sharing of spaces. 
2.  Regulating plan. All initial Planned Development District rezoning and certain amendments to PUD Districts shall provide a Regulating plan in accordance with Section 6.8.1., including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Land use mix. Calculations of the land use mix in accordance with Section 6.8.2.D of this Code. 
b.  Flexible regulations. The applicant may request to deviate from certain property development regulations (specifically indicated as flexible regulations) within Table 6.8-6, Property Development Regulations. 
c.  Transportation. Transportation program; 
d.  Street and pathway. Street and pathway cross-sections and, 
See Section 6.8.1., for the specific requirements for flexible regulations, transportation programs and street and pathway cross-sections. 
3.  Land use justification report. A land use justification report shall be provided to justify and explain the mix of commercial, recreational, public and private civic land uses proposed and describe the methods used to calculate this percentage, including the raw data used (the assumptions made for proposed population counts), the analysis procedures and the resulting land acreage and building square footages. The justification report shall also address the amount, if any, of affordable housing proposed and the following: 
a.  Land use in relationship to population. The maximum amount of commercial square footage and land area and the minimum amount of recreational land area or site improvements, shall be calculated based on the projected population of the PUD. See Section 6.8.2, below; and, 
b.  Recreation areas. PUDs shall designate areas on the Preliminary Development Plan for recreation by providing parks or recreation areas; 
i.  Recreation report. A report shall detail the passive and active recreation provided for the population of the PUD and shall be submitted as part of the justification report. This report shall include, but is not limited to: 
(a)  The types of passive recreation proposed and a total acreage amount; 
(b)  The types of active recreation proposed including a list and cost estimation of site improvements and a total acreage amount; 
(c)  The methodology used to calculate the minimum amount of recreation required based on population and the following: 
(i.)  The requirements of this section. In cases of conflict between the recreation requirements of the sections listed above, the stricter regulation shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
(d)  The proposed connections (bike lanes, pedestrian paths, etc.) used to connect land uses and pods. 
E.  Administration. 
1.  Conditions of approval. The Village Council may impose conditions of approval upon the development order to assure the intent of this section is satisfied and that the public health, safety and welfare are provided, see Section 6.8.1. 
2.  Development Review Committee (DRC) approval. Prior to Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Boards and following approval by the Village Council, the Preliminary Development Plan, regulating plan, and justification report shall be submitted for review and certification by the DRC according to Art. 5, Development Review Procedures and Section 6.8.1. 
3.  Phasing controls and platting. Each PUD shall be subject to the time limitation and review requirements of Section 5.8 (Compliance with time limitations) and Section 6.8.1. and shall proceed in a reasonably continuous and timely manner complying with these phasing requirements and the requirements listed below: 
a.  Commercial uses. No building permit for commercial uses shall be submitted until building permit approval of at least twenty (20) percent or more of the total approved dwelling units for the PUD has been issued unless allowed by development order condition. 
4.  Property owners association. Concurrent with the first recorded plat a property owners association shall be formed to manage the common areas and guide the growth of a PUD. 
F.  Land Uses. Land uses are allowed in accordance with Table 6.8-2 (Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule). This table indicates the general pods and the corresponding land uses, unless otherwise restricted by conditions included in the development order. The proposed land uses and pods shall be subject to the following provisions. 
1.  Pods. A PUD shall be divided into one (1) of the following pods to indicate the land uses proposed within the district. 
a.  Recreation. Recreation land uses shall include parks and recreation areas. The size, location and site improvements for recreation areas shall be graphically designated on all PUD Preliminary Development Plans. The minimum amount of recreation area provided within a PUD (a minimum of one hundred and ten (110) gross square feet of lot area per person) shall be based on the total population of the Village Council approved Preliminary Development Plan. Recreation areas for previously approved planned developments shall be provided at one hundred and ten (110) gross square feet or lot area per person for the total population of any areas being site planned, except for previously platted pods which have met the recreation requirements of the previous subdivision code. Also, a continuous non-vehicular internal circulation system shall connect land uses and pods within the PUD and shall connect with land uses in the surrounding communities. This circulation system shall include, but not be limited to pedestrian paths or sidewalks, bicycle paths or bicycle lanes and driveways to encourage pedestrian access and non-vehicular circulation. 
i.  Parking. Parking is not required for recreation areas which meet the definition of recreation facility in Section 3.2, Definitions, and are less than two (2) acres in size. Other recreation facilities shall provide parking in accordance with Section 7.2, Off-street parking and loading. 
ii.  Pedestrian circulation. All recreation areas and neighborhood parks shall provide a continuous sidewalk or other pedestrian path approved by PZB which connects site improvements (pool, hard surface courts, benches, etc.) to the surrounding PUD's continuous non-vehicular circulation system; 
b.  Land Dedication for Civic/Recreational Facilities. 
i.  Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure the provisions of parks, recreation areas and other community facilities in proportion to the demand created by development. By requiring such facilities, it is the intent of this section to ensure the provision of functionally adequate, aesthetically pleasing and safe parks and recreation areas and to promote a coordinated land planning approach for providing and encouraging publicly and privately owned land uses to serve the community. It should be understood that the civic/recreational land use requirements contained herein, shall in no way alter, diminish, or increase those obligatory conditions which were made prior to the adoption of this Code. 
ii.  Dedication required. As a condition of development, the developer shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the Village, for civic/recreational facilities as provided herein. Civic facilities include but are not limited to fire stations, police stations, libraries, community centers, government offices or public utilities. Dedicated land shall be conveyed in a form approved by the Village Attorney. Land conveyed for civic/recreational sites shall not include land utilized for dry or wet retention for land uses located outside of the civic/recreational site, nor shall the land conveyed include areas required to meet minimum landscape buffer areas or minimum parking requirements. Land dedication pursuant to this section shall be included in the calculation of gross area for purposes of maximum density. 
iii.  General Standard; Formula. 
(a)  The developer shall be required to provide five (5) acres of property for each one thousand (1,000) of the population for park and recreational facilities and one (1) acre of property for each one thousand (1,000) population for other civic facilities. 
(b)  To determine the land to be dedicated, the population shall be calculated based on 2.4 people per approved dwelling unit. 
iv.  Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication. If it is determined that no civic/recreational facility is to be located in whole or part within the proposed development to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, the developer may, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to either fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per acre or the fair market value per acre, whichever is greater, for such required civic/recreational land. Such fee shall be used by the Village as set forth herein. 
v.  Use of Money Received. The money collected under this division shall be paid to the Village. The money shall be placed in a reserve account within the general fund which shall be known as the reserve for civic/recreational facilities. Moneys within the reserve account shall be used and expended solely for the acquisition, improvement, expansion or implementation of civic/recreational facilities of the Village. 
vi.  Requirement of Both Dedication and Fee. A developer shall both dedicate land and pay a fee whenever only a portion of the land calculated by the formula for civic/recreational uses is to be dedicated, in which case that portion shall be dedicated for civic/recreational purposes and a fee shall be paid in lieu of dedicating the remainder of the land that would otherwise have been required to be dedicated. 
vii.  Credit for Private Recreational Space and Facilities. 
(a)  Where private recreational space and facilities are provided in a proposed development and are to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the development, credit may be given for property utilized for such facilities against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof, if the Village Council finds it is in the public interest to do so and if all the following standards are met: 
(i.)  The privately owned facilities are open to the public, under the same terms and conditions as they are available to residents of the development; 
(ii.)  The private ownership and maintenance is adequately provided for by recorded agreement, conveyance or restrictions; 
(iii.)  The use of the private recreational space and facilities is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the Village; 
(iv.)  The proposed private recreational space and facilities are reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, vegetation, hydrology, access and location. 
(b)  The credit available for the acreage devoted to such private recreational space and facilities shall be according to the following schedule: 
Type of Facility Percentage of 
Land Area Credit Court Play (i.e., tennis, basketball, racquetball, shuffleboard, volleyball and bocce 60% Swimming Pools 50% Play Area 25% Golf Courses, Field Sports and Passive Recreational Areas 10%  
(c)  Residential Pod. The residential pod is intended to provide dwelling units for residential occupancy. The gross density (of the pod), number of dwelling units, housing type and housing classification shall be indicated for each pod on the Preliminary Development Plan or Master Plan. Pods may contain different housing types and housing classifications, however specific tabular information concerning each housing type and each housing classification (number of dwelling units of each type or classification) shall be indicated on the Preliminary Development Plan or Master Plan for each pod. 
(d)  Optional Residential (OR) pod. An Optional Residential pods is intended to encourage innovative residential development techniques while providing adequate yards (open space around dwelling units), recreation, privacy, property maintenance, parking, and access to housing. An applicant may request the Village Council to add an overlay designation of Optional Residential to any residential area on the Preliminary Development Plan. The permitted density within an (OR) pod shall be in accordance with the density of the underlying residential pod indicated on the Preliminary Development Plan. A Final Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan of the pod requested for an (OR) land use designation shall be submitted concurrent with the request to designate an (OR) on the Preliminary Development Plan (OR) pods shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i.)  (OR) pods. (OR) pods shall comply with the minimum design specifications indicated in Table 6.8-6, PUD Property Development Regulations; 
(ii.)  Justification report. Village Council applications for Optional Residential pods include submittal of a justification report which explains how the project will function and shall justify how the living environment resulting from the proposed site design complies with the intent of the Optional Residential pod. Justification reports shall include the following: 
•  A written report which details how the proposed site design complies with the intent of the Optional Residential pod; and, 
•  Conceptual graphics (site plans, sections, elevations, perspectives, etc.) indicating how the site design functions with regard to: yards (open space around dwelling units), outside living areas, privacy between dwelling units, property maintenance, parking, access to housing, recreation and public health, safety and welfare. 
(iii.)  Review. The Village Council may approve, approve with site design amendments, or deny the optional residential designation based on compliance with. Table 6.8-6, (PUD Property Development Regulations) and the justification report. 
(iv.)  Intent towards Section 5.8, Variances. The Optional Residential pod designation is not intended to take the place of a variance. Optional Residential pods shall only be granted for an entire, largely undeveloped, residential pod and shall not be granted on a lot by lot basis. 
(e)  Commercial pod. The commercial pod is intended to provide land uses, including but not limited to, commercial service, retail, and professional office uses of a community nature to serve the population of the PUD. 
(i.)  Location. Commercial areas shall be located and designed for the convenience of the PUD's residents. A continuous non-vehicular circulation system shall provide convenient access from the residential housing to the land uses within a commercial pod. Vehicular access to commercial facilities shall not be permitted from an arterial or collector that is not part of the interior circulation system of the PUD. No commercial facility shall maintain frontage, visibility or direct physical access to any arterial or collector bordering or traversing the PUD. 
(f)  Architectural design. The architectural design criteria of Section 6.6.3 (Architectural Compatibility Standards) shall apply to all non-residential development within commercially designated areas. 
(i.)  Area calculation. The maximum area and square footage of the commercial pod shall be based on the following: 
•  Land area. The maximum commercial land area for a PUD is calculated based on the population of the dwelling units approved on the Preliminary Development Plan by the Village Council in relation to the chart below; and, 
Table 6.8-5
PUD Commercial AcreagePopulation Maximum 
Commercial 
Acreage Gross 
Floor 
Area* Less than 1,000 None None 1,001 to 1,740 One (1) acre 8.759 to 15,225 1,741 to 2,990 Two (2) acres 15,234 to 26,163 2,991 to 4,970 Three (3) acres 26,171 to 43,488 4,971 to 6,970 Five (5) acres 43,496 to 60,988 6,971 to 9,950 Seven (7) acres 60,996 to 87,063 9,951 to 15,000 Ten (10) acres 87,071 to 131,250 15,001 to 26,000 Fifteen (15) acres 131,259 to 228,690  
Notes to Table 6.8-5: 
* Buildable commercial gross floor area may vary depending upon lot configuration, site design, and compliance with other property development regulations, including but not limited to, vegetation preservation, building setbacks, landscaping and parking. 
- The calculation of the maximum commercial lot area and gross commercial floor area for PUDs with a residential population exceeding twenty six thousand (26,000) people shall be determined by PZB on a case by case basis. 
- Existing PUD special exception which show an amount of commercial acreage on a previously approved master or site plan, as provided in Section 1.5 of this Code, may develop the commercial acreage in compliance with Table 6.8-6, PUD Property Development Regulations. 
•  Building area. The maximum commercial building area is calculated by multiplying the projected population of the PUD, (dwelling units × 2.4), by the constant (8.75) which equals the total amount of commercial gross square footage permitted for the PUD. 
(ii.)  Hours of operation. Unless authorized by an extended hours of operation permit or by a development order approved by Council, commercial uses within three hundred (300) feet of residential housing shall not: (1) commence indoor business activities prior to 5:00 a.m. or outdoor business activities prior to 6:00 a.m. and (2) commence indoor business activities later than 12:00 a.m. or outdoor business activities later than 11:00 p.m. After July 15, 2013, an extended hours of operation permit for business activities later than 2:00 a.m. shall require Council approval. 
As defined in Article 5, Chapter 12, for the purposes of this section, business activities shall consist of any and all activities which involve patrons of the business (either public or private activity) and do not include activities such as setup/prep, stocking or clean up provided those activities comply with all other Wellington regulations. Commercial uses greater than three hundred (300) feet from residential housing shall be exempt from the hours of operation requirement unless required by a development order condition. 
(g)  Mixed-use pod. PUDs with a Village Council approved contiguous commercial area of five (5) acres or larger may apply to the Development Review Committee to establish a mixed-use pod. The designation of a mixed-use pod in a PUD without the minimum commercial acreage stated above, shall require approval by the Village Council. The land uses allowed within the mixed-use pod shall comply with Table 6.8-2, Planned Development Use Regulations Schedule for a MXPD with a Commercial Low land use designation. 
2.  Supplementary use standards. The standards of Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary Use Regulations) and the standards listed below shall apply within the PUD, unless specifically waived or modified by the terms of the development order for the PUD. 
a.  Commercial pod. Land uses within a commercial pod shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Enclosed uses. All uses, other than incidental storage of merchandise, shall be operated entirely within enclosed buildings, with the exceptions listed in Section 6.5.10. (District Specific Regulations) for the CN, CLO and CC districts and a convenience store with gas sales. 
ii.  Open storage. No outdoor storage or placement of any material, refuse equipment or debris shall be permitted unless in an area designated on a Final Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan which has been approved by PZB. Outdoor storage of merchandise shall be permitted only when incidental to the commercial use located on the premises, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The storage area shall not be located in any of the required building setbacks; 
(b)  The storage area shall be completely screened from view of adjacent road rights-of-way and property lines; and, 
(c)  The stored merchandise shall not protrude above the height of the screening walls, fences or buildings. 
iii.  Outdoor speakers. No outdoor loudspeaker systems shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of residential housing. 
iv.  Rooftop screening. All roof-top mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened so as not to be visible from adjacent land uses of an equal or lesser height. The screen shall be opaque and extend from the roof of the building to a minimum of six (6) inches above the height of the object intended for screening. 
b.  Residential pods. Land uses within a residential pod shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Accessory uses and structures. Residential or commercial construction permits shall not be issued for a project until a Preliminary Development Plan or master plan has been approved by the Development Review Committee and a final plat for the entire development or phase of development has been recorded as a plat of record. 
However, permits for real estate sales offices and sales models may be issued prior to recording a final plat but not before a final site plan/final subdivision plan is approved by the Development Review Committee. 
The following accessory uses in permanent or temporary structures shall be permitted in a PUD according to the following standards. 
(a)  Permanent structures. 
(i.)  Real estate sales office. A real estate sales office shall be permitted in the commercial pod indicated on the Preliminary Development Plan and subject to the property development regulations for commercial uses pursuant to Table 6.8-6, PUD Property Development Regulations. A temporary real estate sales and management office within a mobile home outside of a commercial pod shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.6.2, (Temporary structures). 
(ii.)  Sales Models. Sales models shall be permitted if erected on the site pursuant to all applicable codes and ordinances. However, the executive director or director of PZ&B may temporarily waive a property development regulation to facilitate the use of the building as a sales model. Prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, the sales model shall comply with all applicable property development regulations. The number of sales models shall not exceed eight (8) in number, per pod. One of the sales models may be used for a temporary real estate office if sanitary facilities are approved by the appropriate government agencies. A minimum of eight (8) parking spaces shall be provided. The parking area shall be designed in accordance with Section 7.2, Off-street parking regulations, however, pavement, shellrock, or mulch may be utilized in the parking area with a stabilized subgrade. Sales models, including dry models, may be constructed prior to platting. 
(iii.)  Gatehouses. Gatehouses for internal project security shall be permitted if not in conflict with right-of-way and setback requirements of this Code and the Village Thoroughfare Plan. 
(iv.)  Utilities. Public or private utilities and accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted, subject to compliance with all applicable rules and regulations governing such facilities. 
(b)  Temporary structures. Temporary structures shall be permitted in accordance with Section 6.6.2, Temporary structures. 
G.  Property development regulations. The property development regulations within a PUD shall be as indicated in Table 6.8-6, Property Development Regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided on the approved Preliminary Development Plan, in the development order or as listed below. Any of the pods or housing types listed below may apply to use flexible property development regulations for minimum lot dimensions, and side and rear setbacks based on compliance with Section 6.8 - A.8.f, Regulating plan. 
1.  Residential pods. Residential pods shall follow the property development regulations as indicated by housing type below: 
a.  Single family. Single family development shall be subject to the property development regulations specified in Section 6.5 (Property Development Regulations) for the Residential Single Family (RS) Zoning District. 
b.  Multiple family. Multiple family development shall be subject to the property development regulations specified in Section 6.5 (Property Development Regulations) for the (RH) Multiple Family Residential District (high density) Zoning District. 
c.  Zero lot line. Zero lot line developments shall be subject to the property development regulations specified in Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary Use Regulations-Zero lot line); and, 
d.  Townhouse. Townhouse developments shall be subject to the property development regulations specified in Section 6.4.4 (Supplementary Use Regulations-Townhouse). 
2.  Civic (Public and private). Development within this pod shall be subject to the requirements of Table 6.8-6, PUD Property Development Regulations. 
3.  Commercial. Development within this pod shall be subject to the requirements of Table 6.8-6, PUD Property Development Regulations. 
4.  Mixed-use pod. Development within this pod shall be subject to the following requirements of Section 6.8.4, MXPD: 
a.  Section 6.8.4.A, concerning purpose and intent. The site design and land uses of a Mixed-use pod shall comply with the purpose and intent of the MXPD district; 
b.  Section 6.8.4.C.1.d-f, for pods, perimeter landscape areas, and design criteria; 
c.  Section 6.8.4.E, (entire section), for land uses; and, 
d.  Section 6.8.4.F (entire section), for property development regulations. 
Table 6.8-6 
PUD Property Development Regulations 
Housing Type 
or Pod Minimum Lot 
Dimensions* Max. 
FAR Max. 
Building 
Coverage Minimum Building* 
Setbacks or Separations Size Width 
and 
frontage Depth Front Side* Street Rear* Optional 
Residential - - - - - 25' 10' 1 15' 20' 20' Civic 
(Public or Private) 1.ac.- Pb. 
21,500 sf - 
Pv. 100' 200' .35 .30 25' C - 20' 
R - 40' 25' C - 20' 
R - 40' Commercial 1 ac. 100' 200' .25 .20 25' C - 20' 
R - 40' 25' C - 20' 
R - 40' Recreation 
(Section 7.12) and 
Neighborhood 
Parks 4,300 sf 65' 60' .25 .25 25' 15' 25' 15'  
Notes to Table 6.8-6: 
C = Indicates the building setback if the lot abuts a non-residentially zoned or designated lot. 
R = Indicates the building setback if the lot abuts a residentially zoned or designated lot. 
* = Indicates that the property development regulation is flexible and may be modified by complying with Sec 6.8.1. Single family, multiple family, townhouse and zero lot line housing may request flexible regulation for minimum lot dimensions and side and rear building setbacks by applying to DRC as described in Section 6.8.1. 
1 = Indicates the minimum front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet, provided that the minimum front yard setback for a garage or carport with the entrance facing the front property line shall be twenty-five (25) feet. However, the minimum front yard setback for a garage or carport with the entrance facing the side property line shall be ten (10) feet. 
Pb = Indicates the minimum lot size for the Public civic pod. 
Pv = Indicates the minimum lot size for the Private civic pod. 
- Building proposed within a Mixed-use pod may use the lesser setback requirement for side interior and rear setbacks if like uses abut, (residential uses abutting residential uses, commercial uses abutting commercial uses, or recreational uses abutting recreational uses). 
- The building setbacks indicated above are based on a maximum building height of thirty-five (35) feet. All structures exceeding thirty five (35) feet in height shall provide the applicable setback stated in Table 6.8-6, and an additional setback of one (1) horizontal foot for each one (1) vertical foot of building exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
- For residential development, building setbacks shall be measured from the inside edge of perimeter landscape areas. However, rear or side setbacks may be reduced up to a maximum of twenty five (25) percent of the stated standard if the subject property line abuts a perimeter landscape area or an open space (lake, canal, golf course, preserve area, etc.) greater than or equal to one hundred (100) feet in width. For non-residential development, building setback shall be measured from the property line. 
- Minimum building setbacks for buildings with a minimum lot size required by the LDR other than Townhouses, shall be measured from the lot line. Minimum building setbacks and separations for buildings without a required minimum lot size shall be measured from perimeter property lines, perimeter landscape areas, residential access streets, the proximity of one unit to another and road and canal rights-of-way. 
- Property development regulations not indicated as flexible may be reduced by an administrative reduction of ten (10) percent of the stated standards. See Section 6.8.1. 
5.  Road improvements. The Village Council may condition a PUD to provide certain road improvements within the road right-of-way or elsewhere within the boundaries of a PUD. These improvements may be in addition to the land development improvements required for the subdivision or platting of land and are intended to forward certain goals of the Comprehensive Plan, including but not limited to: assuring the health, safety, and welfare of the public; facilitating and encouraging non-vehicular circulation, implementing the Linked Open Space, Scenic Corridor, and other applicable Village programs, and improving the aesthetics of the community. These improvements may include but are not limited to: street lights, street trees and median landscaping; bike lanes; and underground utilities (see Section 6.8.1.E.4, Right-of-way improvements). 
6.  Streets. Streets serving a residential pod shall reinforce, rather than disrupt, the social integrity of the area. A street hierarchy shall be established which separates higher volume streets, such as arterial and collectors, from local streets or driveways which are internal to and serve residential pods. 
7.  Parking requirements and access. PUDs shall comply with Section 7.2, (Off-street parking regulations) and the parking and loading requirements of this section. 
a.  Residential pod. Parking space requirements for housing within a residential or mixed-use pod shall comply with Section 7.2 (Off-street parking regulations) for the applicable housing type. 
b.  Commercial pod. Parking lot requirements for commercial pods and for commercial uses within mix-use land uses shall comply with Section 7.2 (Off-street parking regulations) and the requirements listed below: 
i.  Calculation rate. Parking spaces shall be calculated at a rate of one (1) space per two hundred (200 s.f.) square feet of gross floor area. Conditional uses shall comply with the parking requirements listed in Section 7.2 (Off-street parking regulations). The total parking calculation rate may be lowered by the use of the commercial parking reduction bonus or the shared parking option listed below. 
ii.  Adjacent lots. Parking lot design and circulation shall allow vehicular access between contiguous lots without accessing a street if sanctioned by PZB or Engineering and Public Works; 
iii.  Parking agreements. Property owners shall record cross-access and shared- parking agreements with adjacent lot owners if sanctioned by PZB; and, 
iv.  Maximum parking provided. The total number of parking spaces provided with a commercial pod shall not exceed the minimum number required to serve the development based upon this section and Section 7.2 (Off-street parking regulations). 
v.  Commercial parking reduction bonus. Commercial pods with a total non-residential gross floor area exceeding eighty thousand (80,000) square feet may reduce the parking calculation ratio rate for general and special permit uses for the amount of non-residential gross floor area above eighty thousand (80,000) square feet and equal to or less than one hundred twenty five thousand (125,000) square feet. This parking calculation rate reduction is limited to non-residential building area and shall be applied only to gross floor area. The gross floor area within the range identified above may be calculated at a reduced ratio of one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. 
vi.  Shared parking. Credit toward reducing the minimum number of required parking spaces for a commercial or mixed-use pod may be given for the submittal and approval of a shared parking study conforming to the requirements of Section 7.2.3.H (Shared Parking) 
vii.  Distance. Parking spaces shall be located within easy walking distance, four hundred (400) linear feet, of a public entrance or exit of a building. This measurement shall be taken beginning at the perimeter of a parking space and extend along a pedestrian pathway or vehicular paved drive intended for use by pedestrians for entering or existing the buildings on site from the parking area. 
viii.  Off-street parking. Twenty (20) percent or more of the parking spaces shall be located at the rear or side of buildings and all parking shall be buffered from view from adjacent streets or land uses by a perimeter landscape area. 
ix.  Landscape requirements. Unless otherwise indicated, a PUD shall be landscaped according to Section 7.3. (Landscaping and buffering) and development order conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2(Exh. B), 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 7(Att. F), 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 6.8.3. - MUPD, Multiple Use Planned Development District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the MUPD district is twofold: 1. to promote the design of unified, multiple use developments for land which has a rural residential 10, commercial, industrial, or commercial recreation designation on the Land Use Atlas, see Table 6.8-1, Planned Development District Densities and Corresponding Land Use Categories; and, 2. to provide for the efficient use of land by the integration of multiple uses within a single development. 
    The intent of the MUPD is to provide for the development of multiple nonresidential uses with enlightened and imaginative approaches to community planning, including but not limited to: 
1.  Allowing flexibility of certain property development regulations; 
2.  Applying certain property development regulations to the entire MUPD rather than individual lots, such as but not limited to: 
a.  Access; 
b.  Parking; 
c.  Lot size and dimensions; 
d.  Lot frontage; and, 
e.  Landscaping. 
3.  Designing for architectural compatibility between land uses for buildings and signage. 
B.  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all MUPDs, whether new or amended, within The Village and shall comply with See. 6.8.1.B, and in accordance with Section 1.5, In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the LDR, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
C.  Previous approvals. Modifications to previously approved Planned Neighborhood Commercial Developments, Planned General Commercial Development, Large-scale community or regional shopping centers (thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of total floor area or more), Planned Office Business Park, and Planned Industrial Park Development special exceptions shall be consistent with the character of the land uses approved for the area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Modifications of special exceptions. Applications for modifications to the special exceptions listed above shall comply with Section 1.5, Exemptions: Effect of code and amendments on previously approved development orders; and, 
2.  Modifications of Planned Developments. Applications for modification of Planned Developments shall comply with the application and procedural requirements of Section 6.8.1, Planned Development Regulations. 
D.  Application. The applicant shall provide a Preliminary Development plan and a regulating plan. These documents shall demonstrate compliance with Section 6.8.1. Planned Development District Regulations, this section, the requirements listed in the rezoning application form and other requirements, as may be required by PZB to process a rezoning or zoning amendment application. 
1.  Preliminary Development Plan. A MUPD shall be governed by a Preliminary Development Plan approved by the Village Council which illustrates, in a graphic, written and tabular form, how the MUPD is designed and phased. The requirements of a Preliminary Development Plan are found below and in the rezoning application form available from PZB. 
a.  Minimum development thresholds. The minimum development thresholds of minimum lot area and minimum building square footage for a MUPD may vary according to the MUPDs Comprehensive Plan land use category as indicated in Table 6.8-17, MUPD Minimum Development Thresholds. 
TABLE 6.8-17 
MUPD MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT THRESHOLDS 
Land Use 
Category Minimum Gross 
Floor Area Minimum 
Acreage RR 10 50,001 15.00 Commercial Low 
Office 20,001 3.01 Commercial Low 20,001 3.01 Commercial High 
Office 50,001 10.01 Commercial High 50,001 10.01 Industrial 100,001 20.01 Commercial Recreation 100,001 10.01  
b.  Contiguous land. MUPDs shall be developed on contiguous lots or tracts. 
c.  Land Use Atlas. MUPDs correspond to the land use categories indicated in Table 6.8-1, Planned Development District Densities and Corresponding Land Use Categories. 
d.  Design intent. The design of the MUPD shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.8.1.E (Planned Developments General-Design Objectives), in addition to the following design criteria: 
i.  Non-vehicular circulation system. A continuous circulation system for pedestrians and bicycles shall connect all of the land uses within a MUPD to encourage non-vehicular circulation; and, 
ii.  The number of free standing commercial buildings with vehicular circulation on four (4) sides of the building shall be limited according to the Comprehensive Plan land use category based upon the following requirements: 
(a)  Rural Residential 10 or 20 - One (1) free standing commercial building is permitted within a MUPD; 
(b)  Commercial Low Office and Commercial Low - One (1) free standing commercial building is permitted within a MUPD; 
(c)  Commercial High Office and Commercial High - Three (3) free standing commercial buildings are permitted within a MUPD; 
(d)  Industrial - Two (2) free standing commercial buildings are permitted within a MUPD; and, 
(e)  Commercial Recreation - Three (3) free standing commercial buildings are permitted within a MUPD. 
iii.  Architectural design standards. MUPD submittals for development order approvals, especially building permits, shall comply with the architectural design standards of Section 6.6.3 (Supplementary Regulations-Architectural Compatibility Standards). 
e.  Perimeter landscape areas. Perimeter landscape areas shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
i.  Required locations. A perimeter landscape area shall be provided around the entire perimeter of a MUPD. The width, planting requirements, and type of perimeter landscape areas provided around a MUPD shall be as determined in Section 7.3. 
f.  Pedestrian orientation and scale. MUPDs shall be pedestrian oriented, and developed at a human scale: 
i.  Connections. Land uses shall be connected by pedestrian paths or sidewalks, and bicycle paths or bicycle lanes; and, 
ii.  Pedestrian and bicycle accessory facilities. MUPDs shall provide facilities for seating, bicycle parking, etc. to encourage non-vehicular on-site circulation. 
g.  Circulation system. MUPDs shall be designed with a circulation system based upon a hierarchy of transportation methods. In descending order of importance, the hierarchy shall consider pedestrians as the most important, followed by cyclists, mass transit and automobiles. This system shall be designed to connect and provide access between land uses within the MUPD and directly adjacent to the MUPD. MUPDs shall comply with subsection G.2., Parking requirements and access, and the types of uses proposed and the location and design of buildings and parking area shall facilitate a reduction in parking requirements through a sharing of parking space. 
i.  Regulating plan. The regulating plan shall provide a comprehensive graphic and written description of the function and development of the MUPD, including but not limited to flexible property development regulations, a transportation program, and street and pathway cross-sections. See Section 6.8.1., for additional requirements. 
(a)  Flexible regulations. The developer may request to deviate from certain property development regulations (specifically indicated as flexible regulations) within Table 6.8-18, MUPD Property Development Regulations. 
E.  Administration. 
1.  Conditions of approval. The Development Review Committee and the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board may recommend, and the Village Council may impose conditions of approval upon the development order according to Section 6.8.1. 
2.  Development Review Committee (DRC). Following approval by the Village Council, the Preliminary Development Plan and regulating plan shall be submitted for review and certification by the DRC according to Art. 5, Development Review Procedures and Section 6.8.1. Changes to previously approved MUPDs which exceed the limits of the DRC shall comply with the modification options contained in Section 6.8.1, Planned Development District Regulations, or Section 5.7, Variances. 
3.  Phasing controls and platting. Each MUPD shall be subject to the time limitation and review requirements of Section 5.9 (Compliance with time limitations) and Section 6.8.1. and shall proceed in a reasonably continuous and timely manner. 
4.  Property owners association. A property owners association shall be formed to manage the common areas concurrent with the recording of the first plat with the Clerk of the Court. 
F.  Land Uses. Table 6.8-2 (Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule) indicates the pods and the corresponding land uses unless otherwise restricted by conditions included in the development order. 
1.  Pods. MUPDs shall provide one of the following pods depending upon the project's Comprehensive Plan land use category: 
a.  Commercial pod. A commercial pod is intended to provide service, retail and professional office uses, see Table 6.8-2, Planned Development District Use Regulation Schedule. 
b.  Industrial pod. An industrial pod is intended to provide light industrial uses, see Table 6.8-2, Planned Development District Use Regulation Schedule. 
c.  Commercial recreation pod. A commercial recreation pod is intended to provide multiple recreational uses, see Table 6.8-2. Planned Development District Use Regulation Schedule. 
d.  Commercial agricultural. A commercial agricultural pod is intended to provide multiple agricultural support uses, see Table 6.8-2, Planned Development District Use Regulation Schedule. 
2.  Supplemental use regulations. All land uses within a MUPD shall comply with the requirements listed below unless specifically allowed by condition within the development order: 
a.  Open storage. No open storage or placement of any material, refuse equipment or debris shall be permitted in the rear of any structure. 
b.  Outdoor speakers. No outdoor loudspeaker systems shall be permitted. 
c.  Rooftop screening. All roof-top mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened so as not to be visible from adjacent land uses. The screen shall be opaque and extend from the roof of the building to the full height of the objects being screened. 
G.  Property development regulations. The property development regulations within a MUPD shall be as indicated in Table 6.8-18, Property Development Regulations for the applicable pod, unless otherwise specifically provided in the approved Preliminary Development Plan or in the MUPD development order. 
Table 6.8-18 
MUPD Property Development Regulations 
Land Use Atlas 
Designation Minimum District 
Dimensions Maximum 
FAR Maximum 
Building 
Coverage Minimum Building Setbacks (ft.) Size Width Depth Front Side* Street Rear* Commercial Low 3 ac. 200' 250' .35 .25 25' C - 15' 
R - 30' 25' C - 20' 
R - 30' Commercial High 5 ac. 300' 300' .50 .30 30' C - 15' 
R - 30' 30' C - 20' 
R - 30' Commercial Low Office 3 ac. 200' 250' .35 .25 25' C - 15' 
R - 30' 25' C - 20' 
R - 30' Commercial High Office 5 ac. 300' 300' .50 .30 30' C - 15' 
R - 30' 30' C - 20' 
R - 30' Industrial 5 ac. 300' 300' .45 .45 30' C - 15' 
R - 40' 30' C - 20' 
R - 40' Commercial Recreation 5 ac. 300' 300' .50 .30 30' C - 15' 
R - 40' 30' C - 20' 
R - 40' Rural 
Residential 
10 10 ac. 
or 
20 ac. 300' 300' .15 .10 50' C - 50' 
R - 100' 50' C - 50' 
R - 100'  
NOTES to Table 6.8-18: 
C - Indicates the building setback if the lot abuts a non-residentially zoned or designated lot. 
R - Indicates the building setback if the lot abuts a residentially zoned or designated lot. 
* Indicates that the property development regulation is flexible and may be modified by complying with Section 6.8.2.D.2. Regulating plan. 
The building setbacks indicated above are based on a maximum building height of thirty-five (35) feet. All structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height shall provide the applicable setback stated in Table 6.8-18 and an additional setback of one (1) horizontal foot for each one (1) vertical foot of building exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
Building setbacks shall be measured from the perimeter property lines. 
1.  Road improvements. The Village Council may condition a MUPD to provide certain road improvements within the road right-of-way, in addition to the land development improvements required for the subdivision or platting of land. These conditional improvements are intended to forward certain goals of the Comprehensive Plan such as: assuring the public health, safety and welfare; facilitating non-vehicular circulation; implementing the linked Open Space, Scenic Corridor and other applicable Village programs; and improving the neighborhood aesthetics. These conditional road improvements may include, but are not limited to street lighting, median landscaping, street trees, underground utilities, and bike lanes. See Section 6.8.1.E.4, Road improvements. 
2.  Parking requirements and access. MUPDs shall comply with Section 7.2, (Off-street parking regulations) and the parking and loading requirements of this section and below. 
a.  Calculation rate. Parking spaces shall be calculated at a rate of one (1) space per two hundred (200 s.f.) square feet of gross floor area for general and special permit uses. Conditional uses shall comply with the parking requirements listed in Section 7.2, (Off-street parking regulations) for specific uses. 
b.  Minimum parking provided. The total number of parking spaces provided for a MUPD shall not exceed the minimum number required to serve the development as indicated by Section 7.2 and the parking requirements of this section. 
c.  MUPD parking reduction bonus. MUPDs with a total non-residential gross floor area exceeding eighty thousand (80,000) square feet may reduce the parking calculation ratio rate for general and special permit uses for the amount of gross non-residential floor area above eighty thousand (80,000) square feet and equal to or less than one hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) square feet. This parking calculation rate reduction is limited to non-residential building area and shall be applied only to gross floor area. The gross floor area within the range identified above may be calculated at a reduced ratio of one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Shared parking. Credit toward reducing the minimum number of required parking spaces for a MUPD may be given for the submittal and approval of a shared parking study conforming to the requirements of Section 7.2.3.H (Shared Parking). 
e.  Distance. Parking spaces shall be located within easy walking distance, four hundred (400) linear feet, of a public entrance or exit of a building. This measurement shall be taken beginning at the perimeter of a parking space and extend along a pedestrian pathway or vehicular paved drive intended for use by pedestrians for entering or existing the buildings on site from the parking area. 
f.  Location. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of parking shall be located to the side or rear of a building. 
g.  Parking agreements. Property owners within a MUPD shall record cross-access and shared-parking agreements with adjacent lot owners if sanctioned by PZB; and, 
3.  Landscape requirements. A MUPD shall be landscaped according to Section 7.3, Landscaping and buffering, the requirements of this section, the conditions on the development order or final site plan/final subdivision plan, and the regulating plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8(Att. G), 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 6.8.4. - Flexible Use Zoning Employment Center (FZEC). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the FZEC is to provide a zoning designation for uses which will create local higher wage employment opportunities and offer a wide range of non-noxious uses that are compatible with one another as well as adjoining residential and commercial areas. FZEC districts can be located on a small site and present a sustainable alternative to retail for industrially designated areas while retaining office uses. 
2.  Technology and Related Uses. The FZEC should strive to contain advanced technology industries and research/development uses, but should also remain open to a variety of uses that meet the general criteria for the FZEC. 
3.  Flexibility of Property Development Regulations. The FZEC provides for flexibility of certain property development regulations placement and clustering of buildings and provisions for site design intended to promote enlightened and imaginative approaches to Village planning, including: 
a.  The encouragement of employment center expansion to the village's economic base through new investment; 
b.  The preservation of natural features, scenic areas and native vegetation; 
c.  The promotion of efficient and economical employment center land use districts; 
d.  The encouragement of employment centers within the Village; 
e.  The provision of on-site essential services for industries, employees, and clients; 
f.  The protection of adjacent properties from any adverse impacts; nearby existing and future non-employment center land uses and activities; 
g.  The arrangement of buildings and land use intensities, as they relate to surrounding land uses to minimize and mitigate negative impacts; and 
h.  The encouragement of employment center expansion to the Village's economic base through new investment. 
4.  Anticipated Benefits. Projects of this nature are of direct and indirect economic benefit to the Village in the form of tax revenues, high-wage, local employment and desirable creative designs for projects. As such, this section is intended to complement the expedited development review process without compromising the Village's thorough review standards. 
B.  Consistency with Comprehensive Plan Land Use Categories. The FZEC zoning district is consistent with the Industrial Future Land Use Map Designation of the Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  Existing Land Development Regulations. Where not specifically amended by this section, the requirements of Section 6.8.1.B regarding Planned Development Districts, and Section 1.5 regarding Non-conformities, shall apply to all new or existing FZEC zoning districts, within The Village. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the land development regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
2.  Existing Projects and Master Plans. 
a.  For the purposes of this section, existing projects are defined as the two (2) industrial projects commonly referred to as "Commerce Park" and "Commerce Park East," located on the south side of Pierson Road and west of Fairlane Farms Road. 
b.  The approved master plan for each existing project shall govern all development and redevelopment for each project. 
D.  Existing Industrial Projects. 
1.  Rezoning of Existing Projects. As part of the adoption of the FZEC zoning district category, the Village shall initiate a rezoning to the FZEC zoning district for the two (2) existing projects previously approved as either a Planned Industrial Park District (PIPD) zoning district or as an Industrial Light (IL) zoning district. 
2.  Effect of Approved Master Plans. For the two (2) existing projects proposed to be rezoned to the FZEC zoning district, the approved master plan shall govern all site development regulations for development and redevelopment for each project. Unless otherwise provided in the approved master plan, uses within these locations shall be consistent with Table 6.8-2. For the purposes of this section the approved master plan and approved site plans consistent with that master plan shall be considered to be a legal and conforming to all requirements of the FZEC zoning district. 
E.  Application for Rezoning. As part of an application for rezoning of property to the FZEC zoning district, the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with this section, Section 6.8.1. regarding planned development district regulations, and other applicable requirements as may be required by Village. Each application for a rezoning shall submit an overall master plan that is consistent with the requirements of 6.8.1. 
F.  Master Plan and Site Plan. 
1.  Conflicts. Where not specifically amended by this section, the requirements of Section 6.8.1.B regarding planned development districts, and Section 1.5 regarding nonconformities, shall apply to each FZEC zoning district, whether new or existing, within the Village. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the land development regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
2.  Master Plan Requirements. The master plan required by this section shall illustrate, in a graphic, written and tabular form, the manner in the project is designed and phased. In addition, the master plan shall provide a comprehensive graphic and written description of the function and development of the project, including but not limited to flexible property development regulations, a transportation program, and street and pathway cross-sections. 
G.  Development Review following Rezoning and Master Plan Approval. Once a proposed site has been rezoned to the FZEC zoning district, and the overall master plan has been approved by the Village Council, review of individual site plans shall be subject to review by the Development Review Committee. 
H.  Design Intent. All proposed FZEC projects shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.8.1.E, regarding design objectives for planned development districts, in addition to the standards listed below. 
1.  Non-vehicular circulation system. FZEC's shall be designed with a circulation system that provides: 
a.  A continuous circulation system for pedestrian paths/sidewalks and bicycle paths/lanes shall connect all of the buildings within an FZEC; and 
b.  Pedestrian and bicycle accessory facilities for seating, bicycle parking, etc. to encourage on-site non-vehicular circulation. 
2.  Landscaping and Open Space. 
a.  All FZEC developments shall be landscaped according to Section 7.3, regarding landscaping and buffering, the requirements of this section and the approved master plan. 
b.  Each FZEC development shall provide landscape areas and open space that includes active and passive recreation areas. A minimum open space of fifteen (15) percent shall be provided. 
c.  A perimeter landscape area shall be provided around the entire perimeter of an FZEC zoning district of not less than twenty-five (25) feet and as provided in the approved master plan. The planting requirements and type of perimeter landscape areas provided around a FZEC project shall be as determined in Section 7.3. 
d.  Use of an alternative landscape betterment plan is encouraged to provide for a maximum of screening and buffering along the perimeter of the project as a means to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
3.  Public/Open Space. Locations not governed by Section 6.5.19.4.I, the Village's "big box" standards, shall provide open space as required in Table 6.8.19. The space shall be designed as landscaped areas with places for informal gathering and seating areas. The design of open spaces shall incorporate at least three (3) of the following: 
a.  Architectural sculptures; 
b.  Fountain structures; 
c.  Tables and benches and seating areas with shade; and 
d.  Gazebos and similar structures. 
4.  Architectural Design Standards. 
a.  Projects of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more. Developments with a cumulative square footage of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or greater are subject to the requirements of the Village's "big box" Ordinance as provided in Section 6.5.19.4.I of the land development regulations. 
b.  Projects less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Developments with a cumulative square footage of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet are subject to requirements of Section 6.8.1.E of the land development regulations regarding design objectives. 
c.  Existing Projects. Existing projects shall comply with design requirements applicable as of the effective date of this section. 
5.  Flexible Regulations. The developer may request to deviate from certain property development regulations as specifically indicated as flexible regulations within Table 6.8.19, FZEC Property Development Regulations. Deviation is limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the applicable regulation. 
6.  Administration. 
a.  Recommended conditions of approval. The Development Review Committee and the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board (PZAB) may recommend, and the Village Council may impose conditions of approval upon the uses in a FZEC due to the proposed location of a project. 
b.  Development Review Committee (DRC). Following rezoning approval by the Village Council, the overall master plan shall be submitted for review and certification by the DRC according to Article 5 of the land development regulations. 
c.  Conditions of approval. The Development Review Committee may impose conditions of approval upon the development order according to Section 6.8.1. regarding conditions. 
7.  Platting and Phasing. 
a.  At a minimum, a boundary plat is required for property with a FZEC zoning designation. 
b.  Each project with a FZEC zoning designation shall be subject to the time limitation and review requirements of Section 5.9 regarding compliance with time limitations and Section 6.8.1. regarding phasing controls and platting, and shall proceed to project completion in a reasonably continuous and timely manner. 
I.  Uses. Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule, Table 6.8-2 indicates the permitted, conditional, accessory and prohibited uses within any FZEC. Unless otherwise restricted by conditions included in the development order and the requirements of this section, uses found in Table 6.8-2 are permitted by right. 
1.  Uses Not Specifically Permitted. For uses not specifically permitted by the FZEC Use Table 6.8-2, a final determination of a permitted use shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Manager. 
2.  Accessory and Support Services. 
a.  Support services such as take-out restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, sundry shops and banks/financial institutions shall be permitted as accessory or support uses intended for the employees within a project zoned FZEC. Accessory uses are indicated by an "A" designation in Table 6.8-2. 
b.  For the purposes of this zoning district, accessory or support uses, as indicated on Table 6.8-2, shall be limited to a total of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or less. 
J.  Nonconforming Uses. The FZEC designation is intended for existing projects as well as new developments, and therefore it is possible that in addition to uses permitted within the FZEC zoning district, a limited number of non-conforming uses may occur. Such uses shall be permitted to remain in a manner consistent with the approved Master Plan, or if not addressed by the approved Master Plan, by the provisions for nonconforming uses in Article 1, Chapter 6 of the land development regulations. 
K.  Property Development Regulations. The property development regulations within a FZEC zoning district shall comply with Table 6.8.19. For existing projects, the provisions of this table shall apply unless otherwise specifically provided in the approved overall master plan, an approved site plan, or in the approved development order. 
Table 6.8.19 
FZEC Property Development Regulations 
Development Standard Minimum Requirement Minimum Parcel Size for FZEC Rezoning 10 acres Minimum Lot Size None Maximum Building Height 35 feet 1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 1.0 Maximum Impervious Surface 75% Maximum Building Coverage 50% Minimum Open Space 15% Development Setbacks 2 Minimum Setback Front 30 feet Side (interior) 3 30 feet Side (street) 30 feet Rear 4 25 feet (Non-residential) 30 feet (Residential) Notes. 1 The building setbacks indicated are based on a maximum building height of 35 feet. All structures exceeding 35 feet in height shall provide an additional setback and separation of one horizontal foot for each one vertical foot of building exceeding 35 feet in height with a maximum height of 72 feet (Policy 1.3.9 of the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan allows employment centers located within the State Road 7 Corridor that employ 100 or more people in a predominately technical or professional occupation to be a maximum height of 72 feet). 2 The setbacks shall be measured from the perimeter property line. 3 Indicates that the property development regulation is flexible and may be modified by complying with Section 6.8.2.D.2. of this Code. 4 Indicates the building setback if the lot abuts a property that is zoned either residential or non-residential.  
L.  Vesting of Existing Projects. Industrial developments constructed prior to the adoption of the FZEC zoning district with an approved Master Plan, shall be considered to be conforming with the applicable requirements of this section. Existing projects rezoned to a FZEC designation shall comply, if needed, with the requirements of Section 1.5 of the LDR's regarding Non-conformities. 
M.  Environmental Design. The use of sustainable building techniques shall be incorporated in a development within the FZEC zoning district. The design shall conserve energy, minimize water usage, recycle wastes and promote environmental sustainability within the Village. 
N.  Sign Requirements. 
1.  Compliance with Sign Regulations. A project within a FZEC zoning district shall comply with Section 7.14, relating to sign regulations. 
2.  Existing Projects. For an existing project, the requirements of Section 7.14 shall apply unless there is an existing master sign plan approved prior to the adoption of this section. 
O.  Parking requirements. All FZEC development, excluding locations with a previously approved Master Plan, shall comply with Section 7.2 of the Village's Land Development Regulations, relating to off-street parking and in addition shall comply with the parking and loading requirements of this section. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
1.  Visitor and Employee Parking. Visitor parking shall be located the shortest walking distance to the primary public entrance of buildings. Designated parking areas shall be provided for all employees. 
2.  Minimum Parking Space Dimensions. 
a.  Minimum dimensions for at grade parking spaces. All parking spaces shall be a minimum width of nine (9.0) feet and a minimum length of eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet, with a back-up aisle as provided in Section 7.2.3.L of these land development regulations. 
b.  Minimum dimensions for parking within structure parking. All garage parking spaces shall be a minimum width of eight and one-half (8.5) feet and a minimum length of eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet, with a back-up aisle as approved by the Village Engineer. 
c.  Existing parking spaces. The parking spaces constructed or approved prior to the adoption of the FZEC zoning district shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of this section. 
3.  Alternative Parking Standards. As an alternative to providing parking and landing spaces as required by Article 7, Chapter 2 of these land development regulations, an applicant may provide a shared parking study or a parking demand study. A shared parking study shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.2.3. A parking demand study shall be prepared as indicated below. 
a.  Preparation. The parking demand study shall be prepared in a professionally accepted manner by a professional engineer or certified planner. 
b.  Contents. The parking demand study shall provide information maximum parking demand based upon peak hour and peak season calculations. 
c.  Recommendations. The parking demand study shall provide recommendations with regard to actual number of spaces needed based upon one (1) or more of the following: 
i.  Peak hour and peak season calculations of maximum parking demand; 
ii.  Mitigation measures that are to be employed on a permanent basis, such as staggered work hours or incentives for car pooling; 
iii.  Alternative transportation measures such as use of public or private transit systems to reduce parking demand; and 
iv.  Use of remote or off-site parking lots for employees used in conjunction with internal mobility systems to transport employees to their place of work. 
4.  Road Improvements. 
a.  The Village Council may require a FZEC development to provide certain road improvements within the road right-of-way, in addition to the land development improvements required for the subdivision or platting of land. 
b.  These improvements are intended to forward certain goals of the Comprehensive Plan such as: assuring the public health, safety and welfare; facilitating non-vehicular circulation; implementing the linked Open Space Scenic Corridor, and other applicable Village programs. 
c.  These conditional road improvements may include, but are not limited to street lighting, median landscaping, street trees, underground utilities and bike lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-13, § 1, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 6.8.5. - Medical Center Planned Development (MCPD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Medical Center Planned Development (MCPD) Zoning District is to provide for the orderly planned development of major health care facilities consisting of a hospital with clinics, medical offices, extended care facilities and other ancillary or medical care support facilities. The MCPD district provides appropriate architectural design standards and locations for large scale developments that ensure capacity of the campus facilities meets the future evolution of healthcare services for the community and the region. The MCPD provides for flexibility of certain property development regulations, placement and clustering of buildings and provision for site design. The MCPD district is consistent with and implements the applicable Goals, Objectives and Policies of the Medical Commercial land use designation of Village's Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Applicability. The MCPD district shall be permitted only in conjunction with a hospital as a principal use. A MCPD district is required to be located at the intersection of two (2) or more major arterial thoroughfares that traverse the Village of Wellington. The MCPD district shall be located not less than five (5) miles from another MCPD district or hospital use measured from the distances of the two (2) closest property lines. The requirements of this section, Section 1.5, regarding exemption and Section 6.8.1., regarding planned developments, shall apply to each MCPD, whether new or amended, within The Village. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
C.  Application Requirement. The applicant shall submit a Master Plan. The document shall demonstrate compliance with this section, Section 6.8.1., regarding planned developments, the requirements listed in the application form and other requirements, as may be required by Planning and Zoning Manager to process a rezoning or zoning amendment application. 
1.  Master Plan. A MCPD shall be governed by a Master Plan approved by the Village Council which illustrates in a graphic, written and tabular form, how the MCPD is designed and phased. The MCPD shall include flexible property development regulations, a transportation program, and internal street and pathway cross-sections. 
a.  Development threshold: The minimum area for a MCPD shall be forty (40) contiguous acres. 
b.  Design intent. The design of the MCPD shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.8.1.E, Design objectives, in addition to the standards listed below: 
i.  Non-vehicular circulation system. Each MCPD shall be designed with an internal circulation system based upon a hierarchy of transportation methods. In descending order of importance, the hierarchy shall consider pedestrians as the most important, followed by cyclists, mass transit and automobiles. This system shall be designed to connect and provide access between buildings within the MCPD and directly adjacent to the MCPD. 
(a)  A continuous circulation system for pedestrian paths/sidewalks and bicycle paths/lanes shall connect all of the buildings within a MCPD. 
(b)  A MCPD shall provide pedestrian and bicycle accessory facilities for seating, bicycle parking, etc. to encourage on-site non-vehicular circulation. 
ii.  Landscaping and Open Space. The MCPD shall provide landscape areas and open space that includes recreation and scenic areas. A minimum open space of twenty (20) percent shall be provided. 
iii.  Architectural design standards. All structures within a MCPD shall comply with the architectural design standards of Section 6.6.3 relating to architectural compatibility standards. 
c.  Perimeter landscape areas. A perimeter landscape area shall be provided around the entire perimeter of a MCPD. The width, planting requirements and type of perimeter landscape areas provided around a MCPD shall be as determined in Section 7.3., relating to landscaping. 
2.  Flexible regulations. The developer may request to deviate from certain property development regulations (specifically indicated as flexible regulations) within Table 6.8-23, MCPD Property Development Regulations. The Planning and Zoning Manager shall have the authority to grant such deviations. 
3.  Platting. A boundary plat is required for property zoned MCPD. The development order for approval of either the MCPD master plan or the MCPD rezoning applicable to a specific property shall provide for when the platting is to be completed and approved by the Village Council. 
D.  Administration. 
1.  Conditions of approval. The Development Review Committee (DRC) and the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board (PZAB) may recommend, and the Village Council may impose conditions of approval as part of an approved development order as provided in Section 6.8.1. 
2.  Development Review Committee. Following approval by the Village Council, the Master Plan shall be submitted for review and certification by the DRC. Changes to previously approved MCPDs which exceed the limits of the DRC shall comply with the modification options contained in Section 6.8.1, regarding planned development district regulations, or Section 5.7, regarding variances. 
3.  Phasing controls and platting. Each MCPD development shall be subject to the time limitation and review requirements of Section 5.9 relating to compliance with time limitations and Section 6.8.1. relating to phasing controls and platting and shall proceed in a reasonably continuous and timely manner. 
E.  Uses. The Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule, as provided in Table 6.8-2 (Attachment 1) indicates the uses permitted within an approved MCPD, unless otherwise restricted by conditions included in the development order and the requirements of this section. 
a.  Accessory uses such as retail (including restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, sundry shops) and financial institutions shall not exceed a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet for each use within a building. 
b.  Uses prohibited within a MCPD include the following: stand alone retail (including restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, sundry shops) and financial institutions; drive-through windows and lanes; and medical or hazardous waste disposal facilities. 
F.  Property Development Regulations. The property development regulations within a MCPD shall be as indicated in Table 6.8-23, unless otherwise specifically provided in the approved Master Plan or in the MCPD development order. 
Table 6.8-23 
Medical Center Planned Development Zoning District (MCPD)
Property Development Regulations 
Development Standard Requirements Minimum Parcel Size 40 acres Minimum Parcel Width 300 feet Minimum Parcel Depth 200 feet Maximum Building Height 72 feet 1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio .40 Maximum Impervious Surface 70% Maximum Building Coverage 25% Minimum Open Space 20% Development Setbacks 2 Minimum Setback Front 30 feet Side (interior) 3 25 feet Side (street) 30 feet Rear 4 25 feet (Non-residential) 30 feet (Residential)  
Notes: 
1  The building setbacks indicated are based on a maximum building height of thirty-five (35) feet. All structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height shall provide an additional setback and separation of one horizontal foot for each one vertical foot of building exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height with a maximum height of seventy-two (72) feet. 
2  The setbacks shall be measured from the perimeter property line. 
3  Indicates that the property development regulation is flexible and may be modified by complying with Section 6.8.2.D.2. of this Code. 
4  Indicates the building setback if the lot abuts a property that is zoned either residential or non-residential. 
1.  Environmental Design. The use of sustainable building and site design techniques shall be incorporated in a MCPD development, as feasible or required by the Planning and Zoning Manager. The design shall conserve energy, minimize water usage, recycle wastes and promote environmental sustainability within the Village. 
2.  Sign requirements. All MCPD development shall at a minimum comply with the requirements of Section 7.14 of the Village's Land Development Regulations, relating to sign regulations and in addition, shall comply with the sign requirements of this section as set forth below. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. A Master Sign Plan shall be approved by the ARB. 
a.  Accessory use tenant signs. 
i.  One (1) tenant wall sign shall be permitted for each accessory use such as retail and financial institutions only. 
ii.  A maximum of two (2) accessory use tenant wall signs shall be permitted for each building. 
iii.  Tenant wall signs shall not be located on walls facing a public right-of-way. 
iv.  Accessory use tenant wall signs shall comply with the standards listed below: 
1.  Wall sign area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
2.  Lettering shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
3.  A maximum of two lines of copy and a combined height of thirty-six (36) inches shall be permitted. 
4.  The sign copy shall advertise only accessory use tenant's name. 
5.  All signs shall be of a consistent format including color, lettering style and materials. Use of tenant logos is permitted consistent with the requirements of this section. 
6.  All wall signs shall be separated a distance of at least fifty (50) lineal feet from any other wall sign. 
7.  All accessory use wall signs shall be located only on the ground floor. 
v.  Tenant monument signs are prohibited. 
b.  Directional signs. 
i.  The sign copy shall be limited to directional messages and arrow symbols only. Acceptable copy includes the name of buildings, main entrances, emergency room, parking lots/garage, hospital and specialty center. 
ii.  The signs shall be for internal pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic located within parking field of the use. 
iii.  Directional signs shall comply with the standards listed below: 
1.  Maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
2.  Maximum width of five (5) feet. 
3.  Sign face area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per side. 
4.  Lettering shall be no more than eight (8) inches in height. 
5.  A maximum of ten (10) lines of copy shall be permitted. 
6.  The number of directional signs permitted shall be limited by the Master Sign Plan. 
7.  Location of directional signs shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists or pedestrians and shall not interfere with public safety. 
c.  Landscaping. All directional and monument signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign to ensure the structure blends in with the site and character of the overall landscape plan. The area of landscaping shall not be less than the area of the sign faces. 
3.  Parking requirements. Any and all MCPD development shall at a minimum comply with Section 7.2 of the Village's Land Development Regulations, relating to off-street parking and in addition shall comply with the parking and loading requirements of this section. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
a.  Visitor and employee parking. Visitor parking shall be located the shortest walking distance to the primary public entrance of buildings. Designated parking area shall be provided for all employees. 
b.  Space dimensions. All MCPD parking spaces shall be a minimum width of nine and one-half (9.5) feet and a minimum length of twenty (20) feet. All garage parking spaces within a MCPD shall be a minimum width of eight and one-half (8.5) feet and a minimum length of eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet. The parking spaces constructed or approved prior to the adoption of the MCPD zoning district shall be vested, be a part of the Master Plan and shall be considered a conforming improvement. 
4.  Road improvements. The Village Council may require a MCPD development to provide certain road improvements within the road right-of-way, in addition to the land development improvements required for the subdivision or platting of land. These conditional improvements are intended to forward certain goals of the Comprehensive Plan such as: assuring the public health, safety and welfare; facilitating non-vehicular circulation; implementing the linked Open Space, Scenic Corridor and other applicable Village programs; and improving the neighborhood aesthetics. These conditional road improvements may include, but are not limited to street lighting, median landscaping, street trees, underground utilities and bike lanes. See Section 6.8.1.E.4, regarding road improvements. 
5.  Public/Open space. The space shall be designed as landscaped areas with places for informal gathering and seating areas. The design of open spaces shall incorporate at least three (3) of the following: 
(a)  Architectural sculptures 
(b)  Fountain structures 
(c)  Tables and benches/seating areas with shade 
(d)  Gazebos 
6.  Landscape requirements. All MCPD developments shall be landscaped according to Section 7.3, regarding landscaping and buffering, the requirements of this section and the master plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 6-26-2007; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 4, 2-14-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-03, § 4, adopted Feb. 14, 2012, repealed § 6.8.5, which pertained to alternative residential planned unit development and derived from Ord. No. 2003-06; June 10, 2003; Table 6.8-2; Ord. No. 2003-20; September 9, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 6-26-2007. Section 4 of said ordinance subsequently renumbered the remaining §§ 6.8.6-6.8.8 to read as §§ 6.8.5-6.8.7. 
Sec. 6.8.6. - Medical Arts Planned Development Zoning District (MAPD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Medical Arts Planned Development Zoning District (MAPD) is to provide for the orderly planned development of a major medical health care complex consisting of a hospital with clinics, medical offices, extended care facilities, ancillary or medical care support facilities, and commercial and office uses integrated within the overall zoning district. The MAPD zoning district provides appropriate architectural design standards and locations for large scale developments that ensure capacity of the campus facilities meets the future evolution of healthcare services for the community and the region. The MAPD zoning district provides for flexibility of certain property development regulations, placement and clustering of buildings and provision for site design. The MAPD zoning district is consistent with and implements the applicable Goals, Objectives and Policies of the Village's Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The MAPD zoning district is consistent the Medical Center (MC) Future Land Use Map designation of the Village's Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  Hospital as a Principal Use. The MAPD zoning district shall be permitted only in conjunction with a hospital as one (1) of the principal uses within the overall planned development zoning district. 
2.  Required Hospital Location. A hospital as a principal use within a MAPD zoning district is required to be located at the intersection of two (2) or more major arterial thoroughfares that traverse Wellington. 
3.  Minimum Separation. A freestanding hospital shall be located not less than three (3) miles from another hospital. The distance shall be measured from the two (2) closest property lines from each hospital. 
4.  Minimum Requirements. The requirements of this section, Section 1.5, regarding exemptions for nonconforming uses, structures and improvements, and Section 6.8.1, regarding planned developments, shall apply to each MAPD zoning district within Wellington. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the LDR, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
D.  Application Requirement. 
1.  Master Plan. The applicant shall submit a Master Plan as part of the planned development district rezoning application. The document shall demonstrate compliance with this section, Section 6.8.1., regarding planned developments and other requirements as provided by these LDR. 
2.  Effect of Master Plan. The MAPD zoning district Master Plan shall be reviewed by the Council, and shall illustrate in a graphic, written and tabular form, how the zoning district is designed and phased. The MAPD zoning district may include flexible property development regulations, and shall include a transportation program, internal street and pathway cross-sections, and including connectivity and cross access with adjacent parcels and properties. 
3.  Development Threshold. The minimum area for a MAPD zoning district shall be twenty (20) contiguous and reasonably compact acres. 
4.  Design Intent. The design of a MAPD zoning district shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.8.1.E, regarding design objectives, in addition to the standards listed below: 
a.  Design intent. The design of the MAPD zoning district shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.8.1.E, regarding design objectives, in addition to the standards listed below: 
i.  Non-vehicular circulation system. Each MAPD zoning district shall be designed with an internal circulation system based upon a hierarchy of transportation methods. In descending order of importance, the hierarchy shall consider pedestrians as the most important, followed by cyclists, mass transit and automobiles. This system shall be designed to connect and provide access between buildings within the MAPD zoning district and directly adjacent to the MAPD zoning district. 
ii.  Pedestrian Circulation. Each MAPD zoning district shall provide a continuous circulation system for pedestrian paths/sidewalks and bicycle paths/lanes shall connect all of the buildings within a MAPD zoning district. Each MAPD zoning district shall provide pedestrian and bicycle accessory facilities for seating, bicycle parking, etc. to encourage on-site non-vehicular circulation. 
iii.  Mass Transit. Each MAPD zoning district shall provide facilities for provision of mass transit services, including the following: 
(a)  Public mass transit; and 
(b)  Private mass transit, including use of trolleys or other vehicles for internal circulation and connection to remote parking facilities. 
iv.  Vehicular Circulation. Each MAPD zoning district shall provide an interconnected vehicular circulation system that provides internal access to all uses and facilities within the planned development district. In addition, as may be required by the approved master plan, internal access connections to abutting properties shall be provided. 
v.  Landscaping and Open Space. Each MAPD zoning district shall provide an integrated system of landscape areas and open space that includes recreation and scenic areas. A minimum open space of twenty (20) percent shall be provided. The integrated system may include pedestrian and bicycle paths as required by this section. 
b.  Public/Open Space. Designated public/open space shall be designed as landscaped areas with places for informal gathering and seating areas. The design of open spaces shall incorporate at least three (3) of the following: 
i.  Architectural sculptures; 
ii.  Fountain structures; 
iii.  Fitness trails; 
iv.  Tables and benches/seating areas with shade; and gazebos; and 
v.  Integration of pedestrian and bicycle paths. 
c.  Perimeter landscape areas. A perimeter landscape area shall be provided around the entire perimeter of a MAPD zoning district. The width, planting requirements and type of perimeter landscape areas provided around a MAPD zoning district shall be as determined in Section 7.3., relating to landscaping. 
d.  Architectural Design Standards. All structures within a MAPD zoning district shall comply with the architectural design standards of Section 6.6.3 relating to architectural compatibility standards and 6.5.19.G relating to design standards for multifamily and non-residential development. 
e.  Flexible Regulations. The applicant for approval of a MAPD zoning district may request to deviate from certain property development regulations specifically indicated as flexible regulations, within Table 6.8-24, relating to property development regulations. The Planning and Zoning Manager shall have the authority to grant such deviations during the Development Review Committee site plan review process. 
f.  Platting. At a minimum, a boundary plat is required for each property assigned a MAPD zoning district designation. The development order for approval of either the MAPD zoning district master plan or the MAPD planned development district rezoning applicable to a specific property shall provide for when the platting is to be completed and approved by the Council. 
E.  Landscape Requirements. Each MAPD zoning district development shall be landscaped according to Section 7.3, regarding landscaping and buffering, the requirements of this section and the master plan. 
F.  Utility, Mechanical Equipment and Storage Tanks. 
1.  Review by Development Review Committee. The location, setbacks, appearance, buffering and screening of such equipment shall be subject to review and approval by the Development Review Committee. 
G.  Administration. 
1.  Conditions of Approval. The Development Review Committee and the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board (PZAB) may recommend, and the Council may impose conditions of approval as part of an approved development order as provided in Section 6.8.1. 
2.  Development Review Committee. Following approval by the Council, the Master Plan shall be submitted for review and certification by the Development Review Committee. Changes to a previously approved MAPD zoning district master plan which exceed the limits of the Development Review Committee shall comply with the modification options contained in Section 6.8.1, regarding planned development district regulations. 
3.  Phasing controls and platting. Each MAPD zoning district shall be subject to the time limitation and review requirements of Section 5.9 relating to compliance with time limitations and Section 6.8.1. relating to phasing controls and platting and shall proceed in a reasonably continuous and timely manner. 
H.  Uses. 
1.  Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Use. The Planned Development District Use Regulations Schedule, as provided in Table 6.8-2 indicates permitted, conditional, special and prohibited uses permitted within an approved MAPD zoning district, unless otherwise restricted by conditions included in the development order and the requirements of this section. 
2.  Accessory Retail and Support Uses. 
a.  Accessory Uses Permitted. Accessory uses such as commercial and retail including restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, sundry shops, pharmacies and financial institutions located within a hospital, medical office, clinic or similar building shall not exceed a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each use within a building. 
b.  Permitted Accessory Use Locations. Accessory commercial and retail uses shall be located only on a ground floor. 
c.  Exception. This restriction shall not apply to uses within any portion of an MAPD zoning district master plan that is designated as a Main Street/Commercial Center element of the master plan. 
I.  Main Street/Commercial Center Design Standards. 
1.  Creation. 
a.  Establishment. Within a MAPD zoning district, a single "main street" or "pedestrian-oriented commercial center" shall be established as part of the approved master plan if the planned development district consists of thirty (30) acres or more. 
b.  Inclusion in Master Plan. The main street/commercial center shall be included as an element of the master plan, and this element shall be based upon the design concepts outlined below. 
c.  Number. More than one (1) main street/commercial center may be created as part of an overall master plan approval. 
d.  Mix of Use. The main street/commercial center shall be designed as a mixed use center incorporating commercial, retail, office, personal services and residential uses. 
e.  Minimum and Maximum Size. A main street/commercial center shall consist of not less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and not more than one hundred fifty (150,000) square feet. Unless approved as part of a master plan, a single tenant shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
f.  Location. To the extent possible, a main street/commercial center shall be located at the logical central place of the property. For the purposes of this section, the central place shall be determined by the size and configuration of the MAPD zoning district, parcel size; parcel geometry; pedestrian, mass transit and vehicular circulation; and density, intensity and distribution of uses, residents, employees and clients. 
g.  Focal Point. The main street/commercial center shall be designed with a central square, plaza or similar focal point, with clearly defined pedestrian connections to all activities within the center. 
h.  Architectural Style. The main street/commercial center shall be designed with an overall unified architectural style that is pedestrian-oriented, including arcades, overhead weather protection, etc., that connects the ground level activities with the focal point. 
i.  Project Form. The main street/commercial center shall be designed in a linear or compact form, with the linear form being encouraged to include street front activities/uses facing the adjacent pedestrian path or roadway. 
j.  On-street Parking. The main street/commercial center shall be designed to include parking along street sections, and that parking is to be included in overall calculations for required parking. 
k.  Structures. The main street/commercial center shall be designed to be a combination of one, two and three story structures, with pedestrian-oriented uses and services on the ground floor and a vertical integration of residential and nonresidential uses on the above-ground floors. All planes of structures, to the extent possible, shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of a sidewalk or pedestrian-oriented area. 
l.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width, and shall be designed to encourage such uses as outdoor restaurant seating, pedestrian street furniture, and similar amenities. 
m.  Utilities and Delivery Service Area. The main street/commercial center shall be designed, to the extent possible, to provide a single, centralized location for provision of deliveries, utilities, solid waste disposal, etc. As an alternative, a limited number of locations throughout the center can be designated to provide this feature. 
n.  Underground Utilities. All public and private utilities shall be installed underground and shall be installed beneath the road rights-of-way. The provisions of this section shall not apply to utilities existing as to the effective date of this section. 
o.  Parking Design and Integration. Excluding on-street parking, the main street/commercial center shall be designed to limit or eliminate vehicle parking areas located between buildings and adjacent public rights-of-way. Vehicle parking for centers shall be designed with the provision of parking in convenient, yet secondary locations. 
p.  Relation to Public Improvements. The main street/commercial center shall be designed to be complementary to and integrate with public improvements located along or within public rights-of-way, parks, pedestrian circulation systems, etc. 
q.  Design Plan. The main street/commercial center shall be designed in accordance with an overall design plan approved as part of a master plan development order approval. 
r.  Alternative Transportation Plan. The main street/commercial center shall be designed in accordance with an overall alternative transportation plan, to integrate mass transit of all types, bicycles lanes, pedestrian paths, and similar non-vehicular modes of travel. The alternative transportation plan shall be approved as part of a master plan development order approval. 
s.  Landscaping. The main street/commercial center shall be designed with an overall landscaping plan, emphasizing the use of native species and shade for pedestrians. The overall landscape plan shall be approved as part of a master plan development order approval. 
t.  Drive Through Facilities. Drive through facilities for any retail or commercial use within the MAPD zoning district are prohibited. 
u.  Freestanding Buildings. Unless approved as part of the overall master plan for the main street/commercial center, freestanding buildings are prohibited. 
J.  Property Development and Supplementary Regulations. 
1.  Compliance with Property Development Regulations. The property development regulations within a MAPD zoning district shall be as indicated in Table 6.8-23, unless otherwise specifically provided in the approved Master Plan or in the MAPD zoning district development order. 
Table 6.8-23 
Medical Arts Planned Development Zoning District (MAPD)
Property Development Regulations 
Development Standard Property Development Regulations Minimum Parcel Size 20 acres Minimum Parcel Width 300 feet Minimum Parcel Depth 200 feet Maximum Building Height 72 feet Minimum Lot Size None Maximum Floor Area Ratio per Lot 0.4 or as may be allowed in Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Maximum Impervious Surface per Lot 75%. Maximum Building Coverage per Lot 50%. Minimum Open Space per Lot 25%. Building Setbacks for Principal Structures Minimum or Maximum Setback.   • Front Minimum of 30 feet for freestanding buildings. Maximum of 15 feet or as otherwise included within an approved master plan in an area designated as "main street/commercial center."   • Side (interior) Minimum of 25 feet or as otherwise approved in the master plan.   • Side (street) 30 feet.   • Rear 25 feet for a non-residential structure. 30 feet for a residential structure.  
2.  Additional Standards. In addition to the standards of Table 6.8-23, the following standards listed below shall apply within the MAPD zoning district. 
a.  Building height. The building setbacks indicated are based on a maximum building height of seventy-two (72) feet. All structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height shall provide an additional setback of one (1) horizontal foot for each one (1) vertical foot of building exceeding thirty-five (35) feet when the properties on which the structures are proposed abut a residential zoning district. 
b.  Measurement of building setbacks. The building setbacks shall be measured from the perimeter property line. 
c.  Side Interior Setbacks. With respect to side interior setbacks, the amount of setback shall be determined by the requirements of the approved master plan, subject to compliance with Wellington's Building Code. 
d.  Rear building setbacks. With respect to rear building setbacks, the minimum distance shall be determined based whether the abutting property is designation as a residential or non-residential zoning district. 
3.  Supplementary Regulations. All development within the MAPD zoning district shall comply with the requirements of this section unless otherwise provided herein or within the approved MAPD zoning district development order. 
a.  Environmental Design. The use of sustainable building and site design techniques shall be incorporated in a MAPD zoning district development, as feasible or required by the approved master plan. The design shall conserve energy, minimize water usage, recycle wastes and promote environmental sustainability within Wellington. 
b.  Sign Requirements. 
i.  Compliance. All MAPD zoning district development shall at a minimum comply with the requirements of Section 7.14 of Wellington's Land Development Regulations, relating to sign regulations and in addition, shall comply with the sign requirements of this section. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
ii.  Master sign plan. A master sign plan shall be approved by the Architectural Review Board (ARB) prior to the installation of any permanent signage. 
iii.  Accessory use retail tenant wall signs. One (1) retail tenant wall sign shall be permitted for each accessory use such as retail and financial institutions only. 
(a)  Maximum number of signs. A maximum of four (4) accessory use retail tenant wall signs shall be permitted for each building. 
(b)  Permitted location. Tenant wall signs shall not be located on walls facing a residentially zoned property. 
(c)  Standards for signs. Accessory use retail tenant wall signs shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(i.)  Wall sign area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
(ii.)  Lettering shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
(iii.)  A maximum of two (2) lines of copy and a combined height of thirty-six (36) inches shall be permitted. 
(iv.)  The sign copy shall advertise only the accessory retail use tenant's name. 
(v.)  All signs for each separate building shall be of a consistent format including color, lettering style and materials. Use of tenant logos is permitted consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(vi.)  All wall signs shall be separated a distance of at least fifty (50) lineal feet from any other wall sign. 
(vii.)  All accessory use wall signs shall be located only on the first floor. 
(d)  One (1) tenant wall sign shall be permitted for each accessory retail use. 
iv.  Accessory retail tenant monument signs. 
(a)  Maximum number of signs and number of tenants. One (1) monument sign with a maximum of four (4) accessory retail use tenants shall be permitted for each building. 
(b)  Standards for signs. Tenant retail monument signs shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(i.)  Signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(ii.)  Signs shall not exceed eight (8) in width. 
(iii.)  Signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 
(iv.)  All retail tenant monument signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign to ensure the structure blends in with the site and character of the overall landscape plan. The area of landscaping shall not be less than the area of the sign faces. 
(v.)  All accessory retail tenant monument sign shall be consistent with the approved sign plan. 
v.  Directional signs. The directional sign copy shall be limited to directional messages and arrow symbols only. Acceptable copy includes the name of buildings, main entrances, emergency room, parking lots/garage, hospital, special center, principal residential uses, and principal uses such as hotels and commercial centers approved as part of a master plan. 
(a)  The signs shall be for internal pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic located within parking field of the use. 
(b)  Directional signs shall comply with the standards listed below. 
(i.)  Maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
(ii.)  Maximum width of five (5) feet. 
(iii.)  Sign face area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per side. 
(iv.)  Lettering shall be no more than eight (8) inches in height. 
(v.)  A maximum of ten (10) lines of copy shall be permitted. 
(vi.)  The number of directional signs permitted shall be limited by the Master Sign Plan. 
(vii.)  Location of directional signs shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists or pedestrians and shall not interfere with public safety. 
(c)  All directional signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign to ensure the structure blends in with the site and character of the overall landscape plan. The area of landscaping shall not be less that the area of the sign faces. 
vi.  Hospital and hospital campus signs. Signs for a hospital and the associated hospital campus shall comply with the standards listed below and the standards provided in Table 6.8-24. 
(a)  Colors and materials for all signs shall comply with the approved sign plan. 
(b)  Sign size and dimensions shall comply with the approved sign plan. 
(c)  Signs may be illuminated as provided in the approved sign plan. 
(d)  Light emitting diode (LED) and similar types of signage are prohibited as a principal or accessory element of any sign. 
(e)  When a hospital and hospital campus is rezoned to the MAPD zoning district, all permanent or temporary signs existing as of the effective date of the rezoning shall be included within and counted as part of an overall sign plan. 
Table 6-8.24
Sign Dimension and Other Provisions for Hospital and Hospital Campus Signs 
Sign Type Max. 1 
Height Max. 
Width Max. 
Size Other 
Provisions Logo, Lines of Copy and 
Number Campus Anchor Monument 20 feet 10 feet 200 square feet None Per approved sign plan Campus Entry Monument 15 feet 9 feet 135 square feet None Per approved sign plan Building Identity Monument 6 feet 11 feet 66 square feet None Per approved sign plan Primary Directional Monument 10 feet 6 feet 60 square feet None Per approved sign plan Secondary Directional 9 feet 5 feet 45 square feet None Per approved sign plan Tertiary Directional 7 feet 4 feet 28 square feet None Per approved sign plan Campus Identity Wall Letters •Letter height NMT 3 26 
inches 
•Logo height NMT 39 
inches 
•Total height NMT 4 feet 75 feet 300 square feet None Per approved sign plan Illuminated Canopy Identity Lettering Letter height NMT 24 inches 25 feet 50 square feet None Per approved sign plan Medical Pavilion Wall 6 feet 10 feet 60 square feet None Per approved sign plan Medical Pavilion Canopy Lettering Lettering NMT 12 inches in height 10 feet 10 square feet None Per approved sign plan Cancer Center Wall Lettering Lettering NMT 13 inches in height 20 feet 60 square feet None Per approved sign plan Illuminated Canopy Identity Lettering •Lettering NMT ___ 
inches in 
height 
•Total height of NMT 3 feet 20 feet 60 square feet None Per approved sign plan Garage Identity 2 feet 15 feet 30 square feet None Per approved sign plan Medical Pavilion Alphabetic Identity 3.5 feet 3 feet 9 square feet None Per approved sign plan Rendina Memorial 4 feet 3 feet 12 square feet Only one memorial sign is permitted within the approved sign plan for a MAPD zoning district. Per approved sign plan Public Service/Temporary Banners 1. As permitted by Section 7.14.12.H, "Temporary Banners in the Medial Commercial Planned Development District," of the Wellington Land Development Regulations. 
2. In addition to the requirements of Section 7.14.12.H, a temporary banner may be placed only on a hospital located at the intersection of SR 7 and Forest Hill Boulevard. Notes. 
1. Max. means Maximum. 
2. LED means Light Emitting Diode. 
3. NMT means Not More Than.  
K.  Parking requirements. All MAPD zoning district development shall at a minimum comply with Section 7.2 of these land development regulations, relating to off-street parking and in addition shall comply with the parking and loading requirements of this section. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the land development regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
1.  Visitor, Resident and Employee Parking. Visitor and resident parking shall be located the shortest walking distance to the primary public entrance of buildings, residences or activities. Designated parking areas shall be provided for all employees as part of the approved master plan or the approved site plan. 
2.  Space Dimensions. All zoning district parking spaces shall be a minimum width of 9.0 feet and a minimum length of nineteen (19) feet. All garage parking spaces within a MAPD zoning district shall be a minimum width of 8.5 feet and a minimum length of 18.5 feet. The parking spaces constructed or approved prior to the adoption of the MAPD zoning district shall be vested, be a part of the Master Plan and shall be considered a conforming improvement. 
3.  Parking Demand. The number of parking spaces may be reduced by either a shared parking study, conducted as provided in Section 7.2.3.H or by a parking demand study prepared in a professionally accepted manner. The study shall be conducted based upon the standard listed below. 
a.  Demand shall be calculated upon peak seasonal use of the hospital and related office, commercial and retail uses within the MAPD zoning district. 
b.  Demand also shall be calculated upon the shift with the greatest number of employees. 
c.  Demand also shall be calculated occupancy of all hospital, medical office, and professional office calculated upon a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of use. 
4.  Road Improvements. 
a.  As provided in Section 6.8.1.E.4, regarding road improvements, the Council may require a MAPD zoning district development to provide certain road improvements within the road right-of-way, in addition to the land development improvements required for the subdivision or platting of land. 
b.  These conditional improvements are intended to forward certain goals of the Comprehensive Plan such as: assuring the public health, safety and welfare; facilitating non-vehicular circulation; implementing the linked Open Space, Scenic Corridor and other applicable Wellington programs; and improving the neighborhood aesthetics. These conditional road improvements may include, but are not limited to street lighting, median landscaping, street trees, underground utilities and bike lanes. See Section 6.8.1.E.4, regarding road improvements. 
5.  Phasing Plan. An application for rezoning and master plan approval shall include an overall phasing plan for construction of individual parcels within a MAPD zoning district, including the construction of the main street/commercial center portion of the district. Modification of the phasing plan shall require Council approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 4, 2-14-2012) 
Note- Formerly § 6.8.7. See editor's note at § 6.8.5. 
Sec. 6.8.7. - Mixed Use Planned Development District (MXPD). 
    The Mixed Use Planned Development District (MXPD) is designed for new development or redevelopment of existing sites and is characterized by a variety of integrated land use types. The intent of the district is to provide for a mixture of uses within a single project in order to develop or redevelop sites which are sensitive to the surrounding uses, obtain the desired character of the community, and ensure the availability of public facilities to serve proposed developments. This designation is also intended to foster infill development, to deter urban sprawl and to lessen the need for additional vehicular trips through the internalization of trips within the community or within a neighborhood or project. The criteria established herein are to be used for development of sites designated as MXPD. 
A.  A MXPD is consistent with the Mixed Use (MU) and Community Commercial (CC) Future Land Use Map designations. 
B.  Each MXPD project shall be approved as a planned development district consistent with the applicable requirements of the Land Development Regulations (LDR). 
C.  An application for establishment of an MXPD Zoning district may apply for targeted expedited permitting processing as provided in Section 5.1.15 of the (LDR). 
D.  MXPDs shall include the following land uses in accordance with Table 1.3.25.1.: 
1.  The residential land use category shall include any combination of the following dwelling types: 
a.  Assisted living facility (Type 1 and 2); 
b.  Congregate living facility (Type 1 and 2); 
c.  Dormitory; 
d.  Loft or residence above a nonresidential ground floor use; 
e  Multifamily, including duplex, triplex or quadplex dwellings; or 
f.  Townhouse. 
2.  The commercial land use category means those establishments providing a variety of uses, including the following: 
a.  Entertainment; 
b.  Hotel or motel or bed and breakfast inn; 
c.  Personal services; 
d.  Restaurants; and 
e.  Retail sales. 
3.  The office land use category means a building or buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of or the administration of a business; organization; profession; service; industry; or similar activity, including and medical office, medical clinic, and medical laboratory; and medical research and development similar types of activities. 
4.  The industrial land use category means those establishments engaged in a variety of light industrial uses including the following: 
a.  Assembly of computers or electronics and similar types of equipment; 
b.  Biomedical and medical research facilities; 
c.  Laboratories; 
d.  Manufacture of products not involving raw or processed food or hazardous materials, or similar types of objectionable materials; 
e.  Medical laboratories; and 
f.  Research and development activities and offices related to such uses. 
5.  The institutional and public facilities land use category means land utilized for a public purpose including the following: 
a.  Colleges and universities; 
b.  Cultural facilities such as museums and art galleries; 
c.  Governmental offices and facilities; 
d.  Places of worship; 
e.  Public or private schools and technical or vocational schools; and 
f.  Congregate residential facilities including assisted living facilities/congregate living facility (Type 3 and 4), dormitories, nursing homes, or convalescent facilities 
g.  Day care center (General). 
6.  The parks land use category means land owned or operated by a governmental entity offering the general public an opportunity to participate in a variety of active, equestrian, passive, or similar recreational activities. 
7.  The conservation land use category shall mean land permanently dedicated for preservation of environmental, conservation, and natural resources, including public or private lands protecting such resources. 
8.  The open space land use category shall mean land permanently dedicated as common open space within a MXPD, including recreation areas, preservation areas, and water management tracts. For the purposes of this section, if open space is included as a specific use within a mixed use project, the open space feature or features, including water management tracts, shall be fully integrated as an element of the overall project and shall be designed to enhance the pedestrian, recreational, and visual amenities within the entire MXPD. 
E.  A MXPD shall contain the minimum number of land uses indicated in Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25. Table 1.3.25.1. 
F.  A single land use shall not occupy more than 60 percent of site area proposed for a MXPD, and land allocation shall comply with the minimum and maximum requirements established in Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25. Table 1.3.25.2. 
G.  The mixed use type shall be as approved for the Comprehensive Plan Mixed Use Future Land Use Map designation. 
H.  Each MXPD shall comply with the development standards listed below. 
1.  The minimum land area for a MXPD shall be five (5) acres. 
2.  The minimum and maximum percent of land allocation indicated in Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25. Table 1.3.25.2 shall be based upon the total site area. 
3.  The maximum building coverage shall be 35 percent. 
4.  The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.50, except the maximum floor area ratio for the parks and conservation land use categories shall be 0.05. 
5.  Unless otherwise herein or established within an approved master plan, the property development regulations for a MXPD shall comply with the property development regulations provided in Table 6.8-18 of the Multiple Use Planned Developments (MUPD) Zoning designations. 
I.  For the purposes of this section, when a minimum percentage of a specific land use is indicated in Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25. Table 1.3.25.2, then at least that minimum percentage of the specific use shall be present as part of the mix of uses within a proposed MXPD, except as provided in Section 6.8.7.J.2. 
J.  The following are additional standards affecting land allocations for a MXPD: 
1.  Commercial or Office land use is required as an element of all mixed use projects. 
2.  Projects more than 30 acres: 
a.  Both Commercial and Office land use shall be required. 
b.  A minimum allocation of 10% of the overall project is required to be designated as both Commercial and Office. 
c.  A minimum building square footage allocation of 25% for Commercial and 25% for Office shall be required for the Commercial and Office land use. 
3.  The maximum residential density within a mixed use project shall be consistent with Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25.(9). For the purposes of this section, residents per acre shall mean total number of residents, without regard to number of single or multiple resident type of unit. 
4.  Within a Type III Mixed Use project at least 25 percent of all residential dwellings or residential units shall be integrated into the structures associated with a commercial, industrial, or office land use parcels, including such dwellings as loft apartments associated with nonresidential uses, above ground floor units associated with nonresidential uses, or residential or transient units integrated into the ground floor of predominantly nonresidential structures. The density of such units shall be determined as provided in Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25. Table 1.3.25.3. The percentage of property utilized for calculating residential density shall be as provided in Future Land Use Element Policy 1.3.25. Table 1.3.25.4. 
K.  The individual uses, buildings, or parcels within MXPDs shall include interconnecting pedestrian ways and plazas. 
L.  To the extent possible, pedestrian connections to abutting residential properties shall be created. This provision is intended to encourage creation of such connections, but not to force a residential property owner or residential governing association to accept the installation of such connection. 
M.  The individual uses, buildings, or pods within MXPDs shall, when applicable, include site planning, design, and compatibility features which minimize adverse impacts on adjacent uses, such as the following: 
1.  Locate parks, conservation areas, or preserves adjacent to abutting residential zoning districts; 
2.  Locate open spaces, including water management features, adjacent to abutting residential zoning districts; 
3.  Limit the height of nonresidential buildings to not more than two (2) floors when adjacent to abutting residential zoning districts; 
4.  Locate all freestanding residential uses or development adjacent to all abutting residential zoning districts. 
5.  Dumpsters and Recycling Containers. 
a.  Location. Locate dumpsters, recycling, and related solid waste disposal facilities at least 100 feet from abutting residential zoning districts. 
b.  Screening. Require permanent structural or nonstructural screening adjacent to all abutting residential zoning districts. 
6.  Ensure site and security lighting does not spillover into adjacent residential zoning districts. 
N.  Each application for a MXPD Zoning designation shall include and specify the maximum development threshold proposed for a particular site. For the purposes of the Mixed Use category, the term "maximum development threshold" means the total potential development is proposed to be established within a mixed use project, including all residential and nonresidential uses. 
O.  Each application for Mixed Use Planned Development District designation shall comply with the following: 
1.  All policies adopted as part of the Mixed Use Future Land Use Map category of the Wellington's Comprehensive Plan when the project is located on a parcel with a Mixed Use Future Land Use Map designation. 
2.  All requirements of the development order and master plan approved for a Mixed Use or Community Commercial Future Land Use Map designation. 
P.  Each application for the MXPD district designation shall include a conceptual master plan to specify maximum development as provided herein. 
Q.  A maximum development threshold for each property with a MXPD district designation shall be established within the proposed master plan. The maximum development threshold shall include the following measures of density or intensity: 
1.  Identification of each type of mixed use land use classification (e.g. residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, etc.). 
2.  Identification of the maximum number of square feet, or other applicable type of measurement such as number of students, for each nonresidential use to be established. 
3.  Establishment of a maximum number of dwellings to be constructed. 
4.  Establishment of number of residents permitted. 
5.  Establishment of number of units permitted. 
6.  Identification of dwelling unit types to be constructed. 
7.  Identification of other specific development limitations such as building height, building location, building design, natural resources protection, etc. 
R.  Within each MXPD, certain design concepts shall be integrated within the overall master plan. These design concepts are provided below, and shall govern the overall master plan for the mixed use center. 
1.  The mix of uses shall comply with the requirements provided in this Section. 
2.  Ground floor uses shall be predominately pedestrian oriented, including retail, restaurants, personal services, financial institutions, etc. Not less than 75 percent of the lineal frontage of all ground floor uses shall be pedestrian oriented. 
3.  Buildings, vehicular access, parking, service uses such as dumpsters and recycling facilities, outdoor venues, and similar activities or uses shall be located and oriented to avoid conflict with residential uses located on properties abutting or adjacent to a mixed use center. 
4.  MXPD Architectural Style and Center Design shall be: 
a.  Designed with an overall unified architectural style approved as part of the overall master plan. Final architectural plan shall be subject to review by the Architectural Review Board (ARB) as provided in Section 6.5.19 of these Land Development Regulations. 
b.  Pedestrian-oriented, including arcades, overhead weather protection, etc., that connects all ground level activities and provides direct access to any outparcels, sidewalks or other pedestrian amenities including mass transit facilities, bicycle parking areas, etc. 
c.  Designed with a central square, plaza, piazza or similar focal point, with clearly defined pedestrian connections to all activities within the center. 
d.  Designed to be a combination of one, two and three story structures, with pedestrian-oriented uses and services on the ground floor and a vertical integration of residential and nonresidential uses on the above-ground floors. 
e.  Designed with external sidewalks and walkways a minimum of 10 feet in width, and shall be designed to encourage such uses as outdoor restaurant seating, pedestrian street furniture, and similar amenities. 
f.  Utilities and Delivery Service Area. 
i.  Designed to the extent possible, to provide a single, centralized location for provision of deliveries, utilities, solid waste disposal, etc. As an alternative, a limited number of locations throughout the center can be designated to provide this feature. 
ii.  Within a MXPD, all dumpsters shall be located at least 150 feet from an abutting residential property. As an alternative, dumpster locations shall be fully and completely enclosed. 
iii.  Hours to service dumpsters shall be established by the master plan approving creation of a MXPD. 
g.  Parking Design and Integration. 
i.  Designed to the extent possible, to locate vehicular parking in areas that are consistent with the following: 
ii.  Located at least 100 feet from any adjacent residential uses; 
iii.  Not located between buildings and adjacent public rights-of-way; and 
iv.  Do not interfere with safe and convenient pedestrian circulation. 
h.  Designed to be complementary to and integrate with public improvements located along or within public rights-of-way, parks, pedestrian circulation systems, etc. 
i.  Shall coordinate its landscaping, signage, and related improvements with any gateway, corridor or similar plans that are approved by Wellington and designed to enhance entry into Wellington via vehicular, pedestrian or related circulation systems. 
j.  Designed to integrate mass transit of all types, bicycles lanes, pedestrian paths, and similar non-vehicular modes of travel. If included, the alternative transportation provisions of this section shall be approved as part of a master plan development order approval. 
k.  Designed with an overall landscaping plan, emphasizing the use of native species and shade for pedestrians. The overall landscape plan shall be approved as part of a master plan development order approval. 
l.  MXPD may incorporate drive through facilities for any retail or commercial use as a conditional use, subject to Wellington Council consideration during an initial or subsequent development review. 
m.  Designed in accordance with an overall design plan approved as part of a master plan development order approval. 
n.  Designed to locate utilities and delivery service areas at least 100 feet from any adjacent residential use. Each MXPD shall be designed to provide a single, centralized location for the provision of utilities, solid waste disposal, etc. As an alternative, a limited number of locations throughout the site can be designated to provide this service. 
o.  All public and private utilities shall be installed underground and shall be installed beneath the road rights-of-way in accordance with Wellington standards. Underground utilities may be installed in a swale are if the adjacent roadway is curbed. The requirement shall not apply to aboveground utilities existing as to the effective date of this section. 
p.  Excluding on-street parking, the main street/commercial center shall be designed to limit or eliminate vehicle parking areas located between buildings and adjacent public rights-of-way. Vehicle parking for centers shall be designed with the provision of parking in convenient, yet secondary locations. 
S.  Major Amendments to an Approved MXPD Master Plan. 
1.  A major amendment to an approved MXPD master plan for a site assigned a Community Commercial Future Land Use Map designation shall comply with the requirements of these land development regulations. 
2.  A major amendment to an approved MXPD master plan for a site assigned a Mixed Use Future Land Use Map designation shall comply with the Policy 1.3.24.15.F of the Future Land Use Element of Wellington's Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 4, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1(Exh. 1), 12-13-2016) 
Note- Formerly § 6.8.8. See editor's note at § 6.8.5. 
Secs. 6.8.8-6.8.13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.8.14. - Residential Renaissance Overlay Zoning District (RROZD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Residential Renaissance Overlay Zoning District (RROZD) is to provide for the orderly planned development and redevelopment of certain distressed residential multifamily neighborhoods and communities within Wellington. The text of the RROZD provides for the following: neighborhoods where the RROZD can be applied; use of targeted expedited processing and permitting; inclusion of neighborhood serving non-residential uses such as day care centers; creation of "live-work": residential units; potential residential density bonuses to encourage redevelopment of older, distressed residential units; creation of local governance entities such as property owner or home owner associations; provision of design criteria; provision of standards for projects that renovate existing units; provision of standards for redevelopment projects that replace existing units; and creation of a specific development review process for all projects within a RROZD area. 
B.  Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The RROZD is consistent with and implements the applicable Goals, Objectives and Policies of the Wellington Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Zoning District Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The RROZD shall be consistent with the Residential "D," "E," "F," "G," and "H" Future Land Use Map designations of the Wellington Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  Zoning District Location. A RROZD zoning district overlay shall be located only within an approved residential planned unit development and shall be limited to the neighborhoods enumerated below in Section 6.8.14.E.1.b. 
E.  Applicability. 
1.  Areas Where RROZD May Be Assigned. The RROZD shall be permitted in compliance with each of the locational criteria listed below. 
a.  The rezoning shall occur as an overlay zoning district within an existing residential planned unit development. 
b.  The rezoning shall occur within one (1) or combination of the following residential neighborhood areas listed below and as provided in Exhibit 1: 
i.  12th Fairway; 
ii.  Folkstone Circle; 
iii.  French Quarter Condominium; 
iv.  Goldenrod Road/Hyacinth Place; 
v.  Guildford Way; 
vi.  Hawthorne Place/Veronica Court/Morning Glory Drive; 
vii.  Montauk Drive; 
viii.  Montauk Drive Condominium and Rental Complex; 
ix.  Peconic Court; 
x.  Periwinkle Place/Lily Court; 
xi.  Riverside Circle; 
xii.  Shakerwood Condominium; 
xiii.  Staghorn Street/Mulberry Place; 
xiv.  Sturbridge Village Condominium; 
xv.  Westhampton Circle; 
xvi.  White Pine Drive; and 
xvii.  Yarmouth Circle/Yarmouth Drive (North of Greenbriar Boulevard). 
2.  Conflicts with other Land Development Regulations. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the land development regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
F.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Mandatory Pre-Application Conference. At least one (1) month prior to submission of an application for a RROZD zoning designation, a mandatory pre-application conference with the Development Review Committee shall be scheduled. One (1) of the principal purposes of the pre-application meeting shall be to review for compliance with all requirements of this section and all applicable land development regulations to which the application is subject. 
2.  Proposed Master Plan. The applicant shall submit a proposed master plan as part of the overlay district rezoning application. The document shall demonstrate compliance with this section, Section 6.8.1., regarding planned developments, and all other applicable requirements as provided by these land development regulations. 
3.  Contents and Effect of Proposed Master Plan. 
a.  The proposed RROZD master plans shall illustrate in graphic, written and tabular form how the proposed project is designed and phased, if phasing is proposed as part of the overall rezoning application. 
b.  The approved master plan shall govern overall development within the area rezoned. All site plans for development of specific parcels shall be consistent with the approved master plan. 
G.  Flexible Property Regulations Allowed. An application for a RROZD zoning district designation may include flexible property development regulations as provided in Table 6.8-23 of the land development regulations. 
H.  Minimum Development Threshold. The minimum area for a RROZD shall be two (2) compact, contiguous acres. 
I.  Design Criteria. Design criteria applicable to a proposed RROZD zoning district overlay is provided below. 
1.  Design Intent. The design intent of a RROZD zoning district overlay is to provide for the improvement of housing stock within Wellington, to provide a variety of housing opportunities, to provide for development or redevelopment of neighborhoods consistent with an approved master plan, and to provide for a variety of housing types. 
2.  Applicability. Design criteria provided in this section shall be applicable to a proposed RROZD zoning district overlay. Application of each individual criterion is to be based upon the land area, number of units and development location. Compliance with the overall intent and specific design criteria shall be included within the required master plan application. 
3.  Architectural Standards. 
a.  Standards of this section shall provide an overall architectural design for renovated or newly-constructed units, including proposed architectural style, exterior architectural improvements for structures to be renovated, exterior colors including trim, exterior materials, roof materials and colors, architectural treatments, door and window treatments, etc. For the purposes of this section, the following are required architectural styles and features: 
i.  Use of the Florida Vernacular, Monterey, Cottage, Bungalow, Spanish Colonial, or Mediterranean Revival architectural styles or other architectural style approved as part of an overall master plan; 
ii.  Use of interior courtyards and similar common entry and exit features; and 
iii.  Use of landscaping and open space to provide common spaces usable to residents. 
b.  To the extent feasible, renovation of existing units shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
4.  Parking Plan. 
a.  An overall parking plan shall be provided to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section, these land development regulations and to ensure adequate resident and guest parking, including the following: 
i.  Reduction in the amount of impervious area utilized for parking spaces; 
ii.  Increase in landscaping for all parking spaces, including landscaping to separate assigned parking spaces reserved for individual residential units, landscaping to provide shade for parked vehicles, and landscaping to improve the overall appearance of the residential community; 
iii.  Provision of common parking areas; 
iv.  Provision of bicycle parking facilities; 
v.  Reduction in overall parking based upon number of residential units reserved for residents fifty-five (55) years of age or older; 
vi.  Convenient guest parking; 
vii.  On-street parking; and 
viii.  Provision of an appropriate storm water management system. 
b.  An overall parking plan may include provision for overnight parking of commercial owned or operated by residents of the area zoned RROZD. 
5.  Landscaping. An overall landscaping plan shall be provided, including the following: 
a.  Integration of existing landscaping; 
b.  Provision for perimeter landscaping, buffering and screening; 
c.  Provision for common area landscaping, including trees, palms, understory, shrubs and ground cover; 
d.  Use of not less than seventy-five (75) percent native landscaping materials; 
e.  Provision for landscaping for parking areas as provided herein; and 
f.  Irrigation of all landscaping and landscaped areas. 
6.  Overall Project Circulation. Overall project circulation shall include the provision for street closure, or elimination or realignment of streets to enhance overall project layout, eliminate outmoded circulation patterns, reduce through traffic, and to otherwise minimize the impacts of traffic circulation on neighborhood residents, and use of the measures indicated below. 
a.  Traffic Calming and Street Connectivity. To the extent feasible, provision for traffic calming and street connection shall be included within a master plan, consistent with the standards listed below. 
i.  Traffic calming. Use of traffic calming measures including but not limited to speed bumps, roundabouts, chicanes, chokers, neck-downs, and bump outs, to reduce overall traffic, slow traffic and protect pedestrians and residents. 
ii.  Street connectivity. Enhancement of street connectivity within the overall project area or to connect to adjacent uses, especially if there are existing, underutilized street connections. 
iii.  Bicycle parking. Provision of bicycle parking at appropriate locations throughout the project. 
b.  Transit Orientation. 
i.  Design. Use of professionally accepted standards for a transit-oriented design, or inclusion of bus stops and bus shelters for public transit or public or private schools. 
ii.  Bus stops or shelters. Installation of bus stops or bus shelters for public and private school transportation. 
7.  Recreation and Common Facilities. Installation of common active or passive recreation facilities or areas, including club houses, tot lots, play grounds and playground equipment, tennis courts, basketball courts, gazebos, pedestrian paths, etc. 
8.  Street Amenities. Provision of street amenities, including street lighting, street furniture, trash receptacles, etc. 
9.  Mail boxes. Provision of one (1) or more appropriately located sites for community-serving mailboxes, including parking or pull-off areas. 
10.  Solid Waste. Provision of centralized, screened and landscaped areas for disposal of solid waste and collection of recycling materials. 
11.  Entry Features. Creation of entry features, including signage, decorative walls, landscaping, etc., to identify the neighborhood or development area. The inclusion of entry features to be based upon size, site design and location of the area to be rezoned. 
12.  Pedestrian Sidewalks and Connections. Creation, as appropriate to the size, site design and location of the area to be rezoned, of pedestrian sidewalks and connections to other pedestrian paths, sidewalks, schools, parks and recreation areas, other public facilities, neighborhood retail or employment centers or areas that are considered a pedestrian destination. 
13.  Platting. All properties rezoned to the RROZD zoning district overlay shall be platted as required by these land development regulations. 
14.  Phasing. The master plan shall include, if phasing is desired by the applicant, an overall phasing plan indicating the timing and location of development on the site. 
J.  Incentives for Renovation or Redevelopment. 
1.  Additional Density. 
a.  An application for a rezoning to RROZD that includes existing units may request additional residential density, as indicated in Table 6.8.14.1. For the purposes of this section, additional density shall not exceed more than twenty (20) percent of the maximum density permitted by the underlying Future Land Use Map (FLUM) designation. 
b.  An application for rezoning to the RROZD for vacant property may request an additional density of not more than twenty (20) percent of the maximum density permitted by the underlying Future Land Use Map (FLUM) designation as indicated in Table 6.8.14.1. 
c.  The actual number of additional density within an approved RROZD master plan shall be determined by the degree to which an overlay zoning district exceeds the minimum requirements of this section. 
Table 6.8.14.1 
Calculation of Density Bonus for RROZD Projects 
Number of 
Existing Units Additional Density for 
Standard Housing Units Additional Density for 
Senior Housing Units Maximum Number 
of Additional 
Units 1, 2 Maximum 
Density Increase Maximum 
Additional Units Maximum 
Density Increase Maximum Number of Additional Units 10 10% 1 10% 1 2 11-29 10% 3 10% 3 6 30-59 10% 6 10% 6 12 60 10% •6 @ 60 Units 
•8 @ 75 Units 
•10 @ 100 Units 
•15 @ 150 Units 
•20 @ 200 Units 10% •6 @ 60 Units 
•8 @ 75 Units 
•10 @ 100 Units 
•15 @ 150 Units 
•20 @ 200 Units •12 @ 60 Units 
•16 @ 75 Units 
•20 @ 100 Units 
•30 @ 150 Units 
•40 @ 200 Units Notes. 
1. Additional density may be allowed based upon approval of LEED-ND designation. 
2. Additional density may be calculated upon both standard and senior housing units.  
2.  Calculation of Additional Density. Additional density to be awarded shall be calculated as provided below. 
a.  For standard housing units, the maximum additional density indicated in Table 6.8.14.1 shall apply. For the purposes of this section, standard housing units shall be units for rent, sale or lease to the general public or reserved for senior housing units. 
b.  For additional senior housing units or LEED-ND units, the maximum density indicated in Table 6.8.14.1 shall apply. For the purposes of this section, the density of senior housing units or LEED-ND units can be applied only when the following has occurred: 
i.  One hundred percent of standard housing units are constructed; and 
ii.  The additional senior housing units or LEED-ND units are to be constructed. 
c.  Senior housing units are to be reserved for adults of at least fifty-five (55) years of age, and shall be retained for that age group for a period of not less than twenty (20) years. The period for retaining senior housing units shall be in the form of a deed restriction, enforceable by Wellington, and approved as an element of the master plan. 
d.  The maximum density shall be calculated based on the maximum density that can be achieved without any additional density permitted as a planned unit development or the incentives provided in this section. In addition to the maximum density, the density bonus as provided in Table 6.8.14.1 shall be applied cumulatively as follows: 
i.  A density bonus of not more than ten (10) percent for standard housing units; and 
ii.  A density bonus of not more than ten (10) percent for any combination of senior housing units or units with a LEED-ND designation. 
3.  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). 
a.  Additional residential density may be allowed for projects approved as a "Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design-Neighborhood Development" (LEED-ND). 
b.  Once calculated, the additional density allowed with the LEED-ND designation can be added to any other additional density allowed as a planned unit development or as provided in this section. 
c.  Additional residential density for a LEED-ND project shall be calculated upon the ratio of one (1) additional unit for each ten (10) units within the area to be rezoned to the RROZD designation. 
K.  Live/Work Units. A renovation or redevelopment project consisting of two (2) or more acres may create live/work units as provided herein. 
1.  Maximum Number of Units. Not more than fifteen (15) percent of the total number of dwellings may be classified as live/work units. 
2.  Types of Uses. Excluding academic or tutorial uses, live work units shall be limited to business and professional types of uses that do not attract clients, visitors and guests into a neighborhood. 
3.  Permitted Locations. Live work units shall be located as provided herein. 
a.  The units shall be identified on the approved master plan. 
b.  The units shall be allowed to cluster at one (1) or a limited number of specific locations within a project, as identified within the approved master plan. 
c.  The units, if not clustered, shall be located in the end units of multifamily structures. 
4.  On-street Parking Permitted. Within a cluster of live/work units, additional parking for clients, visitors or guests may be provided on-street when included within an approved master plan. 
5.  Area Devoted to Nonresidential Uses. Not more than forty (40) percent of total live/work unit space shall be devoted to nonresidential use. 
L.  Governance. 
1.  Permanent Governance. Each approved RROZD zoning district shall provide for permanent, governance in the form of a home owners association, a property owners association, a condominium association, or other legally accepted form of perpetual control and responsibility. The association shall include all properties within a zoning district, including commercial properties. 
2.  Responsibilities. The governance mechanism shall be responsible for the following: 
a.  Maintenance of all common areas such as landscaping, recreational facilities, parking areas, sidewalks, driveways, solid waste disposal areas, and all similar facilities associated with the residential units; 
b.  Maintenance of all exterior improvements, such as walls, windows, doors, roofs, and similar features; 
c.  Compliance with all requirements of a development order or orders issued by Wellington; and 
d.  Such other powers as may be authorized by state or local law. 
3.  Inclusion in Master Plan. The proposed form of permanent governance shall be included as part of the master plan approval for a renovation or redevelopment project. 
4.  Final Approval. The final form of the governance agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the Wellington Attorney. The governance agreement shall be approved prior to the issuance of any final site plan approval by the Development Review Committee. 
5.  On-site Management Required. For projects of more than one hundred (100) dwelling units, an on-site management office shall be maintained. Location, size, hours of operation, and similar features of the office shall be included within the overall master plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 12-14-2010) 
CHAPTER 9. - VOLUNTARY DENSITY BONUS 

Sec. 6.9.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the voluntary density bonus program is to provide for the construction of very low and low income housing in the Village and Palm Beach County. This is accomplished by providing for an increase in permitted density (a density bonus) for a specific development in exchange for either: (1) the construction of very low and/or low income housing on site or off-site; (2) a payment in-lieu-of construction into the Housing Trust Fund; or (3) a combination of construction and an in-lieu payment. 
Sec. 6.9.2. - Authority. 
    The Village Council has the authority to adopt this section pursuant to Article VIII, Sec. 1, Fla. Const., Fla. Stat. and Sec. 163.3161, et seq. Fla. Stat. 
Sec. 6.9.3. - Applicability. 
    This section shall apply to all residential development within the urban service area of The Village until such time as the Village Council may adopt specific receiving areas pursuant to the recommendations of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board Density Task Force, or in conjunction with the Transfer of Development Rights Study and/or the Urban Form Study. In cases of conflict between this section and other sections of the LDR, the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
    Acceptance of applications for the Voluntary Density Bonus Program is suspended until January 2, 1996 or until appropriate changes are made as determined by the Village Council. This temporary suspension is to provide time to evaluate the County's Affordable Housing Study and to revise the procedures of the Voluntary Density Bonus Program. 
Sec. 6.9.4. - General. 
    A developer may request to exceed the existing permitted density up to one hundred (100) percent to a maximum of eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre, or seventy-five (75) percent of the standard density in the case of Congregate Living Facilities (CLFs), to a maximum of forty-five (45) beds per acre, without filing a Site Specific Comprehensive Plan Amendment. In exchange, the developer must provide for the construction of very low and/or low income housing units in The Village by complying with the component standards of this section. 
Sec. 6.9.5. - Provisions for the construction of very low and/or low income housing. 
    In exchange for the density bonus the developer must provide for the construction of very low and /or low income housing. Density bonus requests that exceed the existing permitted density more than sixty-seven (67) percent shall be required to construct very low and/or low income housing on-site. Density bonus requests up to and equal to a sixty-seven (67) percent increase over the existing permitted density shall provide housing pursuant to one (1) of the three (3) options provided for in this section: (1) construction of units on site, or on another site approved by the Planning & Zoning Director; or (2) payment in-lieu-of construction into the Housing Trust Fund, or (3) a combination of (1) and (2). 
A.  Construction of units. The developer shall construct a required number of very low and/or low income housing units in exchange for the receipt of a density bonus. The minimum number of very low and/or low income housing units to be constructed shall be based on the following: 
1.  Density bonus request over sixty-seven (67) percent. Density bonus requests that exceed existing permitted density more than sixty-seven (67) percent must construct very low and /or low income housing on site equal to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of units proposed, rounding down to the nearest whole number, with a minimum of one (1) unit. 
a.  Rental developments shall include at least ten (10) percent very low income units. 
b.  For-sale properties may include only low income housing. 
c.  CLFs shall include twenty (20) percent very low income housing. 
2.  Density bonus request up to sixty-seven (67) percent. All density bonus requests up to or equal to a sixty-seven (67) percent increase over the existing permitted density may elect to construct twenty (20) percent of the total units proposed as very low and/or low income housing on site or on another site which the Planning & Zoning Director determines is consistent with and furthers the intent of the Comprehensive Plan Housing Element Objective 2 addressing the Voluntary Density Bonus Program and the geographic dispersal of lower income households. 
a.  Rental developments shall include at least ten (10) percent very low income units. 
b.  For-sale developments may include only low income housing. 
c.  CLFs shall include twenty (20) percent very low income housing. 
3.  Assurances of affordability. The developer shall provide language, acceptable to the Village Attorney, which guarantees for a period of at least fifteen (15) years, how the affordability will be maintained for units required to be very low and/or low income pursuant to income categories and definitions of the Comprehensive Plan Housing Element. CLFs shall meet the definition of a very low income individual. 
A guarantee must be documented in the public record and may be in the form of a deed restriction to be recorded on the property and/or resale addendum to the sales agreement or eligibility requirements for rental property, or other method acceptable to the Village Attorney. 
4.  Income qualifications. For units required to be very low and/or low income, a developer shall document in the public record a guarantee, in a manner acceptable to the Village Attorney, that the household, upon entry to the unit, shall meet the definition of a very low or low income household pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan Housing Element. CLFs shall meet the definition of a very low income individual. 
5.  Limitations on qualifications. No occupants of units of very low and/or low income housing constructed pursuant to this program shall be subject to restrictions beyond the income qualifications as defined in the Comprehensive Plan Housing Element. 
6.  Dispersal. The very low and/or low income housing shall not be concentrated within one area of the development or one (1) neighborhood, but rather shall be distributed and integrated throughout the development. 
7.  Housing opportunities. Developments that offer varied bedroom and square footage options shall include similar variation in the construction of very low and/or low income housing required in exchange for the density bonus. 
B.  Payment in-lieu-of construction. A developer, requesting no more than a sixty-seven (67) percent increase in density, may elect to make a payment into the Housing Trust Fund in-lieu-of construction of very low and/or low income housing units. 
1.  Housing Trust Fund. The in-lieu payment shall be placed into the Housing Trust Fund and is subject to the provisions of Housing Trust Fund Ordinance and requirements of this section. 
2.  Land Cost Model. The amount of payment shall be based on the Land Cost Model described below: 
a.  General. The in-lieu payment shall be based on the most recent Village appraisal for the site of the proposed development. 
i.  Calculation of the payment. The appraisal value of an acre of the development site, as appraised for residential use, shall be multiplied by the additional acreage required to build the requested number of units when total acreage requirements of the development are calculated using the existing permitted density. 
ii.  Payment. The total amount of the in-lieu-of payment shall be established at the time of submittal of the General Application for development approval. 
b.  Receipt of Payment. The in-lieu payment shall be pro-rated for each unit based on the total number of units to be built in the development. Payment shall be due prior to the issuance of any building permits for the project. The developer shall pay the pro-rated payment for each unit for which a building permit is to be issued. 
3.  Use of in-lieu fees. All in-lieu fees collected pursuant to the Voluntary Density Bonus Program shall be subject to the conditions established in the Housing Trust Fund Ordinance. 
C.  Combination of construction of units and the payment in-lieu-of construction. The developer, requesting no more than a sixty-seven (67) percent increase in density, may elect to construct only a portion of the very low and/or low income units required in conjunction with a payment in-lieu-of construction to account for the remaining very low and/or low income units required in exchange for the receipt of the density bonus. 
1.  Established proportion of construction to in-lieu payment. The amount of in-lieu fee to be paid in conjunction with construction of very low and/or low income housing units, in exchange for the density bonus, shall be based on the percentage of very low and/or low units to total units to be constructed, as follows: 
Percentage* of 
Very Low/Low Income 
Units to be Constructed Amount of 
Payment in-lieu-of 
to be Paid to the Trust Fund Under 5 percent 100 percent At 5% up to 10% 
(1 unit minimum) 75% At 10% up to 15% 
(1 unit minimum) 50% At 15% up to 20% 
(1 unit minimum) 25% At 20% & Over 
(1 unit minimum) 0%  
* Percentage of the total number of units proposed for the development. 
2.  In-lieu payment. The in-lieu payment shall be paid pursuant to the Land Cost Model and procedures described in Section 6.9.5.B. 
Sec. 6.9.6. - Presubmittal Conference. 
    Prior to submittal of an application requesting a density bonus, the applicant must attend a presubmittal conference with the appropriate PZB staff to review the requirements and procedures of the Voluntary Density Bonus program. 
Sec. 6.9.7. - Review of Land Use Compatibility. 
    Any application for the Voluntary Density Bonus Program shall be reviewed for land use compatibility and consistency with Comprehensive Plan policies. 
A.  Submission of application. An application for the Voluntary Density Bonus Program shall be submitted to the Planning Division for review of land use compatibility and consistency with Comprehensive Plan policies prior to submission of a General Application for development approval, at any time during the year, in a form established by the Planning & Zoning Director and made available to the public. 
B.  Determination of sufficiency. The Planning & Zoning Director shall determine the sufficiency of an application for the review within five (5) working days from the receipt of the application. 
1.  If it is determined that the application is not sufficient, written notice shall be sent to the applicant specifying the deficiencies within ten (10) working days of the determination. The Planning & Zoning Director shall take no further action on the application unless the deficiencies are remedied. If the deficiencies are not remedied within twenty (20) working days, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
2.  If the application is determined sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director will proceed to review the application pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
C.  Review and decision of the Planning & Zoning Director. Within fifteen (15) working days after the Planning & Zoning Director determines the application is sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director shall review the application to determine if the applicant has complied with the component standards required for a density bonus pursuant to Section 6.9.7.E. The Planning & Zoning Director shall prepare a report which outlines the conditions necessary for approval of the density bonus or outlines the justification for denial of the density bonus. The applicant will be notified of the completion of the report. 
D.  Review by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. Within thirty-five (35) working days of the completed Planning report, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider the application, the Planning & Zoning Director's report, the relevant support materials, and testimony at a meeting with regard to land use compatibility and consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The PZAB shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application based on the standards in Section 6.9.7.E. Upon failure of the PZAB to make a recommendation within thirty-five (35) working days, the applicant, with a report recommending the approval of the density bonus request, may proceed in the development review process pursuant to the procedures described in Section 6.9.12. By mutual consent of the Planning & Zoning Director and the applicant, the time frame for the PZAB review may be extend beyond thirty-five (35) days. 
E.  Standards. All applications for the voluntary density bonus program shall comply with these standards: 
1.  The request for a density bonus shall be compatible with surrounding land uses and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The development shall be within a three-fourths (3/4) mile [fifteen (15) minute] walk of a mass transit stop, or a commercial/employment center which offers varied opportunities and positions for full-time employment, or retail grocery shopping and pharmaceutical service for the residents of the proposed development. 
3.  The development shall be located pursuant to Section 6.9.3., Applicability. 
4.  The density of the development shall not exceed a one hundred (100) percent increase above the existing permitted density up to a maximum of eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre. CLFs shall not exceed a seventy-five (75) percent increase above the standard density of the existing land use category, up to a maximum of forty-five (45) beds per acre. 
5.  The application shall provide written justification of how the proposed development promotes the Housing Element policy (2-g) in the Comprehensive Plan, which encourages the equitable geographic distribution of affordable housing to disperse lower income households. 
F.  Review of an application to proceed. The application shall be recommended for approval or approval with conditions by the Planning & Zoning Director or the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board to proceed in the development review process as an applicant under the voluntary density bonus program. 
G.  Issuance of a recommendation to proceed. A report recommending approval or denial of the request shall be issued by the Planning & Zoning Director within seven (7) working days of PZAB action or inaction. The report shall identify all conditions that must be fulfilled by the developer in order to receive the density bonus. The report shall also include any recommendations or comments of the PZAB. 
H.  Appeals. Any applicant under the Voluntary Density Bonus program denied a recommendation to proceed through the development review process may request to appeal the decision to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. 
Sec. 6.9.8. - Development review procedures for voluntary density bonus applicants. 
    Upon the issuance of the preliminary report the applicant may proceed with the development approval process pursuant to Section 5.1 of this Code and the procedures described herein. All projects shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied by the Village Council subsequent to Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board review and recommendation, except those projects consisting of ten (10) or fewer units only require Development Review Committee review and approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
A.  Submission of general application. Threshold Review shall be required pursuant to the criteria in Section 5.1 of this Code. In conjunction with the General Application submittal pursuant to Section 5.1.3., an applicant for a density bonus must submit all necessary information and material as required by the voluntary density bonus program. 
1.  Determination of sufficiency. The Planning & Zoning Director shall determine the sufficiency of the application for the Voluntary Density Bonus Program within five (5) working days from the receipt of the voluntary density bonus program component of the General application from the Planning & Zoning Director as provided for in Section 5.1.4. Threshold Review. 
a.  If it is determined that the application is not sufficient, written notice shall be sent to the applicant specifying the deficiencies within ten (10) working days of the determination. The Planning & Zoning Director shall take no further action on the application unless the deficiencies are remedied. If the deficiencies are not remedied within twenty (20) working days, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
b.  If the application is determined sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director will notify the Planning & Zoning Director that the application is ready for review pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
B.  Review and decision of the Planning & Zoning Director. Within fifteen (15) working days after the Planning & Zoning Director receives the voluntary density bonus program component of the application, the Planning & Zoning Director shall notify the Planning & Zoning Director whether the application submitted complies with Section 6.9.13 - (Standards). Written notification in the form of a letter of agreement, specifying how the applicant shall fulfill all requirements of the Voluntary Density Bonus Program, shall be attached to the general application or may be incorporated into a Development Agreement or other approved agreement required to fulfill the adequate facilities ordinance. 
C.  Threshold Review. In addition to the requirements of the Threshold Review Section 5.1.4., the letter of agreement, or other approved agreement specifying how the applicant fulfills the requirements of the Voluntary Density Bonus Program, shall accompany the adequate facilities component of the application prior to issuance of a Concurrency Reservation or Conditional Concurrency Reservation. Concurrency Reservation or Conditional Concurrency Reservation shall be based on the total density of the development including the density bonus to be granted pursuant to the voluntary density bonus program. 
D.  Review and recommendation of the DRC. The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall review an application for the Voluntary Density Bonus program to permit the use of the approved bonus density by providing flexibility in the application of the land development regulations in accordance with Section 6.5.12. The DRC shall review the application, the recommendation to proceed report, Development Agreement or other agreement. The Development Review Committee shall then approve, approve with conditions or deny a project consisting of ten (10) or fewer units or recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application for more than ten (10) to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board based on the standards in this Section, Section 6.5.12, and Article 5 of this Code. 
E.  Review and recommendation or the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. Within twenty (20) working days of the recommendation of the DRC, (pursuant to the procedures established for public hearings under Article 5 of this Code) the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider the application, the recommendation to proceed report, the DRC recommendation, the relevant support materials, and public testimony given at a hearing. After the close of the public hearing the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall recommend to the Village Council approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application based upon standards in this Section and Article 5 of this Code. 
F.  Action by Village Council. 
1.  Scheduling public hearing(s). After review and recommendation by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board, the application shall be scheduled for consideration at a public hearing(s) by the Village Council at the next regularly scheduled public hearing by which public notice requirements can be satisfied, or such time as is mutually agreed upon between the applicant and the Planning & Zoning Director. 
2.  The public hearing(s). At the public hearing(s), the Village Council shall consider the application, all relevant support materials, the recommendation to proceed report, the DRC and the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board recommendations, and the testimony given at the public hearing(s). 
3.  Decision. Within twenty (20) working days after the conclusion of the final public hearing, the Village Council shall decide to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the standards established in this section and Article 5 of this Code. 
Sec. 6.9.9. - Standards. 
    In addition to fulfilling the standards of Section 6.9.5. and Section 6.9.7.E., to qualify for any voluntary density bonus an applicant shall meet the general standards below. 
A.  General standards. 
1.  The development shall meet all concurrency requirements at the level of impact calculated at the "bonus" density. 
2.  The developer shall specify in a Development Agreement or other approved agreement which of the three options described in Section 6.9.5. (Provisions for construction of very low and/or low income housing). will be utilized and how the requirements for that option will be fulfilled in exchange for the density bonus. 
Sec. 6.9.10. - Conditions. 
    The Planning & Zoning Director, Development Review Committee, or Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board may recommend and the Village Council may impose such conditions in approval of a voluntary density bonus that are necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon the public and the neighborhood. 
Sec. 6.9.11. - Effect. 
    Approval of a voluntary density bonus shall grant the right to increase density in the development consistent with the terms approved in the development order. The density bonus shall run with the initial development order approval. 
A.  Amendments to a voluntary density bonus. A density bonus may be amended, extended, varied or altered only pursuant to the standards and procedures established for its original approval, or as otherwise set forth in this section. 
B.  Map designation of a density bonus development. A development which receives an approved density bonus shall be designated by a symbol on the Land Use Atlas and the Zoning quad sheets until the development is built-out. At that time the Land Use Atlas and the Zoning quad sheets shall be changed to reflect the total density of the development including the bonus density. 
C.  Transfer of a density bonus. A density bonus runs with the development order and may be transferred to a new owner of the development only if the new owner agrees to fulfill the all terms of the agreement made by the original owner. 
D.  Amendments to Concurrency Reservation. A developer shall amend the concurrency reservation to reflect any reduction in the total number of units to be built prior to application for subsequent development orders from the Village or Palm Beach County. 
E.  Monitoring. All conditions of approval shall be subject to being monitored. The developer shall supply all necessary information in a timely manner acceptable to the designated County monitoring staff. Failure to provide such information, in a timely manner, may result in a revocation of the density bonus. 
CHAPTER 10. - EQUESTRIAN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT (EOZD)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, adopted Jan. 12, 2010, amends the former Ch. 10, §§ 6.10.1-6.10.12, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-02, adopted Sept. 9, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-11, adopted July 13, 2004; Ord. No. 2009-10, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 27, 2009. 

Sec. 6.10.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of these Equestrian Overlay Zoning District (EOZD) regulations is: 
A.  Protection. To protect and enhance the Equestrian Preservation Areas of the Village, as created by the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Preservation. To preserve, maintain, and enhance the equestrian community associated with the Village of Wellington. 
C.  Rural lifestyle. To preserve, maintain, and enhance the rural lifestyle associated with the equestrian community. 
D.  Land uses. To identify and encourage types of land uses that are supportive of the equestrian and rural character of the Equestrian Preservation Areas. 
E.  Development patterns. To preserve, maintain, and enhance development patterns which are consistent with the overall character of the equestrian community. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.10.2. - Applicability and Conflicts. 
    The provisions of this Article shall apply to all land located within the Equestrian Preservation Areas, as identified on the Future Land Use Map of the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan. 
    In the event of any conflicts between the requirements of this Article and the requirements of the Land Development Regulations, the requirements of this Article shall govern. In the absence of any conflict, the requirements of the underlying zoning district and the Land Development Regulations shall be applicable and supplemental to the requirements of this Article. 
    The provisions of this Article and any amendment hereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully approved development order approved prior to August 27, 2002, if the development order remains valid. Issuance of subsequent development orders shall be based on the requirements of this Article; provided, however that a complete application for development approval received prior August 27, 2002, shall be reviewed using the criteria that existed on the date of the application. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any request to modify any development order or permit; however, only the area directly affected by the proposed modification shall be subject to the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.10.3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions are established: 
A.  Cluster Development (Equestrian): A residential development pattern that allows a lot size less than the minimum required within the applicable subarea and provides common areas for equestrian amenities, open space, preservation of environmentally-sensitive areas, or similar features consistent with the purpose and intent of the overlay district. 
B.  Dressage Wall: A structure utilized in dressage training, consisting of a permanent wall with a mirror located on one (1) side of the wall and facing a dressage training or practice ring. 
C.  Equestrian Amenities: Low-impact amenities that serve the purposes of equestrian use and training activities, including structural improvements such as fences and dressage walls, but not lighting standards or seating, and non-structural improvements such as banks, ditches, jumps, paddocks, polo fields, riding arenas, and riding rings. Equestrian amenities do not include livestock waste storage areas or similar facilities. 
D.  Equestrian Arena, Private, Covered: A roofed structure utilized for equestrian purposes, including practice sessions, shows, etc. 
E.  Equestrian Arena, Private, Not Covered: A structure utilized for equestrian purposes, including practice session, shows, etc. 
F.  Equestrian Instruction: Instruction related to such equestrian activities as polo, riding, dressage, and jumping. 
G.  General Store: An equestrian or agriculturally-oriented retail establishment of a community-serving nature that sells convenience goods, equestrian-related products, agricultural-related products, prepared foods, fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, and other products of a similar nature. 
H.  Lot Coverage: The building footprint of all principal and accessory structures constructed on a lot or parcel, not including shade houses or opened-sided roofed areas such as covered porches or carports. 
I.  Recreational Vehicle: A travel trailer, camping trailer, motor home, private motor coach, park trailer or fifth-wheel trailer as defined in Section 320.01, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
J.  Stall: A compartment for a domestic animal in a stable or barn. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.10.4. - Subareas Established. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following subareas are established and shall be so indicated on the Official Zoning Map of the Village of Wellington: 
A.  Subarea A. Subarea A, generally consisting of Section 2, Township 44S, Range 41E and Section 35, Township 43S, Range 41E, including the area described as "Palm Beach Little Ranches" and "Palm Beach Little Ranches East." 
B.  Subarea B. Subarea B, generally consisting of those portions of the Wellington PUD located in Sections 8 and 17, Township 44S, Range 41E, including the developments known as Saddle Trail Park and Paddock Park No. 2 and Parcel "H", Greenview Shores No. 2 of Wellington-(P.U.D.), according to the Plat thereof, as recorded in Plat Book 31, Pages 120-136, of the Public Records of Palm Beach County, Florida. 
C.  Subarea C. Subarea C, generally consisting of Sections 19, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, and 34, Township 4S, Range 41E and Section 25, Township 44S, Range 40E, located south of Lake Worth Road and west of 120 th Avenue, including all of Palm Beach Point and that portion of the Orange Point PUD located in Section 34. 
D.  Subarea D. Subarea D, generally consisting of portions of Sections 15 and 16 and Sections 20, 21, and 22, Township 44S, Range 41E, including the Wellington Country Place PUD and the Equestrian Club PUD. 
E.  Subarea E. Subarea E generally consisting of Section 13, Township 44S, Range 40E; commonly known as "Rustic Ranches." 
F.  Subarea F. Subarea F generally consisting of portions of Section 18, Township 44S, Range 41E, commonly known as "Winding Trails" of The Landings at Wellington PUD. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 2016-17, § 2, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 6.10.5. - Applications and Development Review Process. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Article, the requirements of Article 5 regarding applications for development orders shall apply within the Equestrian Preservation Areas. All applications within the Equestrian Preserve Area subject to review by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall be reviewed by the Equestrian Preserve Committee prior to review by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.10.6. - Development Standards. 
    Minimum setbacks and other development standards for principal and accessory uses within the Equestrian Preservation Areas are established in Table A. 
A.  Minimum Setbacks. 
1.  Measurement. All setbacks shall be measured from property lines or from right-of-way easement lines in those subdivisions without dedicated or platted rights-of-way. 
2.  Exemptions. Excluding dressage walls, there are no required setbacks for equestrian amenities. 
Table A. 
Minimum Setbacks for Principal and Accessory Uses 
Setback Minimum Setback 
for Principal Structures (1) Minimum Setback 
for Accessory Structures All Equestrian Areas Exceptions 
(See Notes) Conforming 
Lots Nonconforming 
Lots/Exceptions Front 100 Feet 50 Feet (2) 
25 Feet (3) 
50 Feet (6) 100 Feet 100 Feet 
55 Feet (7) 
20 Feet (8) 
30 Feet (9) Side, Interior 50 Feet 25 Feet (2) 
25 Feet (3) 
50 Feet (6) 25 Feet 15 Feet 
10 Feet (7) 
20 Feet (8) 
30 Feet (9) Side, Corner 80 Feet 50 Feet (2) 
25 Feet (3) 
50 Feet (6) 25 Feet 25 Feet 
10 Feet (7) 
20 Feet (8) 
30 Feet (9) Rear 100 Feet 25 Feet (2) 
25 Feet (4) 
15 Feet (5) 
10 Feet (6) 25 Feet 15 Feet 
10 Feet (7) 
20 Feet (8) 
30 Feet (9) Residential Lot 50 Feet (6) 50 Feet (8) 
50 Feet (9)  
Notes and Additional Standards for Affected Setbacks: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, barns, stables, covered arenas and similar structures are always considered a principal use. 
(2)  Setback for Little Ranches No. 2 and Little Ranches East. 
(3)  Setback for Paddock Park II and Saddle Trail Park and Mystic Equestrian. 
(4)  Setback for barns in Paddock Park II and Saddle Trail Park and Mystic Equestrian. 
(5)  Setback for dwellings in Paddock Park II and Saddle Trail Park and Mystic Equestrian. 
(6)  Setback for dwellings and barns in Winding Trails. 
(7)  Setback for accessory structures in Winding Trails. 
(8)  Setback for riding ring, paddock and practice fields in Winding Trails. 
(9)  Setback for manure bin in Winding Trails. 
B.  Development Standards. All development in the Equestrian Preservation Areas shall comply with the Development Standards set forth in Table B. 
Table B. 
Development Standards for Principal and Accessory Uses 
Development Standard Minimum Dimension or Standard Minimum Lot Width 300 feet, or as otherwise provided in a current, valid development order. 
250 feet (1) Minimum Lot Depth 300 feet, or as otherwise provided in a current, valid development order. 
100 feet (2) Maximum Floor Area Ratio 20%, or as otherwise provided in a current, valid development order or as otherwise provided in the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Maximum Building Height* 35 feet (3) Maximum Lot Coverage 20%, or as otherwise provided in a current, valid development order.  
Notes and Additional Standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot width for Subarea F, Winding Trails. 
(2)  Minimum lot depth for Subarea F, Winding Trails. 
(3)  Subarea F shall have a maximum of two (2) stories. 
*Note: Subarea A, C, D and E of the EOZD: Principal and accessory structures are limited in height to 35 feet in accordance with the method of calculating maximum building height as set forth in section 6.5.8 of the LDRs. Residential properties proposed to have architectural features (including but not limited to chimneys, cupolas, parapets, towers and turrets) as part of the principal or accessory structures may exceed the 35 foot height limitation provided the architectural feature meets all of the following standards: 
a)  The lot must be five (5) acres in size or greater; 
b)  The architectural feature does not include habitable room(s); 
c)  The architectural feature may exceed the roof line by 25% with a maximum building height of the feature not to exceed 50 feet; 
d)  The architectural feature does not exceed ten (10) percent of the ground level floor area or roof area, whichever is less, of the principal/accessory structure; and 
e)  The architectural feature shall be setback one (1) additional foot for each additional foot of height above 35 feet. 
Subarea B of the EOZD: Principal and accessory structure shall maintain the maximum building height of 35 feet as set forth is section 6.5.8 of the LDRS. Non-habitable architectural features proposed on lots five (5) acres or greater shall be subject to the height limitations set forth in the regulations for Subarea A, C, D and E above. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 2016-17, § 2, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 6.10.7. - Permitted and Conditional Uses. 
A.  Principal and Accessory Uses. Uses in the Equestrian Preservation Areas are limited to those uses set forth in Table C below. To the extent that Table C conflicts with Tables 6.4-1 and 6.8-2 of the Land Development Regulations, the provisions of Table C shall control. 
Table C. 
Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses 
Use Properties with No Current PUD Master Plan Residential Pods of PUDs Commercial Additional Standards (§ 6.10.7.2) and this 
Section Comm. Pods of PUDs & Comm. Plnnd. Devels. Comm. 
Rec. Legend 
C = Conditional Use • P = Permitted Use • Blank = Prohibited Use 
D = Development Review Committee • S = Special Permit Accessory Dwelling Unit P P P P See Sec. 6.10.7.B.1 Agriculture, Bona Fide P C Agricultural Sales and Service C C Agricultural Stand S S Agricultural Storage, Indoor P P P P Air Curtain Incinerator, Temporary S S P P See Sec. 6.10.7.B.2 Airplane Landing Strip, Accessory C C Amusements, Temporary and Special Events S S Arena, Auditorium, or Stadium C Assembly, Nonprofit Institutional C C C Auction, Outdoor P P P See Sec. 6.10.7.B.3 Bed and Breakfast C C See Sec. 6.10.7.B.4 Communication Tower, Commercial C C C Congregate Living Facility (Community Residential Home), Type 1 (6 or less residents) P P Day Care, Family (5 or less children) P P Day Care, General (More than 6 Children) C C Dwelling, Single Family, Detached P P Equestrian Arena, Commercial C C P Equestrian Arena, Private/Not Covered P P Equestrian Arena, Private/Covered P P See Sec. 6.10.9.C Equestrian Instruction P P P P Equestrian Uses, Seasonal S S S S Excavation and Fill (Noncomm.) P P P P Farrier (Non-mobile) P P P Feed Store and Tack Shop P P Fitness Center P P Fruit and Vegetable Market P P Garage, Yard, or Rummage Sale P P General Store P P See Sec. 6.10.7.B.5 Government Services, Municipal D D D D Government Services, Non-Municipal D D D D Groom's Quarters P P P Guest Cottage P P Helipad, Accessory C D Home Occupations P P P House of Worship P P P P Kennel, Private D Landscape Maintenance Service C Livestock Raising D D D D Mobile Home, Limited (2 Yr. Home Constr., Ag. Security & Ag. Office) S Nursery, Retail C C C Nursery, Wholesale D D D Park, Passive P P P P Park, Public P P P P Professional and Business Office P See Sec. 6.10.7.B.6 Recreational Vehicle Park C See Sec. 6.10.9.A Restaurant, General P P Restaurant, Specialty P P Schools C C C C See Sec. 6.4.4.(98) Security/Caretakers Quarters (Bona Fide Agriculture Only) S S S Shadehouse, Accessory P P Stables P P P P Utility, Minor P P P P Veterinary Clinic D P P Wastewater, Water, or Stormwater Treatment Plant C C C  
B.  Additional Standards. The following additional standards shall apply to the uses listed in Table C. 
1.  Accessory Dwelling Unit. An accessory dwelling unit may be used as a security office for any commercial equestrian or agricultural activity. 
2.  Air Curtain Incinerator. Limited only to land-clearing activities pursuant to applicable Village permits and development orders. 
3.  Auction, Outdoor. 
a.  An outdoor auction shall be held not more than four (4) times per year at the same location within a residential zoning district. 
b.  An outdoor auction shall not exceed more than three (3) days in length. 
c.  There shall be no limit on the number of auctions held on a site with a commercial recreation Future Land Use Map designation. 
4.  Bed and Breakfast Establishments. 
a.  Bed and Breakfast establishments in the EOZD shall meet [Section] 6.4.4.20 regulations. Additionally the following supplemental regulations shall apply within the EOZD. 
b.  Patrons of the establishment may stable horses in a permanent barn or stable located on the same parcel as the establishment. Temporary stabling tents are prohibited for Bed and Breakfast establishments. 
c.  Parking shall be provided for the barn and grooms quarters in accordance with the Land Development Regulations as a separate calculation and shall be in addition to the required parking for the Bed and Breakfast use. 
5.  General Store. Outdoor display of fruits and vegetables is permitted, provided such display shall not exceed more than ten (10) percent of gross floor area of the general store. 
a.  Temporary flags, banners, signs, and similar advertising devices are prohibited. 
b.  Retail or wholesale sale of gasoline, diesel fuels; and similar petroleum products are prohibited. 
6.  Professional and Business Offices. Professional and business offices shall be limited to equestrian- and agricultural-related services. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 9(Att. H), 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 2, 9-27-2016) 
Sec. 6.10.8. - Maximum Density and Minimum Lot Size. 
    Maximum density and minimum lot size requirements for property within the Equestrian Preservation Areas are established in Table D. 
Table D.
Maximum Density and Minimum Lot Size Requirements 
Subarea Maximum Density Minimum Lot Size Cluster Development A 0.2 Dwelling Units per Acre 5 Acres Prohibited B 0.5 Dwelling Units per Acre 1 Acre Prohibited C 0.1 Dwelling Units per Acre 10 Acres Prohibited D 0.5 Dwelling Units per Acre 2 1 Acres Permitted E 0.2 Dwelling Units Per Acre 5 Acres Prohibited F 0.5 Dwelling Units per Acre 2 Acres Prohibited Note 
1. In a cluster development minimum lot size is 0.33 acres provided that overall density of the cluster development shall be not more than one unit per two acres.  
A.  Cluster Development in Subarea D. Cluster development in Subarea D shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Maximum Density. Maximum overall density shall be as provided in Table D. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size. Minimum lot size shall be 0.33 acres provided that overall density within a cluster development shall be maintained at one (1) unit per two (2) acres or less. 
3.  Common Features. In addition to such common areas as roads, drainage, and utilities, a cluster development shall provide common features, including equestrian amenities, preserve areas for environmentally-sensitive lands, or similar features consistent with the purposes of this District. Common features shall be reserved for use by property owners, guests, and residents of such cluster development. 
4.  Dwelling Unit Types. Within a cluster development, only single family detached residential dwelling units are permitted. 
5.  Planned Development Review. 
a.  A cluster development shall be subject to review as a residential planned unit development or as an amendment to an existing residential planned unit development. 
b.  As part of the planned unit development master plan, the master plan shall include information regarding the type, size, and general location of proposed common equestrian amenities, including but not limited to stables, rings, paddocks, exercise areas, internal equestrian and bridle trails, connections to external equestrian and bridle trails, and other improvements to be constructed for equestrian or equestrian-related purposes. 
6.  Design, Installation of and Access to Common Equestrian Amenities. 
a.  Common equestrian amenities shall be designed to serve as the internal focus or centerpiece of a cluster development. 
b.  Installation of all equestrian amenities included within an approved cluster development is required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any residential dwelling unit within the development. 
c.  Each dwelling unit shall be provided with access to common equestrian amenities and the access shall be included in the overall master plan. 
7.  Deed Restriction. Prior to the issuance of a final master plan approval by the Development Review Committee, a deed restriction, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, shall be executed and recorded to limit in perpetuity the use of common equestrian amenities to owners and residents of the cluster development. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 2016-17, § 3, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 6.10.9. - Supplemental District Regulations. 
    The requirements listed below shall apply to all uses within the Equestrian Preservation Areas. 
A.  Temporary Residences and Recreational Vehicle Parks. 
1.  Temporary Residence Prohibited. The use of recreational vehicles, as a temporary residence within the Equestrian Preserve Areas is prohibited. 
2.  Recreational Vehicle Park. A recreational vehicle park may be established within the EOZD subject to each of the standards listed below. 
a.  The park is located within a property that is designated as "Commercial Recreation" by the Future Land Use Map or the Official Zoning Map. 
b.  The park is located within a property that contains an approved permanent equestrian venue consisting of at least fifty (50) acres, including the following: 
i.  A commercial equestrian arena; 
ii.  An arena, auditorium or stadium; or 
iii.  A polo stadium. 
c.  The number of recreational vehicles permitted shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the underlying residential density of the equestrian venue parcel. 
d.  The location of all permanent structures associated with the park and all recreational vehicles shall comply with the building setbacks applicable to principal structures. 
e.  The individual recreational vehicle spaces within park shall be provided electrical, potable water and sanitary sewer service as indicated below. 
i.  The electrical service connections for the park shall comply with all requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
ii.  The water service connections for the park are approved by the Village and comply with all requirements of the Florida Building Code and other appropriate agencies such as the Palm Beach County Health Department (PBCHD). 
iii.  The sanitary sewer service is provided by connection to the wastewater treatment system or wastewater treatment is provided by a septic tank approved by the Village and the PBCHD 
f.  At a minimum, the park shall be landscaped and buffered as provided in Article 7, Chapter 3 of these land development regulations. Additional landscaping and buffering may be required when any portion of the park abuts property assigned a residential designation by the Future Land Use Map or the Official Zoning Map. 
g.  Minimum size for a recreational vehicle parking space is one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum depth of forty (40) feet. 
h.  A minimum of one (1) vehicle parking space per recreational vehicle space shall be provided. Additional uses within the park shall provide the amount of parking required by Article 7, Chapter 2. 
i.  Permitted accessory uses within a recreational vehicle park are indicated below. 
i.  Recreation amenities, restricted to use by park clientele, including pools, tennis and shuffleboard courts, recreation rooms, equestrian facilities, nature and walking trails, play grounds, tot lots, and similar facilities. 
ii.  Gate houses or similar facilities designed to provide security to the park. 
iii.  Maintenance facilities. 
iv.  Administrative office space necessary for operation of the park. 
v.  Commercial or retail use, restricted to use by park clientele, including convenience food and beverage items and recreational vehicle parts. 
B.  Dressage Walls. 
1.  Setbacks. Setbacks for dressage walls shall be ten (10) feet from front, rear, and side yards. 
2.  Measurement of Setback. Setbacks shall be measured from property line or edge of roadway easement, as applicable. 
3.  Easements. Dressage walls shall not be located within easements. 
4.  Minimum Lot Size. A dressage wall shall be located on a parcel consisting of at least one (1) acre. 
5.  Maximum Dimensions. A dressage wall shall not exceed the maximum dimensions listed below: 
a.  Maximum height shall not exceed ten (10) feet. 
b.  Maximum length shall not exceed seventy (70) feet. 
c.  Maximum width shall not exceed four (4) feet. 
6.  Other Applicable Standards. 
a.  Dressage walls shall comply with all requirements for sight-distance clear zones for rights-of-way. 
b.  A dressage wall shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the architectural style, color, and materials of the principal structure. 
c.  The reflective portion of a dressage wall shall be located so as to avoid reflecting the glare of the sun or lighting from any adjacent light source onto a public or private right-of-way or an abutting property. 
d.  A building permit shall be obtained prior to construction of a dressage wall. 
e.  The exterior portion of a dressage wall that is visible from a public right-of-way shall be screened with hedges, shrubs, or other suitable plant materials. A landscape plan for screening a dressage wall shall be submitted with a building permit application, and the landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of completion for the wall. The plant materials shall be of such number and type as to completely screen a dressage wall within two (2) years of installation. 
C.  Fences. 
1.  Wire Fences. Wire fences, including hog fences, galvanized chain-link, and vinyl-covered chain-link fences are permitted only if such fence is covered by hedge located on the exterior of the fence. Hedge material shall be installed in such manner to cover the fence within two (2) years after planting. In lieu of a hedge, a wire or chain-link fence may be screened by the use of a three (3) or four (4) board fence. The wire or chain-link fence shall be attached to the board fence. 
2.  Barbed Wire. The use of barbed wire is prohibited. 
3.  Thoroughfare Fences. Within the Equestrian Preserve, thoroughfare fences shall be natural, clear-coat, black, gray, or white-painted, three-rail wooden fences. 
D.  Use of Tents as Temporary Stalls. The use of tents as temporary stalls shall comply with the standards listed below: 
1.  Tents Prohibited. After June 1, 2003, tents shall not be permitted in Subarea A, Subarea F and the residential-developed areas of Subareas B and D, except in conjunction with the construction of a barn or stable. Any such temporary tent shall be removed within ten (10) working days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the barn or stable. 
2.  Tents Permitted. Tents are permitted in all areas not excluded in Section 6.10.9.D.1 above, subject to obtaining a Seasonal Equestrian Use permit for temporary stables as provided in Article 5, Chapter 7, Section 5.7 of these land development regulations. 
a.  Tents Permitted During Construction. Tents may be permitted, for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months, during the period when a building permit for a permanent barn or stable has been issued and construction is actively proceeding. The Planning and Zoning Manager may extend the period during which a tent is permitted by a period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months, based upon active and ongoing construction of the permanent stable. 
b.  Removal. Any tents shall be removed within two (2) weeks of receipt of a certificate of occupancy or revocation of building permit. 
3.  Temporary Suspension of the Prohibition of Tents as Temporary Stalls after a Declared Natural Disaster. If Wellington is within an area declared by the Governor as a natural disaster area or as authorized by the Village Council, the prohibition of tents within all subareas of the EOZD may be temporarily suspended. A property owner must apply for a Special Permit and comply with the following regulations: 
a.  A Natural Disaster is defined as a major adverse event resulting from natural processes of the earth including floods, hurricanes, tornados, brush fires, lightning, or similar event. 
b.  The damage must be a result of a natural disaster or emergency which activates Emergency Operations Level 1 - Full Scale Activation of the Emergency Response Team by the Governor and/or Village Manager. 
c.  The special permit requirements set forth in Article 5, Chapter 7, except Section 5.7.5, shall be met prior to the erection of a temporary tent. 
d.  The Special Permit issued due to a natural disaster or emergency shall be issued only after the Village Building Official determines there is substantial damage to an existing barn or stable structure as a result of the natural disaster that warrants the use of a temporary tent as a stable. 
e.  A temporary tent for stabling may be permitted, for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months, during the period when a building permit for replacement of a permanent barn/stable or repair of barn/stable due to damage caused by a natural disaster has been applied for and/or issued and construction is actively proceeding. The special permit may be extended up to six (6) months based on active and ongoing construction/repair. The temporary tent must be removed within two (2) weeks of issuance of certificate of occupancy, special permit expiration, or building permit revocation, whichever occurs first. 
f.  The temporary tent shall not include more stalls or greater square footage than the permanent stable that was deemed uninhabitable. 
g.  Once the temporary tent permit is issued, the damaged stable or barn shall not be utilized until the permanent structure receives a Certificate of Occupancy or final inspection. 
E.  Parking on Public Rights-of-Way. 
1.  Parking Prohibited. Unless otherwise provided herein, parking of vehicles on public rights-of-way or easements within the EOZD is prohibited. 
2.  Parking for Non-recurring Events. For the purposes of this section, parking of vehicles on public rights-of-way or easements within the EOZD may be permitted for non-recurring events. A special use permit shall be obtained prior to the event. 
F.  Horse Trailers. 
1.  Parking Permitted. Parking of horse trailers anywhere in the Equestrian Preservation Areas shall be permitted, subject to the limitations listed below. 
2.  Parking Prohibited in Certain Areas. Horse trailers may not be parked in roadway or canal rights-of-way or easements. 
3.  Parking Permitted within Urban Service Boundary. Parking of horse trailers within those areas of the Equestrian Preservation Area which are within the Urban Service Boundary shall be permitted, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  One (1) unscreened horse trailer may be parked adjacent to a barn or stable on an individual lot, provided that the horse trailer may not be parked between the front plane of the primary structure and the roadway easement or right-of-way and additional horse trailers may be kept provided that: 
b.  The additional trailer(s) shall be screened from the view of adjacent roadways and private properties when the lot is 2.5 acres or less and the trailers are screened as provided in Section 62-9.(b).(1) of the Code of Ordinances. For properties in excess of 2.5 acres, not more than one (1) trailer per acre may be parked as provided in Section 6.10.9.G.3.a. 
c.  The screened parking area meets the accessory structure setbacks listed on Table A, Minimum Setbacks for Principal and Accessory Uses of this section. 
d.  Temporary parking of horse trailers (i.e., trailers on site for instructional, show, or other site-specific uses) shall be allowed, provided that said temporary parking is not overnight, and trailers are not parked in rights-of way or easements. 
4.  Exemption. Property within Subarea A and property with a Comprehensive Plan designation of Commercial Recreation are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
G.  Stalls per acre. Within Subarea B, stables shall contain no more than four (4) stalls per acre. Within Subarea F, stables shall contain no more than four (4) stalls per acre with a maximum of ten (10) stalls per lot. 
H.  Fencing. 
1.  Exception for Fencing with the Front Setback. The entire Equestrian Overlay Zoning District shall be exempt from those provisions of Section 6.6.4.G.3 of the Land Development Regulations that prohibit fencing in front setbacks. 
2.  Fencing Outside the Urban Services Boundary Area. For those parts of the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District that lie outside of the Urban Services Boundary Area, the provisions of Chapter 36, Article II, Section 36-22 (c) of the Property Maintenance Standards regarding fence and wall maintenance, shall be enforced at twenty-five (25) percent in lieu of the ten (10) percent specified in that section. 
I.  Equestrian Arenas, Covered. 
1.  Setbacks. Setbacks for roofed equestrian arenas shall comply with the requirements of Table A. 
2.  Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured from property line or edge of roadway easement, as applicable. 
3.  Design. A roofed equestrian arena shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the architectural style, color, and materials of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 2, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2016-17, §§ 4, 5, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 6.10.10. - Bridle Trails and Easements. 
A.  Dedication Associated with Development Approval. To implement the Equestrian Path Circulation System adopted as part of the Future Transportation Map of the Comprehensive Plan, the Village may require dedication of a bridle path easement as part of a development order approval for a conditional use or a Development Review Committee approved use or as part of issuance of a building permit for a principal equestrian structure or as part of a plat approval within the Equestrian Preserve Area. The requirement for such dedication shall not have the effect of reducing the density or intensity of development to which a property owner would be entitled if the dedication was not required or caused an increase in a required front, side interior, side corner, or rear setback. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.10.11. - Commercial Development Standards. 
    Commercial development shall be limited to those uses intended to serve the needs of the surrounding equestrian and agricultural communities and shall be determined by such factors as size of the use and types of goods and services to be offered. In addition, commercial development shall be designed in a manner that recognizes its location within the Equestrian Preservation Areas. Commercial uses may be established subject to the requirements of this Article and these land development regulations. All permitted and conditional uses within a planned development shall be consistent with the requirements of this Section. 
A.  Planned Development Rezoning. A rezoning to a planned development district shall be required if a proposed use consists of more than one (1) acre or five thousand (5,000) gross square feet. 
B.  Orientation and Scale. The commercial uses shall be oriented toward agricultural and equestrian uses of a community-serving nature. Commercial uses shall be of a scale, intensity, and character that are consistent with and compatible to the equestrian community. 
C.  Architecture. The architectural style of commercial buildings and centers shall be of a mass, bulk, and style that is consistent with the equestrian nature of the Equestrian Preservation Areas, such as barns and stables. Building colors and materials also shall be of a nature that is consistent with the equestrian nature of the area. Commercial sites shall integrate a variety of pedestrian and equestrian amenities into overall design, including the following: 
1.  Pedestrian Circulation. An overall pedestrian circulation plan. 
2.  Equestrian Circulation. An overall equestrian circulation plan. 
3.  Pedestrian Walkways. A covered arcade, pedestrian walkway, or similar feature that is a minimum of eight (8) feet in width. 
4.  Equestrian-oriented Features. An overall plan to provide hitching posts, fences, corrals, and similar features to provide a temporary location to hold and protect the horses of owners patronizing a commercial establishment. 
D.  Size. The gross floor area of any single commercial use shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, including indoor storage, administrative offices, and similar areas. 
E.  Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., including delivery of merchandise, restocking, and after-hours cleanup and maintenance. Hours of operation may be extended by either a development order approved by the Village Council or a response to an emergency involving the treatment of human or animal patients. 
F.  Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall not adversely affect adjacent residential uses. Parking lot light standards shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
G.  Outdoor Display and Storage. Outdoor display and storage of merchandise is prohibited, excluding outdoor display in conjunction with a general store. 
H.  Buffers. Commercial planned developments shall provide extensive landscape buffers as a means to integrate commercial uses with the predominant equestrian, residential, and agricultural uses present within the EOZD. At a minimum, buffers shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Perimeter Buffer. A perimeter buffer of at least twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided along the entire property line. 
2.  Opaque Buffer. An opaque buffer of at least five (5) feet in height shall be provided along the entire perimeter, consisting of any combination of berm, wall, or fencing. 
3.  Canopy Trees. Canopy trees shall be provided at a rate of not less than one (1) tree per twenty-five (25) feet. Trees shall be staggered along both sides of the berm, wall, or fence. Trees shall be native and representative of native vegetation of the Village. Minimum tree height shall comply with the requirements of Article 7.3. 
4.  Hedges. Hedges shall be planted at a height and number as required by Article 7.3. 
5.  Native Canopy Trees. Native canopy trees shall be provided within all parking areas at a rate of one (1) tree per eight (8) parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 6.10.12. - Stables. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is: 
1.  Protection and Enhancement. To protect and enhance the Equestrian Preservation Areas of the Village, as created by the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Preservation and Maintenance. To preserve, maintain, and enhance the equestrian community associated with the Village of Wellington. 
3.  Rural Lifestyles. To preserve, maintain, and enhance the rural lifestyle associated with the equestrian community. 
4.  Land Uses. To identify and encourage types of land uses that are supportive of the equestrian and rural character of the Equestrian Preservation Areas. 
5.  Development Patterns. To preserve, maintain, and enhance development patterns which are consistent with the overall character of the equestrian community. 
B.  Applicability and Conflicts. 
1.  Applicability. Unless otherwise specified herein, these regulations shall apply to all stables within the Village. Any stable that was issued a building permit by the Village of Wellington or Palm Beach County Building Departments prior to the passage of Ordinance 2003-02 may be built or continue to exist, as originally permitted, regardless of any prior or subsequent challenge to the validity or appropriateness of the building permit and subject only to its status as a conforming structure. No challenges to the issuance of any permit prior to the effective date of Ordinance 2003-02 regarding the size of any stable structure based on allegations the structure failed to comply with the then existing floor area regulations shall be permitted. 
2.  Conflicts. In the event of any conflicts between the requirements of this Section and other requirements of the Land Development Regulations, the requirements of this Section shall govern. In the absence of any conflict, the requirements of the underlying zoning district and the Land Development Regulations shall be applicable and supplemental to the requirements of this Section. 
C.  Effect on Previously Permitted Barns and Stables. 
1.  Conforming Structures. Stables for which a valid building permit was issues prior to the adoption of this Ordinance that do not conform to the provisions of the Ordinance shall be considered to be legal conforming structures. 
2.  Construction. Any stable permitted prior to October 8, 2002, which exceeded the restrictions on accessory structures but otherwise met the requirements of the LDR, may be constructed in accordance with the permit. Any stable constructed in accordance with such a permit shall be deemed a legal conforming structure. 
D.  Supplemental Regulations for Barns and Stables on Residential Lots. Barns and stables on residential lots within the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District shall be subject to the following limitations provided in Table E. 
Table E. 
Supplemental Regulations for Barns & Stables on Residential Lots 
Size of Lot Residential 
Unit Required (1) Square Footage 
of Stable Number 
of Stables Approval Required Less than 1/2 acre Yes 1,250 square feet/acre (2) 1 Building permit Greater than 1/2 acre, less than 1 acre Yes 1,250 square feet/acre (2) 1 Building permit Greater than 1 acre, less than 3 acres Yes 1,250 square feet/acre (2) 1 Building permit Greater than 3 acres, less than 5 acres Yes 1,250 square feet/acre (2) 1 Building permit Greater than 5 acres, less than 10 acres No Limited by FAR and lot coverage in subarea 1 Building permit Greater than 10 acres No Limited by FAR and lot coverage in subarea No limit Building permit  
Notes and Additional Standards for Affected Types of Required Approval. 
(1) For the purposes of this section, grooms quarters shall not be used to meet the requirements of a residential unit. 
(2) An administrative variance of up to fifteen (15) percent may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Manager providing the stable structure complies with all other zoning district and subarea regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
CHAPTER 11. - PALM BEACH LITTLE RANCHES OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 6.11.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    Palm Beach Little Ranches is an established residential neighborhood, with an equestrian character, located along the south side of Southern Boulevard about equal distance between State Road 7 and Forest Hill Boulevard. This neighborhood consists of three residential areas, Palm Beach Little Ranches, Palm Beach Little Ranches East, and unplatted land, which total 604 acres in size. The lot sizes are up to ten acres per lot. 
    The residents and property owners of Palm Beach Little Ranches have assisted in the development of this overlay zoning district to help preserve the unique character of their community. Therefore, the purpose and intent of the Palm Beach Little Ranches Overlay Zoning District is: 
A.  Establish regulations. To establish land development regulations that implement the community vision and values established in the Village Charter and the "Equestrian Element" of the Village of Wellington's Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Preservation. To preserve the rural character and lifestyle of the Palm Beach Little Ranches community, and provide guidelines for the future. 
C.  Existing development. To preserve and maintain the existing residential and equestrian development patterns within this neighborhood. 
Sec. 6.11.2. - Applicability and Conflicts. 
    The regulations of this section shall apply to all land located within the residential neighborhood known as Palm Beach Little Ranches, which is generally bounded on the north by the C-51 canal, on the east by the east Village limits, on the south by the C-28 canal, and on the west by the east plat line of Pinewood East No. of Wellington plat. 
    In the event of any conflict between the regulations of this section and the other regulations in the Land Development Regulations, the regulations of this section shall govern. In the absence of any conflict, the regulations in the underlying zoning district and the Land Development Regulations shall be applicable and supplement the regulations in this section. 
    The provisions of this Article and any amendments hereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully-approved development order approved prior to August 27, 2002, if the development order remains in effect. Issuance of subsequent development orders shall be based on the minimum requirements of this Article; provided, however, that a complete application for development approval received prior to August 27, 2002, shall be reviewed using the criteria that existed on the date of the applications. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any request to modify any development order or permit; however, only the area directly affected by the proposed modification shall be subject to the provisions of this Article. 
Sec. 6.11.3. - Permitted, Conditional and Special uses. 
A.  Uses. The uses allowed within the Palm Beach Little Ranches Overlay Zoning District are limited to those uses set forth in Table 6.11-1 below. Any use not listed in Table 6.11-1 is prohibited. The regulations in this section shall govern if there are any conflicts between this section and other regulations in the Land Development Regulations. 
Table 6.11-1
Permitted, Conditional & Special Uses 
Uses Palm Beach Little Ranches Notes* Accessory dwelling P 1 Agriculture bona fide P 6 Air curtain incinerator, temporary S 8 Airplane landing strip, accessory C 10 Aviculture A - Restricted to a maximum of 200 birds 19 Bed and breakfast S - No signage allowed 20 Church or place of worship P 26 Congregate living facility, Type 1 P 30 Family day care center (five or fewer children) P - No signage allowed 34 Equestrian instructional services P Equestrian arena, private D Equestrian uses, seasonal S Garage, yard or rummage sale P 52 Government services - municipal D 54 Government services - non-municipal D 54 Grooms quarters P 55 Guest cottage P 57 Home occupation P - Occupational license required 60 Kennel, private D 64 Livestock raising D - No pigs 67 Mobile home dwelling S - During construction of a single-family home 73 Nursery, wholesale D 78 Park, public P 83 Shadehouse, accessory P 101 Single-family dwelling P 102 Stable, commercial D 104 Stable, private P 105 Storage, indoor agricultural P 107 Storage, outdoor agricultural P 107 Utility, minor P 111 Vehicle repair & related services, mobile minor P 113 Veterinary clinic D 114 Water or wastewater treatment plant C 117  
;adv=qp; Key: 
P = Permitted Use 
S = Special Use 
D = Permitted subject to Site Plan Approval by Development Review Committee 
A = Conditional Use, Class A (Approval required by the Village Council) 
* NOTES are contained in Section 6.4.4 of the Village's Land Development Regulations 
B.  Supplemental use regulations. The following supplemental use regulations shall apply to the uses listed in Table 6.11-1 above. 
1.  Aviculture. The maximum number of birds shall be restricted to two hundred (200) birds. 
2.  Family day care. The maximum number of children shall be limited to five (5) as governed by Florida Statues. No exterior signage shall be allowed. 
3.  Livestock. Allowable livestock shall not include pigs. 
4.  Mobile home dwelling. One (1) mobile home dwelling per lot shall be allowed only during the construction of a single-family residence. Construction shall be defined as the time between the issuance of a Building Permit to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or to the revocation of a Building Permit. All applicable permits and licenses for a mobile home shall be required. A Special Permit from the Village shall be required and shall be valid for one (1) year in accordance with the Village's regulations for such permits. 
5.  Development applications requesting approval for the above uses may be submitted by facsimile to the Village's Planning, Zoning and Building Department. 
Sec. 6.11.4. - Density and Lot Size Requirements. 
    The maximum density and minimum lot size requirements for property within Palm Beach Little Ranches are established in Table 6.11-2 below. 
Table 6.11-2
Density & Lot Size Requirements 
Maximum density Minimum lot size Cluster Development 0.2 dwelling units per acre (one (1) dwelling unit per five (5) acres) Five (5) acres Prohibited  
Sec. 6.11.5. - Development Standards. 
    All development within Palm Beach Little Ranches shall comply with the Development standards set forth in Table 6.11-3 below. 
Table 6.11-3
Development standards for Principal and Accessory Uses 
Minimum lot width 300 feet Minimum lot depth 300 feet Floor area ratio 15% Maximum building height 35 feet Maximum lot coverage 20% or as otherwise provided in a current and 
valid development order.  
Sec. 6.11.6. - Minimum Building Setbacks. 
A.  Building setbacks. The minimum building setbacks indicated in Table 6.11-4 shall apply to all principal and accessory buildings and structures, except as exempted in paragraph 6.11.6.2 below. 
B.  Exemptions. There are no required setbacks for equestrian amenities, excluding dressage walls. 
Table 6.11-4
Minimum Building Setbacks for Principal and Accessory Uses 
Setback Area Principal Building 
or Structure Accessory Building 
or Structure Front 50 feet 100 feet Side, interior 25 feet 25 feet Side, corner 50 feet 25 feet Rear 25 feet 25 feet - conforming lots Rear 25 feet 15 feet - nonconforming lots  
Sec. 6.11.7. - Supplemental Zoning Regulations. 
A.  Temporary residences. The use of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers or similar vehicles as a temporary residence within Palm Beach Little Ranches is permitted, but shall not to exceed two consecutive weeks. 
B.  Dressage walls. Dressage walls are regulated by sub-sections 6.10.9.B of this Code. 
C.  Fences. 
1.  Wire fences, including hog fences, galvanized chain-link and vinyl-covered, chain-link fences are permitted. Such fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height in all setback areas. A wire or chain-link fence must be screened by the use of a three (3) board fence or a four (4) board fence. The wire or chain-link fence shall be attached to the board fence. 
2.  Prohibited fence materials. The use of barbed wire or razor wire is prohibited. 
Sec. 6.11.8. - Use of Tents as Temporary Stalls. 
    As of June 1, 2003, temporary tents shall not be permitted in Palm Beach Little Ranches except as allowed by this subsection. Tents may be permitted, for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months, during the period a building permit for a permanent barn or stable has been issued and construction is actively proceeding. Any tents shall be removed within one (1) week of the receipt of certificate of occupancy or the revocation of a building permit. 
Sec. 6.11.9. - Horse Trailers. 
    Parking of horse trailers anywhere in Palm Beach Little Ranches shall be permitted, subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Prohibited parking. Horse trailers may not be parked in roadway or canal rights-of-way or easements, or in a required setback area. 
B.  Screening. When feasible, horse trailers shall be screened from adjacent public rights-of-way by landscaping or buildings. 
Sec. 6.11.10. - Bridle Trails and Easements. 
    To implement the Equestrian Path Circulations System adopted on the "Future Land Use Map" of the Comprehensive Plan, the Village may require dedication of bridle path easements as part of development or similar approval within Palm Beach Little Ranches. The requirement for such dedication shall not have the effect of reducing density or intensity of development to which a property owner would be entitled if the dedication was not required, or cause an increase in a required front, side interior, side corner, or rear setback area. 
Sec. 6.11.11. - Vegetation Removal and Tree Protection. 
    Vegetation removal and tree protection within Palm Beach Little Ranches shall be regulated by Article 7 of the Village's Land Development Regulations. However, the removal of dead, diseased or invasive, non-native trees in this overlay district shall not require a Village permit. 
[Ord. No. 2003-12; June 24, 2003; Sec. 6.11] 
CHAPTER 12. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2014, repealed Ch. 12, §§ 6.12.1-6.12.4, which pertained to temporary suspension of the prohibitions of the use of tents as stalls within certain areas of the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District and derived from Ord. No. 2005-22, § 1, adopted Nov. 29, 2005. 

Sec. 6.12.1-6.12.4. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 13. - RUSTIC RANCHES OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT (RROZD) 

Sec. 6.13.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    Rustic Ranches is an established residential neighborhood, with a rural, equestrian character, located along the west side of Flying Cow Road approximately one (1) mile south of Southern Boulevard (State Road 80). The neighborhood is compromised of approximately 638.9 acres of which lot sizes are mainly five (5) acres in size, however there are a few ten (10) acre lots. 
    The residents and property owners of Rustic Ranches have developed this overlay zoning district to help preserve the unique character of their community. Therefore, the purpose and intent of the Rustic Ranches Overlay Zoning District is: 
1.  Establishment of land development regulations. To establish land development regulations that implement the community vision and values established in the Village Charter and the "Equestrian Element" of the Village of Wellington's Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Preservation of character and lifestyle. To preserve the rural character and lifestyle of the Rustic Ranches community, and collectively determine guidelines for the future. 
3.  Preservation of land uses. To preserve and maintain the existing mix of land use patterns within this neighborhood. 
4.  Incorporation of "declaration of restrictions". To the extent practicable, to incorporate the provisions of the "Declaration of Restrictions" for the neighborhood known as Rustic Ranches into the neighborhood plan and the Rustic Ranches Overlay Zoning District. 
5.  Inclusion within the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District. To make Rustic Ranches a part of the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District (EOZD). 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.2. - Applicability and conflicts. 
1.  Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply to all land located within the residential neighborhood known as Rustic Ranches, which is generally located within and consists of Section 13, Township 44 South, Range 40 East of Palm Beach County. 
2.  Conflicts. In the event of any conflict between the regulations of this Chapter and the other regulations in the Land Development Regulations (LDRs), the regulations of this Chapter shall govern. In the absence of any conflict, the regulations in the underlying zoning district, the EOZD and the Land Development Regulations shall be applicable and supplement the regulations in this Chapter. 
3.  Effect on existing development orders. The provisions of this Chapter and any amendments hereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully-approved development order approved prior to October 1, 2005, so long as the development order remains in effect. Issuance of subsequent development orders shall be based on the minimum requirements of this Chapter. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any request to modify any development order or permit; however, only the area directly affected by the proposed modification shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.3. - Permitted, conditional and special uses. 
1.  Allowable uses. The uses allowed within the RROZD are limited to those uses set forth in Table 6.13-1 below. Any use not listed in Table 6.13-1 is prohibited. 
Table 6.13-1 
Use Regulations Schedule 
Uses Development 
Review 
Procedure Notes* Accessory dwelling P 1 Agriculture, bona fide P 6 Air curtain incinerator, temporary S 8 Equestrian instructional services P 60 Equestrian arena, private D 41 Equestrian uses, seasonal S Grooms quarters P 55 Guest cottage P 57 Home occupation P 60 Kennel, private D 64 Mobile home dwelling S 73 and as provided in Sec. 6.13.6.2.A Nursery, wholesale D 78 Shadehouse, accessory P 101 Single-family dwelling P 102 Stable, commercial D 104 Stable, private P 105 Storage, indoor agricultural P 107 Storage, outdoor agricultural P 107 Utility, minor P 111 Veterinary clinic B 114  
KEY 
B = Conditional Use Class B (Review by PZAB) 
D = Permitted subject to Site Plan Approval by DRC 
S = Special Use 
P = Permitted Use 
* See Chapter 4, Article 6 of the LDRs for applicable notes. 
2.  Supplemental use regulations. The following supplemental use regulations shall apply to the uses listed in Table 6.13-1 above. 
A.  Mobile home dwelling. The following regulations shall apply to mobile homes within Rustic Ranches. 
1.  Mobile homes as a primary residential structure. For lots on which the primary residential structure is a mobile home as of the effective date of this ordinance, the property owner shall have not more than twelve (12) months from the effective date to obtain a building permit for a permanent residential structure. 
2.  Ability to use a Mobile home if a valid building permit has been issued. 
(a).  One (1) mobile home dwelling per lot shall be allowed only during the construction of a single-family residence. Construction shall be defined as the time between the issuance of a building permit to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or to the revocation of a building permit. All applicable permits and licenses for a mobile home shall be required. A special permit from the Village shall be required and shall be valid for one year in accordance with the Village's regulations for such permits. 
(b).  A property owner shall have thirty-six (36) months to complete the permanent structure after obtaining a building permit. At the end of the thirty-six (36) months, the mobile home shall be removed. The Director may issue one extension, of not more than ninety (90) days, to allow completion of a permanent residential structure. 
3.  Removal of mobile home if building permit not received. A property owner shall remove the mobile home within twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance if a permit for a permanent residential structure is not issued by the Village. 
B.  Outdoor agricultural storage. Outdoor agricultural storage shall not include any noxious or offensive odors or materials nor shall it include waste, refuse, garbage, or debris. 
C.  Temporary residences. The use of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers or similar vehicles as a temporary residence within Rustic Ranches is permitted, but shall not exceed two (2) consecutive weeks during a calendar year. 
3.  Exempt Uses. Any use that legally exists as of the effective date of this Ordinance is exempt from the DRC process requirement as indicated in Table 6.13-1. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.4. - Supplemental Regulations. 
    The requirements of this section shall apply to all uses within the RROZD. 
1.  Fences. 
A.  Permitted fences. Wire fences, including hog fences, galvanized chain link and vinyl-covered, chain-link fences are permitted. Such fences shall not exceed five (5) feet in height along the front of the lot and six (6) feet in height in all other areas. A wire or chain link fence must be screened by the use of a three (3) rail fence or a rail board fence. The wire or chain-link fence shall be attached to the rail fence. 
B.  Prohibited fence materials. The use of barbed wire or razor wire is prohibited. To the extent any barbed wire or razor wire is currently, such wire must be entirely replaced or removed by January 1, 2009. No repairs or replacements of portions of the existing prohibited fence can be made with prohibited materials. 
2.  Horse trailers. 
A.  Horse Tractors and Trailers. The parking of tractors and trailers utilized solely for equestrian purposes within the RROZD shall be permitted, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  One unscreened horse tractor and trailer may be parked adjacent to a barn or stable on an individual lot, provided that the horse tractor and trailer may not be parked between the front plane of the primary structure and the roadway easement or right-of-way. 
2.  Additional horse trailers may be kept provided that: 
a.  The additional trailers shall be completely screened from the view of adjacent roadways and private properties. 
b.  The screened parking area meets the accessory structure setbacks listed on Table 6.13-4 of this Chapter. 
3.  Temporary parking of horse tractors and trailers on site for instructional, show, or other site specific uses shall be allowed, provided that said temporary parking is not overnight, and trailers are not parked in rights-of-way or easements. 
3.  Prohibited uses. 
A.  Semi-tractors and trailers. 
1.  The parking of all commercially related semi-tractors and trailers is prohibited within the RROZD, excluding horse trailers and tractors as provided herein. 
2.  The use of all commercially related semi-tractors and trailers, mobile homes, or similar structures or vehicles for storage is prohibited within the RROZD. 
3.  All storage structures prohibited herein, but existing as of the effective date of this ordinance, shall be removed within twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance. 
4.  All storage structures shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Chapter, the EOZD, the LDRs and the Florida Building Code. 
4.  Existing uses. 
A.  Legally established uses. Any legally established existing use within the RROZD that does not comply with the requirements of Table 6.13-1 shall remain as a legal nonconforming use and is not subject to development review as provided in Table 6.13-1. Any legal nonconforming use shall be subject to the requirements of Article 1, Chapter 6 of these LDRs. 
B.  Illegal uses. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, any illegal use existing as of the effective date of this ordinance shall remain an illegal use and is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.5. - Density and lot size requirements. 
    The maximum density and minimum lot size requirements for property within Rustic Ranches are established in Table 6.13-2 below. 
Table 6.13-2.
Density and Lot Size Requirements 
Maximum Density Minimum Lot Size One dwelling unit per five acres Five acres  
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.6. - Property development standards. 
    All development within the RROZD shall comply with the property development standards set forth in Table 6.13-3 below. 
Table 6.13-3.
Development Standards for Principal and Accessory Uses 
Development Standard Minimum Requirements Minimum lot width 300 feet Minimum lot depth 300 feet Maximum floor area ratio 15% of lot area Maximum building height 35 feet Maximum lot coverage 20% of lot area or as otherwise provided in a current and valid development order  
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 6.13.7. - Building setbacks. 
1.  Minimum building setbacks. The minimum building setbacks indicated in Table 6.13-4 shall apply to all principal and accessory buildings and structures. 
2.  Exemption for equestrian amenities. There are no required setbacks for equestrian amenities, excluding dressage walls. 
Table 6.13-4.
Minimum Building Setbacks for Principal and Accessory Uses 
Setback Area Principal Building 
or Structure Accessory Building 
or Structure Front 100 feet 100 feet Side, interior 50 feet 25 feet Side, corner 80 feet 25 feet Rear, conforming lots 100 feet 25 feet Rear, non conforming lots 100 feet 15 feet  
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.8. - Vegetation removal and tree protection. 
A.  Notification of native tree removal. Vegetation removal of native tree species on residential properties within Rustic Ranches shall be required to notify the Village's Planning and Zoning Department by facsimile or in person. However, the removal of dead, diseased or invasive, non-native trees in this overlay district shall not require notification. 
B.  Removal of Non-native species. Florida Holly or other similar non-native species shall be removed if adjacent to and directly affecting an abutting property and when adjacent to or within a swale or drainage area within twenty-four (24) months of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
C.  Exception. Commercial nurseries within the RROZD are not subject to requirements for obtaining a vegetation removal permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 6.13.9. - Incorporation into the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District. 
    The Rustic Ranches Neighborhood is hereby incorporated into and made a part of Sub Area E of the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 2-14-2006; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 9-10-2013) 
Article 7 - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 7.1.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to provide site development standards for development in The Village to ensure adequate landscaping and protection of the natural environment, to encourage design consistency, to ensure uncongested roads, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of The Village. 
Sec. 7.1.2. - Authority. 
    The Village Council has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to Art VIII, Sec. 1, Fla. Const, Sec. 125.01 et. seq., Fla. Stat., and Sec. 163.3161 et. seq., Fla. Stat. 
CHAPTER 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 7.2.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure that off-street parking, off-street loading, queuing and on-site circulation is provided in proportion to the density and intensity of the site. The intent is also to ensure that the facilities are functionally adequate, aesthetically pleasing and operationally safe. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 10-27-2015) 
Sec. 7.2.2. - Applicability. 
    The standards of this chapter shall apply to all development within the Village, or existing development that is modified to the extent that it includes an addition or enlargement not specifically shown on previously approved plans. All off-street parking areas established by this chapter shall be continuously maintained according to the standards of this chapter. 
A.  New buildings. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided for any new building constructed. 
B.  Additions and enlargements. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided for any addition to or enlargement of an existing building. The additional parking and loading spaces shall be required only in proportionate to the extent of the addition, or enlargement, not for the entire building. 
C.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Table 7.2-1. 
TABLE 7.2-1 
MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS 
Use Parking Standard Residential Single-family and multi-family residential Two (2) spaces per unit and units with four (4) or more bedrooms require one (1) additional parking space per bedroom. Multi-family shall provide 0.25 quest parking spaces per unit for all dwelling units. Congregate living facilities, Type 1, 2, 3 and 4 One (1) space per unit or two (2) beds whichever is greater; and one (1) space per peak shift employee or one (1) space per 200 square feet of office whichever is greater; Type 3 and 4 shall provide drop off space within 100 feet of the primary building entrance Public, Civic and Recreational (Outdoor) Athletic field One (1) space per four (4) bleacher seats or 30 spaces per field, whichever is greater Church or place of worship One (1) space per three (3) seats (schools and gyms calculated separately) Clubhouse 1 space per 500 square feet of air conditioned use College or university, vocational school One (1) space per two (2) students (maximum enrollment) 
One (1) space per four (4) seats in gymnasiums and auditoriums 
One (1) space per 300 square feet of administrative and educational office space Golf course Four (4) spaces per hole; plus 1 space per 200 square feet of clubhouse Government services One (1) space per three (3) seats of public assembly room or one (1) space per 500 square feet, whichever is greater School, elementary One (1) space per classroom, plus one (1) space per 200 square feet not accounted for in class or hall areas; School, secondary 0.25 per student, plus one (1) per 200 square feet not accounted for in class or hall areas; Tennis courts 1.5 spaces per court Commercial Arena, auditorium, entertainment, theater, public assembly or stadium One (1) space per 200 square feet of use area or one (1) space per three (3) seats whichever is greater and appropriate for the use; plus 1 space per employee (Accessory uses shall be calculated separately) Automotive service, repair or restoration One (1) space 200 square feet, plus two (2) spaces per repair bay Bowling alley Two (2) spaces per lane, plus One (1) space per 200 square feet of non-bowling area Day care center 
 Capacity 6 to 99 
 Capacity 100 or more   
One (1) space per five (5) persons; plus one (1) drop off stall per 20 persons 
One (1) space per 10 persons; plus one (1) drop off stall per 10 persons Entertainment, indoor One (1) space per 200 square feet or one (1) space per three (3) seats whichever is greater Events or special use One (1) space per four (4) seats or one (1) space per three (3) attendees (as approved for event) whichever is greater Hospital or medical center 1.5 spaces per two (2) beds, plus one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) Hotel or motel 1.25 spaces per guest room; (convention areas, restaurants, etc. totaling over 1,500 square feet shall be calculated separately); plus 1 space per employee Nursing or convalescent facility One (1) space per four (4) beds, plus one (1) space per 200 square feet of office Office One (1) space per 200 square feet; Restaurant or lounge One (1) space per three (3) seats including outdoor seating; Retail One (1) space per 200 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) for centers up to 500,000 square feet; 1 space per 200 square feet of gross leasable area (GLA) for centers over 500,0000 SF Agricultural Agricultural research and development 10 spaces or 1 space per 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater Nursery, retail One (1) space per 500 square feet of indoor or covered retail or office areas plus one (1) space per four (4) acres if the nursery is 20 acres or less, or one (1) space per five (5) acres if the nursery is greater than 20 acres Nursery, wholesale One (1) space per four (4) acres if the nursery is 20 acres or less, or one (1) space per five (5) acres if the nursery is greater than 20 acres Stable Four (4) or fewer stalls: No required parking 
Five (5)-100 stalls: One (1) space per three (3) stalls 
101+ stalls: One (1) space per two (2) stalls 
All parking provided for stalls shall be available at all times. Industrial Manufacturing and processing Two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of first 10,000 square feet; plus one (1) space per 1,000 square feet over 10,000 square feet Contractors or storage yard One (1) space per 500 square feet; plus one (1) space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor storage Self-service storage facility One (1) space per 200 storage bays, plus one (1) space per 200 square feet of office with a minimum of 5 customer spaces; Warehouse/wholesale One (1) space per 2,000 square feet, plus one (1) space per 200 square feet of office or sales area  
D.  Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for all development and/or use if determined appropriate by the Development Review Committee (DRC). All schools, public tennis courts, restaurants and office use shall provide bicycle parking facilities. Bicycle parking space shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space per 2,000 square feet of floor area or three (3) seats, whichever is greater; with a minimum of two (2) spaces required. A maximum of 10 spaces shall be required for a single use, excluding schools. The bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 50 feet of the primary building entrance or use. An alternative location maybe utilized if more convenient for the uses they are intended to serve, in high pedestrian traffic area and easily accessible as determined by DRC. The bicycle parking facilities shall be of the same quality, character and color of other site amenities within the development. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 3, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 10-27-2015) 
Sec. 7.2.3. - Off-street parking. 
A.  Computing parking standards. 
1.  Multiple uses. On lots containing more than one (1) use, the total number of required off-street parking spaces shall be equal to the sum of the required parking for each use as if provided separately, unless a shared parking is approved pursuant to Section 7.2.3.H (Shared parking). 
2.  Fractions. When calculation of required off-street parking spaces results in a fractional number, any such fractional space shall require a full off-street parking space (rounded up). 
3.  Floor area. Off-street parking and loading standards that are based on square footage shall be computed using gross floor area (GFA), unless another measurement is specified. 
4.  Bench seating. When the calculation of required parking spaces is based on the number of seats, each 22 linear inches of bench, pew, or similar bench seating facility shall be considered one (1) seat. 
5.  Unlisted land uses. In the event that off-street parking standards for a particular use are not listed in this section, the standards for the most similar use shall be applied or one space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area. In making the determination, any evidence of actual parking demand for uses shall be considered as well as other reliable traffic engineering and planning information that is available. 
B.  Location of required parking. Except as provided in Section 7.2.3.H (Shared parking), Section 7.2.3.1 (Off-site parking) and Section 7.2.3.K (Valet parking), all required off-street parking, except for fee simple developments with common parking lots, shall be provided upon the same lot as the principal use. The location of required off-street parking spaces shall not interfere with normal traffic flow or with the operation of queuing and backup areas. Loading areas shall not obstruct pedestrian pathways. 
1.  Distance from building or use. Unless otherwise provided in this section, no on-site parking space shall be located more than 600 feet from the building or use it is intended to serve. This standard shall not apply to parking spaces provided for auditoriums, stadiums, assembly halls, gymnasiums, and other places of assembly, nor shall it apply to hospitals, large-scale retail, wholesale, and consumer service uses of over 500,000 square feet or industrial, wholesaling or manufacturing establishments. 
2.  Buffers and rights-of-way. There shall be no parking or storing of vehicles in the landscape buffer or the existing or ultimate right-of-way of an abutting street. 
3.  Sidewalk access for rear parking. There shall be no parking of automobiles at the rear of a structure unless a public pedestrian walk connects it to the front of the structure or there exists an entrance to store in the rear. The pedestrian path or sidewalk shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width, clearly marked, well lighted and unobstructed. 
4.  Garages and carports. Space within a carport or garage may be used to satisfy residential off-street parking standards, provided that no building permit shall be issued to convert a carport or garage to a living area without provision of required off-street parking spaces in the driveway or in a common parking lot. 
C.  Use of required off-street parking areas. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the use of residents, customers, patrons and employees. Required parking spaces shall specifically not be used for the storage, sale or display of goods or materials or for the sale, repair, or servicing of vehicles. All vehicles parked within off-street parking areas shall be registered and capable of moving under their own power. Required parking areas shall not be used by delivery vehicles. Required off-street parking spaces shall be free from building encroachments. A portion of the required parking area may be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Special events/uses. Required off-street parking areas may be used on a temporary basis pursuant to a special use issued by the Planning Director or Council pursuant to Article 5; or 
2.  Recyclable materials collection bins. Required off-street parking areas may be occupied by recyclable materials collection bins that have been approved as a special use. The bin shall retain its mobility and shall not occupy more than five (5) percent of the total on-site parking spaces. The bin and adjacent area shall be maintained in good appearance, free from trash. 
D.  Parking fees. Except as provided in Section 7.2.3.K (Valet parking) and Section 7.2.3.0 (Public, private or commercial lots), a fee or other form of compensation shall not be charged for the use of required off-street parking spaces. Fees may be charged for the use of parking spaces that have been provided in excess of minimum standards. 
E.  Motorcycle parking. For any nonresidential use providing 50 or more spaces, a maximum of three (3) required off-street parking spaces may be reduced in size and redesigned to accommodate motorcycle parking. When provided, motorcycle parking shall be identified by a sign. 
F.  Handicapped parking. The provision of handicapped parking spaces and passenger loading zones shall be governed by Secs. 316.1955, 316.1956, and 553.48, Fla. Stat., or as amended. These sections shall govern the minimum number, signage, identification and reservation of spaces for the handicapped. All required signs shall include the language, "$250 fine for violators." All handicapped parking spaces shall be paved. A portion of the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces may be used to satisfy the handicapped parking space standards. 
G.  Guest parking. Guest parking spaces where required, may be grouped, provided that the spaces are located within 300 feet of the dwellings that they are intended to serve. Guest parking may be grassed, as provided in Section 7.2.3.J (grassed parking), except that no permit is required. Each space shall be provided with wheelstops, except for grassed guest parking, or parking which is designed as parallel parking. All guest parking shall be prominently identified with an above-grade sign or marking on the wheelstop. 
H.  Shared parking. The Development Review Committee may authorize a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for multiple use developments or for uses that are located near one another and which have different peak parking demands and operating hours. Shared parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Application. In addition to the application information for development permit for Site Plan, the applicant shall submit additional information for shared parking; 
2.  Location. All uses which use shared parking shall be located on the same lot or on contiguous lots. 
3.  Shared parking study. A shared parking study shall be submitted which shall: 
a.  Be based on the Urban Land Institute's methodology for determining shared parking or other generally accepted methodology; 
b.  Address the size and type of activities and the anticipated peak parking and traffic demands; 
c.  Provide for reduction of paved area by not more than 50 percent of the combined parking required for each use under Section 7.2.2.C, 
d.  Provide for no reduction in the number of required handicapped spaces; 
e.  Provide a plan to convert reserved space for future required parking spaces pursuant to Section 7.2.2.C.; and 
f.  Be approved by the Village Engineer based on the feasibility of the uses to share parking due to their particular peak parking and trip generation characteristics. 
4.  Reserved space. The applicant shall account for 100% of the reduction granted through one (1) of the following alternatives: reserved area; future parking garage; future rooftop garage; off-site parking or limitation of uses to adhere to parking regulations. This area shall not be used for on-site retention of storm-water runoff nor shall it be used to satisfy the landscaping and buffering standards. Preservation areas designated and protected by any government shall not be used to satisfy the reserve standard. The reserved space, shall be landscaped and maintained to present an orderly appearance. 
5.  Agreement for shared parking. A shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement or through unity of control. An attested copy of the agreement between the owner(s) of record and the Village shall be submitted to the Planning Director who shall forward a copy to the Village Attorney for review. The agreement shall be recorded in the deed records of Palm Beach County by the owner of record and proof of recordation shall be presented to the Planning Director prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  List the names and ownership interest of all parties to the agreement and contain the signatures of those parties; 
b.  Provide a legal description of the land; 
c.  Include a site plan showing the area of the shared parking and reserved space for future parking; 
d.  Describe the parking area and designate and reserve it for shared parking unencumbered by any conditions which would interfere with its use; 
e.  Agree and expressly declare the intent for the agreement to run with the land and bind all parties and all successors in interest to the agreement; 
f.  Assure the continued availability of the spaces for shared use and provide assurance that all spaces will be usable without charge to all participating uses; 
g.  Describe the obligations of each party, including the maintenance responsibility to retain and develop reserved space for additional parking if the need arises; 
h.  Incorporate the shared parking study by reference; 
i.  Be made part of the Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan; and 
j.  Describe the method by which the agreement shall, if necessary, be revised. 
6.  Change in use. Should any of the shared parking uses be changed, or should the Planning Director find that any of the conditions described in the approved shared parking study and/or agreement no longer exist, the owner of record shall have the option of submitting a revised shared parking study in accordance with the standards of this section or of providing the number of spaces required for each use separately. 
I.  Off-site parking. The Development Review Committee may permit all or a portion of the required parking spaces to be located on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located. Off-site parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Necessity. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not feasible to locate all of the required parking on the same lot as the principal use; 
2.  Ineligible activities. Off-site parking shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards for restaurants, lounges, convenience stores and other convenience-oriented uses. Required handicapped parking spaces shall not be located in an off-site parking facility; 
3.  Future Land Use Map Classification. Off-site parking areas shall require the same or a more intensive Future Land Use Map classification than that required for the use served; 
4.  Agreement for off-site parking. In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a written agreement or unity of control shall be required. An attested copy of the agreement among the owners of record shall be submitted to the Planning Director who shall forward a copy to the Village Attorney for review. The agreement shall be filed in the deed records of the County by the owner of record. Proof of recordation of the agreement shall be presented to the Planning Director. The agreement shall: 
a.  List the names and ownership interest of all parties to the agreement and contain the signatures of those parties; 
b.  Provide a legal description of the land; 
c.  Include a site plan showing the area of the use and parking parcel; 
d.  Expressly declare the intent for the covenant to run with the land and bind all parties and all successors in interest to the covenant; 
e.  Assure the continued availability of the spaces and provide assurance that all spaces will be usable without charge; 
f.  Describe the obligations of each party, including the maintenance responsibility; 
g.  Require that the Planning Director be notified prior to the expiration or termination of an off-site parking lease agreement; 
h.  Be made part of the Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan; and 
i.  Describe the method by which the covenant shall, if necessary, be revised. 
5.  Signs. One sign shall be located at the off-site parking facility indicating the use that it serves, and one sign shall be located on the site of the use served, indicating the location of the off-site parking facility. 
J.  Grassed parking. Grassed parking may be permitted if approved by the Village Engineer, pursuant to the following procedures and standards: 
1.  Application. In addition to the application information for development permit for Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan, the applicant shall submit the following: 
a.  A written statement of and a site plan showing the area proposed for grassed parking and the proposed method of traffic control to direct vehicular flow and parking; 
b.  A written statement that the parking area proposed for grassed parking shall be used for parking no more than three (3) days or nights each week or on an irregular, intermittent or part-time basis of no more than 45 days within a period of four consecutive months within a 12-month period. This information shall contain the proposed hours and days of the expected use of the grassed parking and the expected average daily traffic and peak hour traffic counts, as calculated by a professional engineer qualified to perform such studies; 
c.  Description of the method to ensure that the grassed parking surface will be maintained in its entirety with a viable turf cover; 
d.  A conceptual drainage plan for the entire parking area; and 
e.  A description of the soil type of the area proposed for grassed parking. 
2.  Standards. The following standards shall apply to grassed parking: 
a.  Only parking spaces provided for peak demand may be approved as grassed parking. Paved parking shall be provided for average daily traffic, including employees and visitors; 
b.  A grassed parking area shall not include any existing or proposed landscaped area, surface water management area or easement other than a utility easement; 
c.  Handicapped parking shall not be located within a grassed parking area. Paved walkway shall be provided from any handicapped parking space to the building, structure or use it is intended to serve; 
d.  Grassed parking areas shall meet minimum landscaping requirements of subsection O and 
e.  Within grassed parking areas, all access aisles shall either: (a) be paved and meet the same substructural and surface standards as paved asphaltic parking surfaces; or (b) be surfaced with paver block, or other semi-pervious coverage approved by the Village Engineer. 
3.  Permit. If at any time prior to the approved expiration date of the development order, it is determined that a grassed parking area does not meet the standards established in this section, the Planning Director shall require the restoration of the grassed surface or the paving of the grass for parking. The owner/applicant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all grassed vehicle use areas. Grassed parking areas shall be maintained so as to present a neat appearance and to ensure a viable and healthy grassed surface. In the event of the deterioration of a grassed parking surface, the Village may require the full restoration of the parking facility to Village standards. 
4.  Regulatory treatment of grassed parking areas. All surface parking areas, grassed or otherwise, shall be considered impervious paved surface for the purpose of determining tertiary drainage system flow capacity and secondary stormwater management system runoff treatment/control requirements. 
K.  Valet parking. Valet parking may be used upon any lot to satisfy off-street parking standards. The design of valet parking shall not cause customers who do not use the valet service to park off-premise or in the right-of-way or cause queuing in the right-of-way. The following standards shall apply to valet parking. 
1.  Maximum number of reserved spaces. No more than 50 percent of the required off-street parking spaces may be reserved for valet parking. 
2.  Location of reserved valet spaces. Off-street parking spaces reserved for valet parking may be located anywhere on-site, except that handicapped parking spaces shall be the spaces located closest to the nearest accessible entrance of the building that the parking spaces are intended to serve. 
L.  Parking area design and construction standards. 
1.  Dimensions and geometries. The dimensions and geometries of off-street parking areas shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
i.  All uses shall provide parking spaces that have minimum widths of nine and one-half (9.5) feet and governed by Table 7.2-2. 
ii.  Handicapped parking. All spaces marked and reserved for use by persons with disabilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of Secs. 316.1955, 316.1956 and 553.48, Fla. Stat. 
iii.  Queuing distance. A minimum queuing distance of 20 feet is required between the property line and the first parking space. 
iv.  Parallel parking. Parallel parking spaces shall have minimum lengths of 23 feet and minimum widths of 10 feet. 
v.  Measuring parking space width. Where double striping is used to mark spaces, parking space width shall be measured from the centerline of one set of stripes to the centerline of the corresponding set of stripes. 
TABLE 7.2-2 
MINIMUM PARKING BAY DIMENSIONS 
A 
Angle B 
Space 
Width 
(feet) C 
Space 
Depth 
(feet) D 
Aisle 
Width 
(feet) E 
Curb 
Length 
(feet) F 
Wall-to-Wall Width 
(feet) G 
Interlock-to Interlock Width 
(feet) H 
Space 
Depth to 
Interlock 
(feet) 45 9.5 17.5 12.0 13.5 47.0 43.0 15.5 12.0 17.5 12.0 17.0 47.0 43.0 15.5 60 9.5 19.0 15.0 11.0 54.0 50.0 17.5 12.0 19.0 14.0 14.0 53.0 49.0 17.5 70 9.5 19.5 18.0 10.0 57.0 55.0 18.5 12.0 19.5 17.0 12.5 56.0 54.0 18.5 75 9.5 19.5 22.0 10.0 61.0 59.0 18.5 12.0 19.5 21.0 12.5 60.0 58.0 18.5 80 9.5 19.5 23.0 9.5 62.0 61.0 19.0 12.0 19.5 22.0 12.0 61.0 60.0 19.0 90 9.5 18.5 25.0 9.5 62.0 62.0 18.5 12.0 18.5 24.0 12.0 61.0 61.0 18.5  
Note: 
1) Dimensional requirements for parking spaces vary depending on the angle of parking provided. 
Figure 7.2-1
Parking Space Schematic

Figure 7.2-2
Parallel Parking Dimensional Standard and Marking Option

2.  Construction and design of parking area. 
a.  General on-site circulation standards. 
i.  There shall be safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian pathways, bikeways, parking aisles, driveways, and off-street parking and loading spaces within parking areas. 
ii.  The materials used for paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls, fences, curbs and benches shall be of good appearance and maintained. 
iii.  Parking lots shall be maintained in a safe operating condition and manner. 
b.  Pedestrian circulation. 
i.  Structures, vehicular circulation lanes, parking spaces, driveways, and open spaces shall be designed to provide logical, impediment free pedestrian movement. The site shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic. 
ii.  Paved, landscaped or comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from building entrances to streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings. 
iii.  Where off-street parking spaces directly face a structure, and are not separated by an access aisle from the structure, a paved pedestrian walkway shall be provided between the front of the parking space and the structure. The walkway shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide, exclusive of vehicle overhang, and shall be separated from the parking space by concrete wheel stops or continuous curbing. Residential vehicular use areas are exempt from this standard. 
c.  Paving and drainage design. 
i.  Review and approval by Village Engineer. The drainage design shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer before a permit may be issued. 
ii.  Materials. Unless otherwise provided in this section, all vehicular use areas and specialized vehicular use areas shall be improved either with: (a) a minimum of a six (6) inch shellrock or limerock base with a one inch hotplant mix asphaltic concrete surface; or (b) a base and surface material of equivalent durability, as certified by the developer's engineer. Responsibility for pavement failure occurring as a result of inadequate alternative base and surface material design shall fall on the certifying engineer. 
iii.  Maintenance of paved vehicular use areas. All vehicular use areas or specialized vehicular use areas shall be maintained in good condition to prevent any hazards, such as cracked asphalt or potholes. 
iv.  Shell rock. The uses and associated features approved by the Village Engineer, may construct surface parking lots with shellrock or other similar material except for parking areas connected to a paved public street. When the parking area is adjacent to a paved, public road, a paved driveway apron must be constructed which extends a minimum of 24 feet wide and 60 feet long from the edge of the paved roadway in all directions or 20 feet from the edge of the paved roadway when a cattle grate is provided. The shell rock parking areas must be maintained. 
v.  Wheelstops or curbing required. Wheel stops or continuous curbing shall be placed two and one-half feet back from walls, poles, structures, pedestrian walkways or landscaped areas. The area between any wheel stop and required landscaped strip may be landscaped, rendering the paved space area 15 to 16 feet in length, depending on the angle of parking provided. 
d.  Lighting. If a vehicular use area, or a specialized vehicular use area is to be open for use after dark, it shall be lighted. Lighting shall be arranged and designed so that no source of light is directed toward any adjoining or nearby land used or classified for residential use. Lighting shall be designed to shield public streets and all other adjacent lands from direct or distracting glare, or hazardous interference of any kind. Vehicular use areas shall not be lighted at any other time than the hours of operation of the use that the parking is intended to serve, except for necessary security lighting. Parking lot lighting shall comply with the outdoor lighting standards of Section 7.8.2 (Outdoor lighting standards). 
e.  Striping. Except for parallel parking spaces, parking lots containing spaces for three (3) or more vehicles shall delineate each space by double stripes on each side of the space. All parking spaces stripes shall be painted in white paint except for handicapped spaces which shall have blue stripes. The width of the painted stripe shall be four (4) inches. The separation from inside edge of stripe to inside edge of stripe shall be no less than eight (8) inches and no more than 16 inches. The effective width of the double stripes shall range from 16 inches to 24 inches, measured from outside edge of stripe to outside edge of stripe. Standard and parallel parking spaces striping shall be as shown in Figure 7.2-2. 
f.  Signs. Traffic control signs and other pavement markings shall be installed and maintained to conform with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, as adopted by the FDOT, as revised. 
g.  Drainage. Runoff from vehicular use areas shall be controlled and treated accordance with all applicable agency standards in effect at the time an application is submitted. 
h.  Landscaping. 
i.  All vehicular areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 3 of Article 7. 
ii.  Renovations or additions to vehicular use areas shall provide landscape improvements. Where the renovation affects more than 25% of the vehicle use area or an addition is greater than 25% of the total vehicular use area then a Landscape Betterment Plan shall be provided for the entire vehicular use area which meets the requirements of Chapter 3 of Article 7. 
i.  Preservation. Existing vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the landscaping for the vehicular use area to the fullest extent possible in conformance with Chapter 5 of Article 7. 
Figure 7.2-3
Striping-Standards

M.  Ingress and egress to vehicular use areas. 
1.  Ingress and egress. Each parking space shall have appropriate access to a street or an alley. Only dwelling units with no more than two (2) units shall be allowed backward egress from a driveway onto a local street. In all other cases, maneuvering and access aisle area shall be sufficient to permit vehicles to enter and leave the vehicular use area or specialized vehicular use area in a forward motion. 
2.  Dimensions of access ways. Access ways shall be subject to the dimensional standards shown in Table 7.2-3. 
TABLE 7.2-3 
DIMENSION OF ACCESS WAYS 
Minimum Width at Street* Feet  One-Way 15  Two-Way 25  Two-way with Median** 40  Two-way without Median 35 Right Turn Radius***  Minimum 25  Maximum 30  
  *Measured along right-of-way line at inner limit of curbed radius sweep or between radius and near edge of curbed island at least 50 square feet in area. The minimum width applies principally to one-way driveways. Widths exceeding these standards may be approved by the Planning Director or the Village Engineer, depending on the use. 
 **Excluding median. A width of 20 feet of unobstructed pavement shall be on both sides of median, excluding guard houses and landscape islands. 
***On side of driveway exposed to entry or exit by right-turning vehicles. 
N.  Queuing standards. In addition to meeting the minimum off-street parking and loading standards of this section, all drive-through establishments shall meet the standards listed below: 
1.  Queuing shall be provided for all drive-through establishments. Each queuing lane shall be clearly defined and designed so as not to conflict or interfere with other traffic using the site. Each queuing space shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 20 feet; and 
2.  A by-pass lane a minimum of 10 feet wide shall be provided before or around the point of service. Subject to DRC approval, a by-pass lane may not be required if the queuing lane is adjacent to a parking lot or lane which could function as a by-pass lane. The by-pass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct from the queuing area; and 
3.  For each queuing lane, the minimum number of required queuing spaces, including the one accommodating the vehicle being serviced, shall be as provided in Table 7.2-4. Unless otherwise indicated below, queuing shall be measured from the front of the stopped vehicle (that would be located at the point of ultimate service) to the rear of the queuing lane. One (1) queuing space shall be provided after the point of service for all uses. 
TABLE 7.2-4 
MINIMUM QUEUING STANDARDS FOR DRIVE-THROUGHS 
Drive Through Use Number of Spaces Financial Institution: 
Teller Lanes 
Automatic Teller Lanes   
5 
3 Restaurant 
Minimum before Menu Board 7 
4 Car Wash: 
Automatic 
Self-Service   
5 
3 Oil Change 4 Gasoline Pump at Service Station 20 feet of Queuing at Each End of Pump Island Convenience Store 3 Dry Cleaning or Laundry 3 Retail 4  
O.  Public, private or commercial parking lots. 
1.  General. Off-street parking lots and structures shall be allowed as the principal use where permitted as a conditional use. These parking lots shall not be contiguous to lands used or zoned for residential purposes. Parking spaces may be rented for parking. No other business of any kind shall be conducted on the lot, including repair, service, washing, display or storage of vehicles or other goods. Review of parking lots and structures shall consider the proposed operation of the lot. The standards of this section, including signage, maneuvering, and backup distances may be varied, based on the proposed operation. 
2.  Design. Plans for parking lots shall be drawn to a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals 50 feet and show the layout of the street connection and access ways, drainage provisions, signs, surfacing, curbs or barriers, street connections and access ways of lands located contiguous and directly across the street, and the location and type of landscaping. 
3.  Street connections. Street connections (entrances and exits) shall be located to present the least interference with traffic and the least nuisance on any adjacent street. The point of entrance control shall be located to provide four (4) car queuing (minimum of 80 feet) distance from the right-of-way. 
The location, size and number of entrances and exits shall be subject to the approval of the Development Review Committee. 
P.  Standards for parking structures. 
1.  General. All public or private parking garages may be used to meet off-street parking standards for any use or combination of uses. All public or private parking garages shall comply with the standards for surface parking lots with regard to marking, signage and minimum number of spaces to be provided. 
2.  Site plans. When the parking facilities are housed in a multi-storied structure or on the roofs of buildings, a Site Plan/Final Subdivision Plan shall be submitted thereunder for approval of interior traffic circulation, slope of ramp, ease of access and utilization of ramps, for parking space and aisle dimensions, proper traffic control signing and pavement marking for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian operation, for location of entrances and exits on public roads, for approval of sight distances at such entrances and exits and at corners of intersecting public roads, and for approval of the effective screening of the cars located in or on the parking structures from adjoining lands and from public roads. 
3.  Module width standards. The unobstructed distance between columns or walls measured at any point between the ends of the parking aisle shall be as specified in Table 7.2-5. 
TABLE 7.2-5 
MINIMUM PARKING STRUCTURE MODULE WIDTHS 
Angle Parking on Both Sides of Aisles Parking on One Side of Aisle 90 60 feet one-or two-way aisle 43 feet one-or two way aisle 75 59 feet one-way* 40 feet one-way aisle 60 53 feet one-way aisle* 34 feet one-way aisle  
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 10-27-2015) 
Sec. 7.2.4. - Off-street loading. 
A.  Computing loading standards. 
1.  Multiple uses. On lots containing more than one (1) use, and where the floor area used for each use is below the minimum for required loading spaces but the aggregate total floor area is greater than the minimum, off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were used for that use in the building for which the most spaces are required. In such cases, the Planning Director may make reasonable requirements for the location of the required loading space. 
2.  Fractions. When calculation of the number of required off-street loading spaces results in a fractional number, a fraction of less than one-half (0.50) shall be disregarded and a fraction of one-half (0.50) or more shall be rounded to the next highest full number. 
3.  Floor area. Loading standards that are based on square footage shall be computed using gross floor area (GFA). 
B.  Loading space ratios. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided at the following ratios: 
1.  One (1) space for every 15,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 100,000 square feet; and 
2.  One (1) space for every 50,000 square feet of gross floor area over 100,000 square feet; and 
3.  One (1) space is required for all restaurant uses. The Development Review Committee (DRC) may determine if the loading space is not required based on the type of restaurant, approximate location to other loading spaces and/or the site configuration. 
C.  Location of spaces. Loading berths and related space shall be located directly adjacent to the building which requires designated loading space. Loading areas shall be proportionately distributed throughout the site. 
D.  Loading demand statement. All applications for new or increased use or capacity for nonresidential establishments shall include a statement outlining the use's projected normal demands for loading and unloading, and a plan showing the location on the lot of the off-street loading space to be provided, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
E.  Relationship to streets and off-street parking areas. 
1.  A street or walkway shall not be used for loading or unloading materials. 
2.  An off-street loading area shall not be used to satisfy any off-street parking standards, and the location of the loading area shall not interfere with the free circulation of vehicles in the off- street parking area. 
3.  Where loading areas are directly adjacent to or integrated with an off-street parking lot, the Development Review Committee may require installation of physical barriers, such as curbing, fences, solid hedges, or other means for separation of loading areas from parking areas and pedestrian traffic. 
F.  Dimensional standards and design requirements. Required off-street loading spaces shall be subject to the following minimum dimensional standards: 
1.  Width. A single loading berth shall have a minimum width of 15 feet. Additional loading berths that lie alongside, contiguous to, and not separated from a first loading berth shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width; 
2.  Length. All loading berths shall be a minimum of 55 feet in length; 
3.  Maneuvering apron. An area equal to the width and length of the berth shall be provided for vehicle maneuvering directly behind the loading berth it is intended to serve; 
4.  Vertical clearance. A vertical clearance of at least 15 feet shall be provided throughout the berth and maneuvering apron; and 
5.  Distance from intersections. 
a.  Distance. No loading space or berth shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of the edge of pavement or curb of any two intersecting streets. 
b.  Setback. The surfaced portions of all loading areas, excluding driveways, shall be setback at least 20 feet from all front or side corner lines. When located at the rear of a building, a minimum five-foot setback from the property line shall be required. 
G.  Entrances and exits. The location and design of entrances and exits shall be in accordance with Section 7.2.3.M (Ingress and egress to vehicular use areas) and Section 7.7 (Driveways and Access). 
H.  Paving and drainage. All loading areas shall be paved in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.2.3.L.2 (Paving and drainage design). 
I.  Access marking. Each off-street loading space shall be provided with safe and convenient access to a street, without it being necessary to cross or enter any other required loading space. If any loading space is located contiguous to a street, ingress and egress to the street side shall be provided only through driveway openings. The dimension, location and construction of these driveways shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of this section. In addition, off-street loading spaces which have three or more berths shall have individual spaces marked, and spaces shall be so arranged that maneuvering to and from a loading space shall be on the same lot unless approved by the Development Review Committee (DRC). Maneuvering shall be permitted in an alley upon the approval of the if surrounding uses are compatible with the subject use. 
J.  Reduction in required loading space. All required off-street loading spaces and their appurtenant aisles and driveways shall be deemed to be required space and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except upon approval by the Development Review Committee (DRC) in the following circumstances: 
1.  Reduction in number of berths. 
a.  Change in use. The number of loading spaces may be proportionately reduced if the space is not needed as a result of a reduction in size or change in the nature of the use to which loading spaces are served. 
b.  Administrative reduction. For uses which contain less than 10,000 square feet of total floor area, the DRC may waive or reduce the loading standards whenever the character of the use does not require the full provision of loading facilities. 
2.  Reduction in size of berth. Reduced space dimensions shall be permitted upon a finding that all of the following standards have been met: 
a.  The operation proposed is such that spaces of the required dimensions are unnecessary because, the size, character, and operation of the use will not regularly involve service by motor vehicles which require the dimensions of an off-street loading berth, such as, but not limited to the following uses: bowling alleys and other recreational establishments, financial institutions, funeral chapel and funeral homes, nursing homes, offices, and personal service establishments; 
b.  The uses are likely to continue or to be succeeded by others for which the same space dimensions will be adequate, or that any additional loading space necessary could be provided in a logical location without creating violations of other standards; and 
c.  Any reduction provides for a minimum space length of 15 feet, a space width of at least 12 feet, maneuvering apron of at least 20 feet in length and 12 in width, and a vertical clearance of 10 feet. 
K.  Repair activities. No motor vehicle repair work except emergency repair service, shall be permitted in any required off-street loading facility. 
L.  Landscaping. All off-street loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 7.3. 
(Ord. No. 2003-18, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-11, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 10-27-2015) 
CHAPTER 3. - LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING 

Sec. 7.3.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of existing and future residents of the Village of Wellington by establishing minimum standards for the installation and continued maintenance of landscaping and buffers within the Village of Wellington. The specific objectives of the section are as follows: 
A.  Aesthetics. To improve the aesthetic appearance of development through creative landscaping that helps to harmonize and enhance the natural and built environment; 
B.  Environmental quality. To improve environmental quality by maintaining permeable land areas essential to surface water management and aquifer recharge; reducing and reversing air, noise, heat, and chemical pollution through the biological filtering capacities of trees and other vegetation; promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade; reducing heat gain in or on buildings or paved areas through the filtering capacity of trees and other vegetation; reducing the temperature of the microclimate through the process of evapotranspiration; and encouraging the use of limited fresh water resources through the use of native and drought resistant plants; 
C.  Water conservation. To promote water conservation by encouraging xeriscaping in appropriate areas, such as medians, and utilization of native and drought tolerant landscape material; encouraging the utilization of water conserving irrigation practices; requiring adherence to sound landscape installation standards and maintenance procedures that promote water conservation; ecological placement of landscape material; and utilization of natural areas and vegetation. 
D.  Preservation of native plants and vegetation. To encourage the preservation and planting of native vegetation and plants; 
E.  Efficiency in land development. To promote efficiency in the development of limited land resources by improving the compatibility of otherwise incompatible land uses in close proximity, particularly residential development that is adjacent to more intensive commercial and industrial development, through the use of landscaped buffers; 
F.  Land values. To maintain and increase the value of land by requiring minimum landscaping which, when installed and maintained properly, becomes a capital asset; 
G.  Human values. To provide physical and psychological benefits to persons through landscaping, by reducing noise and glare, and by softening the harsher visual aspects of urban development; 
H.  Removal of prohibited plant species. To encourage the initial eradication and control the ongoing removal of prohibited plant species which have become nuisances because of their tendency to disrupt or destroy native ecosystems; and 
I.  Improved design. To encourage innovative and cost-effective approaches to the design, installation and maintenance of landscaping, particularly those that promote energy, water conservation and incorporate areas of native vegetation. 
Sec. 7.3.2. - Landscape Design Principles and Concepts. 
    The standards established in this section are to be considered the minimum requirements for landscape design. It is the intent of this section to encourage creativity in landscape design while providing general direction and criteria for the evaluation of landscape plans, planting plans and alternative landscape plans. The following design principles shall be used in evaluating whether standard landscape plans, planting plans and alternative landscape plans conform to the requirements of this section. 
A.  Composition. The quality of a landscape design is as dependent on the composition of its elements as on the quantity and selection of plant materials. Landscape materials should be arranged in a manner as to provide the following qualities and characteristics: 
1.  Texture. Landscape designs should seek to provide a textured appearance through the use of a variety of plant material rather than a single species, contrasting large leaf textures with medium and small leaf textures, and a variety of plant heights at maturity. 
Spacing of key landscaping components, such as trees and shrubs, is an important element of texture and should be consistent with the overall design approach of the landscape plan. Formal landscape designs benefit from a uniform spacing of plants, whereas varied spacing and clustering of trees is more compatible with a naturalistic design. 
2.  Color. Landscape designs should include a variety of plants to provide contrasting color to other plants in the design. Designs are encouraged to include flowering plants and especially a mix of plants that display colorful flowers throughout the year. 
3.  Form. Landscape designs should consider the complete three-dimensional form of the landscape, not simply the form of individual elements. The interrelationship of all landscape components should be considered so that the final landscaping works together to present a coherent whole. Trees, shrubs, and hedges, especially those used for screening and buffering, should display fullness at maturity that is typical of the species. 
B.  Buffering and Screening. The placement of natural landscape materials (trees, shrubs, and hedges) is the preferred method for buffering differing land uses, for providing a transition between adjacent properties, and to screen the view of any parking or storage area, refuse collection, utility enclosures, or service area visible from a public street, alley, or pedestrian area. Plants may be used in concert with fences and/or berms to achieve the desired screen or buffering effect. Landscape material should be mature enough at the time of planting to provide an effective buffer or screen, and should be planted in an appropriate location to allow for desired growth within a reasonable period of time. 
When used to screen an activity area such as a parking lot, landscaping should not obstruct the visibility of motorists or pedestrians and shall not interfere with public safety. 
C.  Responsive to Local Context and Character. Landscape designs should build on the site's and the area's unique physical characteristics, conserving and complementing existing natural features. Naturalistic design elements such as irregular plant spacing, undulating contours, and mixed proportions of plant species should be used to ensure new landscaping blends and contribute to the quality of the surrounding area. Selection and spacing of plant material should be reflective of the neighborhood, district, or area character. If a local plant is identified within an area and is consistent with the requirements of this section, that plant should be incorporated in landscape designs. 
D.  Use of Native and Drought Resistant Plants. Wherever feasible and environmentally beneficial, landscape designs should feature native and/or related plant species, especially in areas adjacent to existing native vegetation, to take advantage of the unique natural character and diversity of the region, and the adaptability of native plants to local environmental conditions. Where feasible, the re-establishment of native habitats should be incorporated into the landscape design. 
In the same manner, landscape designs are encouraged to utilize drought tolerant plant materials to the maximum extent feasible. The use of drought tolerant plants should enrich the existing landscape character, conserve water and energy, and provide as pleasant and varied a visual appearance as plants that require more water. Further, trees and shrubs shall be planted in the energy conservation zone where feasible, in order to reduce energy consumption by shading buildings and shall be used to reduce heat island effects by shading paved surfaces. 
E.  Natural Landscape. Landscape designs should incorporate and complement existing natural landscapes and existing specimen trees and native vegetation (including canopy, understory, and ground cover). Particular care should be given to preserve intact natural ecosystems. Where previous landscaping has dramatically altered natural landscapes, new designs should seek to re-establish natural landscape patterns and plantings. 
F.  Continuity and Connection. Landscaping should be designed in a manner consistent with the adjacent and surrounding landscape, provided that the surrounding and planned landscaping is also consistent with the other design principles. Plant materials should blend well with adjacent properties, particularly where property edges meet, to create a seamless and natural landscape. Exceptions should be made when seeking to create a transition between uses, districts, and tiers. 
G.  Enhancing Architecture. Landscape design should be compatible with and enhance architectural character and features and help relate structure design to the site. Major landscape elements should be designed to complement architectural elevations and rooflines through color, texture, density, and form on both vertical and horizontal planes. Landscaping should be in scale with adjacent buildings and be of appropriate size at maturity to accomplish intended goals. Foundation planting and window boxes should be designed to be compatible with a building's architectural character and are strongly encouraged to incorporate artistic elements. 
H.  Energy Conservation and Sustainable Design . Attention should be given to locating landscape elements in a manner that provides energy conservation benefits. Shade trees planted in the energy conservation zone, for example, can provide daytime shading for buildings, reducing energy needed for interior air conditioning. Landscape design should also consider natural drainage features and the use of pervious surfaces and areas to minimize runoff. 
I.  Pedestrian Importance. In pedestrian-oriented development types, landscape designs should give special attention to the needs of pedestrians. Where landscaping is provided on both sides of a sidewalk, pedestrians should have the experience of walking through a landscape that is separated by a path, as opposed to walking past two (2) separate landscapes that happen to be on either side of a path. Benches, kiosks, artwork and other streetscape elements should be incorporated into landscaping in high activity areas. Pedestrian access to sidewalks or buildings shall be considered in the design of all landscaped areas. 
Sec. 7.3.3. - Applicability; Effect on Previously Permitted Projects. 
    The provisions of this section shall be considered minimum standards and shall apply to all development in the Village, except that development exempted in Section 7.3.4 (Exemptions). For previously approved development orders, refer to Section 1.5 in Article 1 of the LDR. 
Sec. 7.3.4. - Exemptions. 
    The following development shall be exempt from the standards and requirements of this section. All landscaping, however, is subject to the maintenance, pruning and replacement requirements listed in Section 7.3.12: 
A.  Enlargement, repair of single-family or duplex development. The enlargement or repair of one (1) single-family detached or duplex residence on a single lot as long as existing vegetation is not disturbed or displaced; 
B.  Buildings or structures accessory to single-family or duplex development. The initial construction, replacement or repair of buildings or structures accessory to one (1) single-family or duplex residence on a single lot as long as existing vegetation is not disturbed or displaced; 
C.  Recreational Property for athletic playing fields, courts, open play areas or water bodies; 
D.  Bona fide agricultural production. Bona fide agricultural production activities; 
E.  Development that does not entail a substantial change in use. Existing development that does not entail a substantial change in use as defined in Section 3.2. If a substantial change in use occurs on the site of an existing development, the tree planting and preservation standards of Section 7.4 and the Compatibility landscape buffer strip standards of Table 7.3-8 shall apply; and 
F.  Development with site development or building permit approval. Development that has received a certified site plan or building permit approval prior to July 1, 2004 except as provided in Article 1. 
Sec. 7.3.5. - Types of plans. 
    All new development requiring the issuance of a building permit or paving permit shall require submittal and approval of the following, as applicable. The submitted plan must demonstrate how the requirements of Section 7.3 will be met. Plans shall be submitted to the Planning, Zoning and Building Department in a form established by the Planning, Zoning and Building Director and made available to the public. Landscape or Alternative Landscape Plans for projects requiring Development Review Committee site plan or site plan amendment review shall be: 
A.  Standard landscape plan. For non-residential developments, single-family residential developments, multi-family developments greater than two (2) units, and buffer and common areas of a Planned Unit Development, a landscape plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. The landscape plan shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a landscape architect, architect, or engineer. 
B.  Planting or plot plan. For all single-family and two-unit townhouse projects on an individual lot and uses requiring landscaping which would otherwise be exempt, a planting or plot plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. The planting plan shall indicate the number, location, and species of required trees and shrubs. 
C.  Alternative plan. An applicant may demonstrate the intent of this section can be more effectively met, in whole or in part, through an alternative landscape plan. The alternative landscape plan shall be prepared in accordance with the design guidelines and principals set forth in this section. Requirements for plant material, heights, and spacing, and up to fifty (50) percent of the required buffer widths may be varied with approval of an alternative landscape plan. To qualify for approval, the alternative landscape plan shall meet seven (7) of the following ten (10) design guidelines and principles: 
1.  demonstrates an innovative use of plant materials and design techniques in response to unique site characteristics; 
2.  preserves or incorporates existing native vegetation in excess of minimum standards; 
3.  uses a variety of plant material, including plants of color, plants of form and plants of texture; 
4.  incorporates naturalistic design principles, such as natural variations in topography, meandering or curvilinear buffer plantings and grouping of dominant plant materials (trees, large shrubs) in an manner consistent with existing native vegetation; 
5.  integrates landscaping and pedestrian facilities in a manner compatible with the tier in which the development is located; 
6.  use of shade trees in excess of the minimum standards in this section to create a canopy effect; 
7.  provides a minimum of fifty (50) percent of required canopy and palm trees which exceed the minimum height requirements in this section; 
8.  creates a greater compatibility with the landscape on abutting properties, provided the landscaping of abutting developments is consistent with the design principles and guidelines of this section; 
9.  uses water-efficient irrigation systems and xeriscape landscaping principles at appropriate locations; and 
10.  incorporates specific environmental attributes of soil, slope, hydrology, and vegetative communities unique to the site and is compatible with environmental features on abutting properties. 
The alternative landscape plan shall clearly detail the variations requested from the provisions of this section and how they conform to landscape design principles and concepts of Section F. For all non-residential and multi-family development greater than two (2) units and Planned Unit Developments, the alternative landscape plan shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a professional landscape architect, architect or engineer. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval of landscape plans, planting plans and alternative landscape plans may be imposed by the Development Review Committee and include requirements for different plant mixes, greater use of shade trees or trees with larger canopies, berms, tiered planting, meandering paths, minimum plant height and quantity, and minimum and maximum tree and palm spacing. 
Sec. 7.3.6. - Landscape standards. 
A.  General. Trees and other vegetation shall be: 
1.  planted in soil and climatic conditions which are appropriate for their growth habits. 
2.  appropriate for the plant zone in which they are to be planted; 
3.  possess non-invasive growth habits; 
4.  low maintenance and of a high quality design; 
5.  compatible with any existing native plant to the greatest extent possible; and 
6.  otherwise consistent with the intent of this section. 
B.  Plant Quality. Plants installed pursuant to this section shall conform to or exceed the minimum standards for Florida Number 1, as provided in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Parts I and II," prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. A different minimum standard may be approved for native plants installed in accord with the approved alternative landscape plan if an applicant demonstrates that sufficient quantities of commercial stock meeting the Florida Number 1 standard are not available in Palm Beach County. All plants shall be clean and free of noxious pests and/or disease. 
1.  The Village has established a Preferred Species List, including native and drought tolerant species, noninvasive plants and plants not destructive to native plants. This list will be periodically revised, as needed. At least fifty (50) percent of the required plants shall be selected from the Preferred Species List. 
C.  Minimum interior tree and shrub quantities. The following minimum interior tree, shrub and sod quantities shall be required in addition to those plants required for preserve or buffer areas: 
1.  Future Land Use Residential A. 
a.  Trees. One (1) tree shall be planted or preserved for every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross lot area, excluding areas of vegetation required to be preserved by Section 7.4 and areas left to be undisturbed. No more than fifteen (15) new trees shall be required per lot and no less than fifty (50) percent of these trees shall be planted or preserved within twenty-five (25) feet of the exterior of the home. Credit for existing trees will be given in accord with Section 7.3.7. 
b.  Shrubs. One hundred fifty (150) one gallon, one hundred fifty (150) three gallon, six (6) seven gallon and four (4) fifteen-gallon accent shrubs shall be planted or preserved for every lot. No less than seventy-five (75) percent of the shrubs shall be planted or preserved in the front of the front plane of the home. 
c.  Sod. Sod shall be installed within thirty-five (35) feet of the perimeter of the home. The balance of the lot shall be seeded, mulched or where native plant communities exist, left undisturbed. 
2.  Future Land Use Residential B. 
a.  Trees. One (1) tree shall be planted or preserved for every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross lot area, excluding areas of vegetation required to be preserved by Section 7.4 and areas left to be undisturbed. No more than forty (40) new trees shall be required per lot and no less than fifty (50) percent of these trees shall be planted or preserved within twenty-five (25) feet of the exterior of the home. Credit for existing trees will be given in accord with Section 7.3.7. 
b.  Shrubs. One hundred fifty (150) one-gallon, one hundred fifty (150) three-gallon, six (6) seven-gallon and four (4) fifteen-gallon accent shrubs shall be planted or preserved for every lot. No less than seventy-five (75) percent of the shrubs shall be planted or preserved in the front of the front plane of the home. 
c.  Sod. Sod shall be installed within thirty-five (35) feet of the perimeter of the home. The balance of the lot shall be seeded, mulched or where native plant communities exist, left undisturbed. 
3.  Future Land Use Residential C. 
a.  Trees. One (1) tree shall be planted or preserved for every one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of the gross lot area, excluding areas of vegetation required to be preserved by Section 7.4 and areas left to be undisturbed. Credit for existing trees will be given in accord with Section 7.3.7. 
b.  Shrubs. One hundred (100) one-gallon, seventy-five (75) three-gallon, two (2) seven-gallon and two (2) fifteen-gallon accent shrubs shall be planted or preserved for every lot. No less than seventy-five (75) percent of the shrubs shall be planted or preserved in the front of the front plane of the home. 
c.  Sod. Sod shall be installed over one hundred (100) percent of the lot area and to the edge of pavement, or where native plant communities exist, leave it undisturbed. 
4.  Future Land Use Residential D, E, F, G and H. 
a.  Trees. One (1) tree shall be planted or preserved for every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of the gross lot area, excluding areas of vegetation required to be preserved by Section 7.4 and areas left to be undisturbed. Credit for existing trees will be given in accord with Section 7.3.7. The minimum tree and shrub planting standard is exclusive of trees, shrubs or hedges required to be planted in perimeter buffers, however, trees preserved in open common spaces shall receive a credit against the landscape area requirements. 
b.  Shrubs. One hundred (100) one-gallon, seventy-five (75) three-gallon, two (2) seven-gallon and two (2) fifteen-gallon accent shrubs shall be planted or preserved for every lot. No less than seventy-five (75) percent of the shrubs shall be planted or preserved in the front of the front plane of the home. For non-single family dwelling units, foundation plantings are required. Shrubs used to screen accessory structures shall not be counted towards minimum shrub requirements. 
c.  Sod. Sod shall be installed over one hundred (100) percent of the lot area and to the edge of pavement, or where native plant communities exist, leave it undisturbed. 
5.  Future Land Use Designation of Non-residential. 
a.  Trees and Shrubs. One (1) tree and three (3) shrubs shall be planted or preserved for every twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet of a nonresidential lot or fraction thereof, excluding only areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law and preservation areas. The minimum tree and shrub planting standard is exclusive of trees, shrubs or hedges required to be planted in perimeter buffers and vehicular areas. {See landscape and preservation standards in Section 7.4 excluding required buffer widths.} 
b.  Foundation planting. Foundation plantings shall be provided along the front, side and rear façades of commercial structures, except for vehicle access areas such as garages and bay doors, drive-through windows and loading areas. The minimum width of the required foundation planting shall be five (5) feet for single-story buildings and eight (8) feet for buildings with two or more stories. Landscape material shall not be planted within one (1) foot of the building foundation to provide termite treatment of the building. The combined length of the required foundation planting shall be no less than forty (40) percent of the total length of the applicable side of the structure. All required foundation plantings shall be planted with a minimum of one (1) tree or three (3) palms for each twenty (20) linear feet of building façade and a combination of mass plantings of shrubs, a minimum of two (2) to three (3) feet in height or mass plantings of appropriate ground cover, a minimum of one-half (1/2) foot up to two (2) feet in height, and/or accent plants. 
6.  Developments with more than one (1) Future Land Use Designation. One (1) tree shall be planted or preserved for every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of a residential lot and for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of a nonresidential lot or fraction thereof within a planned development, excluding only areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law and preservation areas. The number of trees required to be planted or preserved in a phase, or subdivision plan of a planned development shall be a proportion of the total number of trees required to be planted in the overall planned development. (This proportion shall be determined by comparing the area of the phase or subdivision plan to the area of the entire planned development as shown on its current, controlling preliminary development plan). Areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law shall be excluded from the calculation of the area of a phase or subdivision plan of the planned development. Preliminary development plans and subdivision plans shall indicate the minimum number of trees to be planted. This figure is intended to be suggestive of the total number of trees which shall be planted or preserved in each subarea. The actual number of trees to be planted or preserved on individual lots will be established on individual building plans. 
D.  Tree species mix. When more than six (6) trees are required to be planted to meet the standards of this section, a mix of species shall be provided. The number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of trees required to be planted and in accordance with Table 7.3-1. This species mix standard shall not apply to areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law. 
1.  At least ten (10) percent of all required trees shall be of a flowering species. 
2.  Not less than twenty (20) percent of all required trees shall be of a palm species. 
3.  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of all trees used to satisfy the standards of this section shall be classified as native and drought-tolerant in the most recent edition of the South Florida Water Management District's Xeriscape Plant Guide. 
4.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all trees that are required to be planted in the interior of vehicular use areas shall be shade trees, as indicated on the recommended tree and plant species list. 
Table 7.3-1 
Tree Species Mix 
Required Number of Trees Minimum Number of Species 1-5 1 6-15 2 16-30 3 31-40 4 41-60 5 61-80 6 81+ 7  
E.  Shrub species mix. When shrubs are required to be planted to meet the standards of this section, a mix of species shall be provided. The number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of shrubs required to be planted and in accordance with Table 7.3-2. This species mix standard shall not apply to areas of vegetation required to be preserved by law. 
1.  At least ten (10) percent of all required shrubs shall be of a flowering species. 
2.  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of all shrubs used to satisfy the standards of this section shall be classified as native and drought-tolerant in the most recent edition of the South Florida Water Management District's Xeriscape Plant Guide. 
3.  Hedges and shrubs shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height immediately upon planting, and spaced at a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches on center. Hedges shall form a solid continuous visual screen of at least three (3) feet in height within two (2) years after the time of planting. 
Table 7.3-2 
Shrub Species Mix 
Required Number of Shrubs Minimum Number of Species 1-10 2 11-100 3 101-150 4 151-200 5 200+ 6  
F.  Tree Size. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required trees on a lot or parcel shall be of an installed size relating to the structure height according to Table 7.3-3. 
Table 7.3-3 
Tree Size 
Structure Height (feet) Tree Height (feet) Palm Height GW (feet) To 15 12 8 15-25 14 12 26-35 16 18 36 or more 18 22  
* GW = Grey Wood 
All other tree sizes shall be as follows: 
a) Shade trees at time of installation shall have a minimum height of twelve (12) feet and a minimum crown spread of six (6) feet. 
b) Flowering trees shall have a minimum installation size of ten (10) feet in height and a minimum crown spread of five (5) feet. 
c) Palms shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clear trunk, be twelve (12) feet in overall height at the time of installation, and have a minimum diameter of six (6) inches. The height of palms will be increased if the fronds hang below eight (8) feet of clearance from the ground. 
d) Eighteen (18)' and twenty-two (22)' palms can be substituted with staggered palms, if approved by the Planning & Zoning Director or his/her designee. 
All measurements shall be from the top of the root ball. 
G.  Ground Treatment. The ground within required landscaped areas or the preservation of existing or new vegetation shall receive appropriate landscaping such as grass, groundcover, mulch, or shrubs and present a finished appearance upon planting. Sand, gravel, shellrock or pavement are not considered appropriate landscape treatment. The following standards shall apply to the design of ground treatment: 
1.  Ground cover. Live materials used as ground cover shall provide a minimum of fifty (50) percent coverage immediately upon planting and one hundred (100) percent coverage within three (3) months after planting. 
2.  Mulch. Mulch shall be installed and maintained at a minimum compacted depth of three (3) inches at all times, in all planted areas not containing ground covers. All mulch material shall be seed and weed free to prevent the spouting and regrowth. Cypress mulch is discouraged as it degrades wetlands. 
3.  Pebbles and rock and sand. Pebbles or rock or decorative sand may be used in a limited amount, as a ground treatment in areas needed to accommodate limited roof runoff and where drainage is a problem. 
4.  Lawn and turf grass. Grass areas shall be planted with species suitable as permanent lawns in the Village of Wellington. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded, provided that solid sod shall be used in swales, rights-of-way or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where grass seed is used, millet or rye shall also be sown for immediate effect, and immediate maintenance shall be provided until coverage is complete. Use of drought-tolerant ground cover instead of lawn and turf grass is encouraged and required on undeveloped parcels. 
5.  Preservation areas. Ground cover is not required in preservation areas shown on approved site or landscape plans. 
H.  Vines. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of all vines required to be planted by this section shall be native species or listed as drought tolerant or very drought tolerant by the South Florida Water Management District's Xeriscape Plant Guide. Vines shall have a minimum of five (5) runners, each a minimum thirty (30) inches in length immediately upon planting. Vines may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier standards. If vines are used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls, their runners will be attached to the fence, screen, or wall in a way that encourages proper plant growth 
I.  Palm trees. Palms shall be considered trees; however, palms susceptible to lethal yellowing shall not be used to comply with this section. 
1.  Palms planted in landscape buffers and in the energy conservation zone shall be installed in groups of no less than three (3). Each group of three (3) palms in a buffer strip and in the energy conservation zone shall be considered to be one (1) tree. In the case of species of palms which characteristically grow in clumps, each clump shall be considered to be one (1) tree. 
2.  Royal, Bismarck or Phoenix palms or other acceptable species, as determined by the Planning & Zoning Director or his/her designee, may be counted as one (1) required canopy tree. These palms shall: 1) not exceed a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of all trees required in the buffer; 2) be spaced a maximum of twenty (20) feet on center; and 3) have a minimum of twelve (12) feet clear trunk. 
J.  Site Design Flexibility. A site plan which provides at least eighty (80) percent of the required trees or landscape area may be approved if it contains specific features which fulfill its exact intent through the use of creative and innovative techniques. All applications for site plan or other approval shall specify features intended to serve in lieu of specific requirements. The adopted design options and the accompanying points shall be clearly tabulated on the landscape plan. Such a landscape plan must satisfy a minimum total of thirty (30) points from Table 7.3-4. 
Table 7.3-4 
Design Option Points 
Design Option Points Landscape focal point to serve as vistas. The landscape focal point must be visible from the entire street frontage of the site, the width of the landscaped focal point must be at least 35 feet and the landscaped focal point may include signage, trees, shrubs and hedges 10 Integration of sculpture, fountains, ponds and lakes in the design. Retention ponds must be visible from the street and landscaped to be accepted as a design option. 10 Coordination of signs, benches, trash receptacles and lighting in the design by color, material, design etc. 5 Utilization of pedestrian plazas. 10 Increased building setbacks of five (5) feet 5 Increased building setbacks of ten (10) feet 10 Utilization of berms to screen all parking areas from public thoroughfares and adjacent residential uses. 10 Utilization of surface materials other than concrete and asphalt to differentiate vehicular and pedestrian traffic throughout the site. These may include tile, brick, paver-blocks or other types of materials equal in durability and imperviousness and approved by the engineering and public works departments. 10  
K.  Landscape Area Around Signs and Screening. 
1.  A three-foot wide planting area shall be required around the base of all proposed freestanding point of purchase, monument, directional or entry wall signs. One (1) shrub for each ten (10) square foot of total feature area shall be installed within the three (3) foot planting area at the base of the sign. Monument signs may be surrounded by colorful ground cover on all sides in addition to the required shrubs. Landscaping and trees that interfere with the visibility of signage may be relocated to the rear of the sign planting area, subject to approval from the Planning, Zoning and Building Director or his/her designee. 
2.  All mechanical, electrical, water equipment exhaust vents, etc. located on the ground or roof top shall be entirely screened from public view utilizing opaque materials and/or landscaping as screening. Screening material shall accommodate maintenance or inspection thereof with the use of appropriate panels and/or hinged gates. All dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad with appropriate depth and be entirely screened on three (3) sides with a wall and shrubs along the wall. 
L.  Entrance Landscape Area. Landscaping at project entrances shall contain a combination of colorful groundcover plants (annuals may be supplemental to other groundcover plants but not be a substitute) and a minimum of two (2) colorful shrub species on both sides of the entrance and a signature tree with a minimum of six (6) feet of clear trunk all planted to preserve the clear sight area. The signature tree does not contribute toward the required number of perimeter trees and is defined as a tree with blossoms or natural color other than green intended to beautify project entrances and contribute to the Village's image. Signature trees include but are not limited to Yellow Elder, Tibouchina Granulosa, and Bougainvillea. 
M.  Landscape in Easements. Landscaping may be permitted in easements only with the written permission of all easement holders. Easements may overlap a required landscape buffer by a maximum of five (5) feet, provided that there remains a minimum of five (5) clear feet for planting, or if a wall with a continuous footer is used, a minimum of ten (10) clear feet for planting. The landscape buffer may be traversed by easements or access ways as necessary to comply with the standards of this section and other Village codes. Easements shall be identified prior to preparation of the landscape plan and any proposed overlap approved by the Planning, Zoning and Building Director or his/her designee and shall be recorded prior to Development Review Committee approval of the site plan. 
1.  Utilities. Trees planted within any easement with overhead utilities shall comply with the latest edition of F P L's publication "Plant the Right Tree in the Right Place," and take into consideration the mature height and spread of the species beneath or adjacent to existing overhead utilities. Where overhead utilities exist, trees shall be maintained so that the trees mature to a height and spreadnot encroaching within five (5) feet of overhead power distribution lines. The easement area shall be counted in plant quantity calculations and plants removed from the easement area shall be relocated or replaced elsewhere in site. In order to maintain tree and plant spacing when a landscape buffer is traversed by a utility easement, a larger overlap may be allowed with the written approval of the relevant utilities. 
2.  Detention/retention areas, swales, drainage easements, and lake maintenance easements. Detention/retention areas, swales, drainage easements, and lake maintenance easements may be located in or overlap required landscape buffers, but the overlap area shall not be counted in determining compliance with landscape requirements. 
N.  Corner Clips. Safe sight distance triangles shall be provided in accordance with applicable Village standards. Extended safe sight distance triangles shall be required in individual cases when the Village Engineer determines that intersecting street alignments or other factors are such that the standard safe sight distances triangles are insufficient to ensure appropriate minimum stopping/crossing sight distances, in accordance with Federal Department Of Transportation "Green book" criteria. Corner clips shall be maintained to provide unobstructed visibility at a level between thirty (30) inches and eight (8) feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway and in a way that does not create a traffic hazard. Vegetation located adjacent to and within corner clip areas shall be trimmed so that limbs or foliage do not extend into the required visibility area. All landscaping within the safe sight distance triangle area shall be planted and perpetually maintained by the property owner, in accordance with this section. Trees located in required corner clips shall have, at installation, a minimum of eight (8) feet of clear trunk. 
O.  Berms. Landscape berms may be used as non-living landscape barriers only when installed in conjunction with plant materials and is compatible with adjacent properties. They should be used to heighten the effectiveness of other plant materials and should not be placed in the field of vision between the right-of-way and plant materials. The slope of the berm shall not exceed three-to-one (3:1). In areas where existing vegetation has been preserved, berms cannot be installed unless no negative impact to the viability of preserved trees and vegetation can be demonstrated. Drainage of berms shall be contained within the buffer area. 
P.  Right-of-way landscape. A property owner may be permitted or required by the Village Engineer to landscape the medians or swales of streets, provided that the plant material to be used complies with the standards of this section. Application forms shall be prepared and made available to the applicant by the Engineering Department. Approval of "on-site" landscape plans shall not constitute approval of any street or right-of-way landscaping that may appear on such plans. The Village Engineer shall retain final authority to approve or disapprove street and right-of-way landscaping plans and maintenance requirements with respect to safe and proper engineering practices. Where appropriate and prior to issuance of a development order, a property owner shall be required by execution of a declaration in the public records, or other means acceptable to the Village Attorney, to install and maintain landscaping along land in or abutting thoroughfare roads. The property owner shall be required to maintain rights-of-way and easements adjacent to their developed property up to the edge of pavement or edge of water. 
Q.  Prohibited plant species. Planting or installation of prohibited species as listed in the Village's Prohibited Species Handbook is prohibited and supersedes the provisions of the Palm Beach County Countywide Prohibited Invasive Non-Native Vegetation Removal Ordinance. Each landscape plan, planting plan, or alternative landscape plan required or permitted shall include a program to eradicate and prevent the reestablishment of prohibited plant species. 
R.  Controlled plant species. The following species may be planted or maintained under controlled conditions provided that they are installed or cultivated according to the following standards: 
1.  Casuarina species hedges (australian pine). Casuarina species may be maintained as a hedge if it was planted prior to February 1, 1990. A casuarina hedge shall be constantly maintained and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
2.  Ficus species. Ficus species may be planted under the following conditions but not to exceed a maximum of ten (10) percent of the total number of required trees: 
a.  Planted as individual trees with an approved root barrier, provided that they are no closer than thirty (30) feet from any structure or utility; or 
b.  Contained in a planter approved by the Planning, Zoning and Building Director; or 
c.  Maintained as a hedge which is constantly cultivated and does not exceed six (6) feet in height for non-residential uses and Planned Unit Development perimeter landscape buffers; or 
d.  Maintained in accordance with the residential restrictions for hedges per Section 6.6(D). 
3.  Grevillea robusta (silk oak) and Dalbergla sisoo (rosewood). Silk oak and Rosewood may be planted as individual trees, unless there is a preserve on the site or within five hundred (500) feet of a preserve area. 
4.  Citrus Trees. Citrus tree shall not qualify as a required tree and as such will not require a tree removal permit. 
5.  Black Olives. Black Olives shall not be installed within fifteen (15) feet of any parking area or sidewalk. 
S.  Artificial plants. No artificial plants or vegetation shall be used to meet any standards of this section. 
T.  Special Landscape regulations. 
1.  Properties fronting State Road 7 
a.  Median Plantings: 
i.  Berm. They shall ranges from one (1) to over three (3) feet in height where space permits, as determined by the Village Engineer. At intersections and left hand turn lanes, sufficient sight visibility shall be maintained. The maximum berm gradient shall not exceed a 3:1 slope. 
ii.  Trees. The following species and numbers of trees shall be used: 
(a)  Royal Poinciana, Delonix regia-planted in odd numbered quantities spaced thirty (30) feet on-center with a twenty-four-foot height and ten-foot spread at time of planting. 
(b)  Wax Privet, Ligustrum japonicum-planted in odd numbered quantities in the bull nose, left hand turn lanes of medians. All Privet trees shall be spaced six (6) feet apart, with an eight-foot planting height and six-foot spread at time of planting. 
(c)  Royal Palm, Roystonia elata-planted in groups of six (6) plants, twelve (12) feet on-center, Florida Fancy grade material, matched, with a minimum of ten (10) feet of grey wood. 
iii.  Shrubs. The following species and numbers of shrubs shall be used: 
(a)  Wax Jasmine, Jasminum volubile-planted in mass at the head of the bull nose at left hand turn lanes, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(b)  Hendersonii Dwarf Allamanda, Allamanda cathartica-planted in mass as an understory to Wax Privet trees, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(c)  Nora Grant Ixora, Ixora 'Nora Grant'-planted in mass as an understory to Royal Palm trees, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(d)  Sweet Viburnum, Viburnum odoratissimum-planted as a hedgerow meandering along the top of the berm and planted beneath Royal Poinciana trees, double staggered row of three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24)inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
b.  Landscape Buffer along SR 7 right-of-way buffers: 
i.  Berm 
(a)  Where sufficient right-of-way exists or is dedicated, a six-foot height berm with a maximum gradient of 3:1 slope. At intersections with major thoroughfares, berms shall wrap corner and maintain clear site visibility. 
ii.  Trees 
(a)  Wax Privet, Ligustrum japonicum-planted along the front side slopes of berms at major intersections and clustered on either side of proposed entrance signage in two (2) groups of three (3) trees. All Privet trees shall be spaced six (6) feet apart, with an eight (8) foot planting height and six (6) feet spread at time of planting. 
(b)  Rusty Fig, Ficus rubiginosa-planted in groups of three (3) trees, twenty (20) feet on-center, along the top of the berm with a minimum two (2) inch caliper/diameter at breast height, four and half (4.5) foot clear trunk, twelve (12) foot height, five (5) foot spread and Florida number one grade material. 
(c)  Noronhia, Calophyllum inothylum-planted in groups of three (3) trees, fourteen (14) feet on-center, along the top of the berm with a minimum two (2) inch caliper/diameter at breast height, 4.5 foot clear trunk, twelve (12) foot height, five (5) foot spread and Florida number one grade material. 
(d)  Live Oak, Quercus virginiana-planted in groups of three (3) trees, twenty (20) feet on-center, along the top of the berm with a minimum two (2) inch caliper/diameter at breast height, 4.5 foot clear trunk, twelve (12) foot height, five (5) foot spread and Florida number one grade material. 
(e)  Small Leaf Clusia, Clusia guttifera-planted in groups of three (3) trees, fourteen (14) feet on-center, along the front side of the berm with a minimum one and one-half (11/2) inch caliper/diameter at breast height, four (4) foot clear trunk, eight (8) foot height, four (4) foot spread and Florida number one grade material. 
(f)  Glaucous Cassia, Cassia surattensis-planted in groups of six (6) to seven (7) trees, nine (9) feet on-center, along the front side of the berm with a minimum one and one-half (11/2) inch caliper/diameter at breast height, four-foot clear trunk, eight (8) foot height, four-foot spread and Florida number one grade material. 
iii.  Palm Trees 
(a)  Royal Palm, Roystonia elata-planted in groups of seven (7) plants, ten (10) to seventeen (17) feet on-center, planted as a back drop to entry signage, planted along top of berm at intersections. Plants shall be Florida Fancy grade material, matched, with a minimum of ten (10) feet of grey wood. 
(b)  Pygmy Date Palm, Phoenix roebellinii-triples planted in groups of six (6) plants, eight (8) feet on-center, along the front slope of the berm. On intersection corners without entrance signage, triples shall be planted in groups of ten (10) plants, eight (8) feet on-center along the front side slope of the berm. Plants shall be Florida Fancy grade material, triple trunk, varying from four to eight (4-8) feet height. 
(c)  Foxtail Palm, Wodyetia bifurcata- planted in groups of six (6) plants, eight (8) feet on-center, along the front slope of the berm. Plants shall be Florida Fancy grade material, matched, eight (8) inch diameter at breast height with six (6) feet of grey wood. 
iv.  Shrubs 
(a)  Hendersonii Dwarf Allamanda, Allamanda cathartica-planted in mass along the front side of berm, as an understory to Foxtail Palm trees, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(b)  Sword Fern, Nephrolepsis exaltata- planted in mass along the front side slope of berms, as an understory to Pygmy Date Palm trees, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(c)  Selloum Philodendron, Philodendron selloum-planted in mass towards the top of the berm, as a backdrop to Pygmy Date Palms and Swordfern, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) inches on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(d)  Variegated Schefflera, Schefflera arboricola 'Variegata'- planted in mass along the front side of the berm, as an understory to Glaucous Cassia, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches, full plant to ground. 
(e)  Red Tip Cocoplum, Chrysobalanus icaco 'Red Tip'- planted in a double staggered row along the top of the berm, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches, full plant to ground. 
(f)  Spanish Stopper, Eugenia foetida- planted in a double staggered row along the top of the berm, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches, full plant to ground. 
(g)  Wax Jasmine, Jasminum volubile-planted in mass at intersections with signage, along the tow of the berm, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
(h)  Nora Grant Ixora-planted in mass at intersections with signage, along the middle of the berm, three (3) gallon material, planted two (2) feet on-center, minimum twenty-four (24) inches height and twenty-four (24) inches spread. 
v.  Groundcover or Turf 
(a)  All within the right-of-way not planted with trees, palms and shrubs shall receive St. Augustine 'floratam' sod. 
Sec. 7.3.7. - Tree credits. 
    A preserved native upland tree or drought-tolerant tree meeting the standards specified in this section may be substituted for any of the trees required by this Code or a condition of approval, subject to the following: 
A.  Tree survey. Credit shall be granted for on-site preservation of existing native or drought-tolerant trees when a landscape plan is accompanied by a tree survey prepared in a form and manner acceptable to the Planning, Zoning and Building Director or his/her designee. 
B.  Tree credit formula. Existing native wetland trees in littoral zones or drought-tolerant trees shall be credited according to the formula in Table 7.3-5. 
Table 7.3-5 
Tree Credits 
Crown Spread of Tree Or Diameter of Tree at 4.5 Feet Above Grade = Credits 90 Feet or Greater Or 37 inches of more = 8 60-89 Feet Or 32-36 inches = 7 50-59 Feet Or 27-31 inches = 6 40-49 Feet Or 22-26 inches = 5 30-39 Feet Or 17-21 inches = 4 20-29 Feet Or 12-16 inches = 3 10-19 Feet Or 7-11 inches = 2 5-9 Feet Or 2-6 inches = 1 Less than 10 Feet Or Less than 2 inches = 0  
Notes to Table 7.3-5 
1. Fractional measurements shall be rounded down. 
2. Preserved slash pines, a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in height, may count as one (1) required tree. 
3. Palms shall be counted as one (1) canopy tree for interior tree requirements. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the required interior trees may be palms. 
4. Palms shall be counted as one-third ( 1/3 ) of a tree for buffer requirements (e.g. three (3) palms = one (1) shade tree). A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the required buffer trees may be palms. 
C.  Trees excluded from credit. Tree credits shall not be permitted for trees that are: 
1.  Required preservation. Trees which are required to be protected by law, or trees located in required preservation areas 
2.  Not protected during construction. Trees which are not properly protected from damage during the construction process, as provided in Section 7.3.12; 
3.  Prohibited, fruit or controlled species. Trees which are classified as prohibited, fruit or controlled species; 
4.  Dead, dying, infested or diseased trees. Trees which are dead, dying, diseased, or infested with harmful insects; or 
5.  Recreation tracts, golf courses, or similar subareas within planned developments. Trees which are located within recreation tracts, golf courses or similar subareas within planned developments which are not intended to be developed for residential, commercial, or industrial use. 
Sec. 7.3.8. - Water conservation. 
    All landscape plans shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the water conservation standards by obtaining a minimum score of thirty (30) points from the water conservation point scale identified in Table 7.3-6. Landscape plans shall be reviewed and certified by a registered landscape architect for adequate irrigation. 
Table 7.3-6 
Water Conversation Point Scale 
Technique/Design Feature Points Moisture-Sensing Controller (other than rain switch) 5 Drip/Trickle/Micro Irrigation System 
 25-50 percent of system 
 51-75 percent of system 
 76-100 percent of system   
5 
7 
10 Irrigation Quality Effluent Irrigation 
 25-50 percent of site 
 51-90 percent of site 
 91-100 Percent of site   
10 
20 
30 Florida Native Landscape 
 25-50 percent of landscape areas 
 51-90 percent of landscape area 
 91-100 percent of landscape area   
10 
20 
30 Required Trees, Very Drought-Tolerant 
 26-50 percent 
 51-100 percent   
5 
10 Extra Shade Trees, Very Drought-Tolerant 
 26-50 percent more trees than required 
 51-100 percent more trees than required   
10 
20 Sod/Turf Area Alternatives 
 26-50 percent permitted sod/turf area 
 51-100 percent permitted sod/turf area   
5 
10 Required Shrubs, Very Drought-Tolerant 
 26-50 percent 
 51-100 percent   
5 
10  
Notes to Table 7.3-6: 
Florida Native Landscape will be preserved or reestablished. Reestablished Florida Native Landscape must include trees, understory and ground cover, with no more than fifty (50) percent of the site sodded. 
Credit for "Sod/Turf Area Alternatives" given for planting/seeding native wildflowers, meadow grasses or ground cover in-lieu of allowable sodded area. 
Sec. 7.3.9. - Parking Lot Landscape Requirements. 
A.  General Tree, Shrub and Hedge Standards. 
1.  Canopy trees. At the time of installation, interior trees in vehicular use areas shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height with a five-foot canopy and be container grown or root pruned in the field. Trees shall have, at installation, a minimum of eight (8) feet of clear truck. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all trees that are required to be planted in the interior of vehicular use areas shall be canopy. 
2.  Palms. Palms shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clear truck at the time of installation. Palms may count as one (1) required interior tree and shall not exceed a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the required interior trees. Preserved native palms with a minimum of four (4) feet of clear truck located within the interior of a site may be counted as one (1) required interior tree. Palms planted in the interior of vehicular use arm shall be an appropriate species which when mature will not interfere with required lighting or other land development regulations 
3.  Hedges and shrubs. The interior landscape requirements for hedges and shrubs shall in accordance with Section 7.3.12.B. 
B.  Off Street Parking and Interior Vehicular Use Areas. 
1.  Terminal and interior landscape islands. 
a.  Terminal Islands. Each row of parking spaces shall be terminated by landscape islands. The terminal island shall not overlap perimeter or other required buffers. The terminal island shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width or fifteen (15) feet in width if accommodating utilities, excluding required curbing, and fifteen (15) feet in length and include at least one hundred and ten (110) square feet of planting area and one (1) tree. 
b.  Interior landscape islands. A minimum of one (1) interior landscape island shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces or fraction thereof. Interior landscape islands shall be spaced a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) feet apart. Interior landscape islands shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width, excluding required curbing and fifteen (15) feet in length and include at least one hundred and twenty (120) feet square feet of planting area and one (1) tree. However, for all non-residential lots equal to or less than one (1) acre, terminal and interior landscape islands shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width excluding required curbing and fifteen (15) feet in length. 
2.  Divider median. Divider medians at least eight (8) feet wide shall be installed between rows of parking and between all parking/vehicular use areas. One (1) tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) linear feet with a maximum spacing of thirty (30) feet on center. 
3.  Landscape diamonds. Landscape diamonds with canopy trees may be distributed throughout the interior of an off-street parking area to provide shading of parked motor vehicles as an alternative to interior landscape islands. Grade level tree plantings areas shall be located only at the common intersection of four (4) parking spaces and spaced no greater than four (4) spaces apart. The ground within the tree planting area shall receive appropriate landscape treatment, including mulch or ground cover. The minimum tree planting area shall be twenty-five (25) square feet with minimum horizontal dimension of five (5) feet. 
4.  Parking area screening. All parking, loading, storage or outdoor display area adjacent to rights-of-way shall be screened with a continuous hedge or shrub in accordance with Section 7.3.10. 
5.  Landscape protection measures. Landscape protection measures, such as curbing and wheel stops, shall be shown on all paving, drainage, site and landscape plans. The landscape area adjacent to any off-street parking space or vehicle use area shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by the use of concrete wheel stops or continuous concrete curbing. 
a.  Planting area width requirements shall be measured from the inside edge of the curb or wheel stop. 
b.  All landscape area subject to vehicular encroachment shall be separated from vehicular use areas by six (6) inch, non-mountable, FDOT type "D" or FDOT type "F" concrete curbing except for divider medians that abut parking spaces with wheel stops, properties located in the Community Facilities zoning district or alternative landscape protection measures approved by the Planning, Zoning and Building Director or the Development Review Committee. 
c.  Wheel stops shall have a minimum height of six (6) inches above the finished grade of the parking area, shall be properly anchored and continuously maintained in good condition. The wheel stop must rest fully on the pavement to prevent rocking. 
6.  Pervious Area. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area shall be landscaped and maintained as pervious surface area, not to include shell rock. The above minimum landscape requirements and additional requirements for retention areas may count towards the twenty (20) percent total pervious surface area. 
7.  Parking Structures. Parking structures shall provide perimeter planters around each level of parking structures. The planter shall provide a total of one-half (.5) square feet of planting area for each linear foot of façade, within five hundred (500) feet of a public right-of-way or residential zoning district, per parking level. Planting areas may be arranged in linear fashion or clustered at intervals and shall be provided with permanent irrigation to permit watering of plant materials. The perimeter planter requirement may be waived if in conflict with the architectural intent of the structure, subject to Development Review Committee approval. 
8.  Excess parking spaces. In the event the number of parking spaces to be installed exceeds the minimum number of parking spaces required by the Land Development Regulations, the required landscaping shall be increased by one hundred (100) square feet for each additional parking space. The additional landscaping shall consist of shrubs, ground cover, grass and mulch in accordance with the standards of these regulations. For each additional five hundred (500) square feet of impervious surface or fraction thereof, one (1) shade tree shall be provided in addition to the shrubs, ground cover, grass and mulch. 
9.  Alternative Interior landscaping. A portion of the landscaping for interior parking spaces, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total requirement, may be relocated so as to emphasize corridors or special landscape areas within the general parking area or adjacent to buildings located on the site, if helpful in achieving greater overall aesthetic effect. Such relocated landscaping shall be in addition to perimeter landscaping requirements. 
Sec. 7.3.10. - Landscape buffer strips. 
    Landscape buffer strips shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Right-of-Way Buffer. 
1.  Width of landscape buffer strips that abut streets. The width of landscape buffer strips abutting streets shall depend on the width of the street's ultimate right-of-way, as referenced by Table 7.3-7. Exceptions to the required right-of-way buffers can be made for developments with setbacks less than twenty (20) feet from the applicable lot line with the approval of an alternative landscape plan. Where the side(s) of a building abuts a property line, as with zero lot line development, that side is exempted from the right-of-way buffer requirements. 
Table 7.3-7 
Width of Right-of-Way Buffer Strips 
Width of Ultimate 
Right-of-Way1 Minimum Width 
of Landscape 
Buffer Strip Trees Shrubs Tree Spacing 0-99 Feet 20 Feet 1/200 sq. ft. 1/25 sq. ft. 20 linear feet 100+ Feet 25 Feet 1/200 sq. ft. 1/25 sq. ft. 20 linear feet  
Notes to Table 7.3-7: 
1. The width of the ultimate right-of-way shall be determined by the Village Engineer. 
2. Single-family detached homes in a residential subdivision shall not require a right-of-way buffer along internal streets. 
2.  Planting Corridor Strip. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the buffer width shall be composed of a vertical landscape screen at least thirty-six (36) inches in height. The width of the screen should not remain uniform throughout the entire linear length of the buffer and should vary between fifty (50) and sixty (60) percent of the entire buffer width in a meandering pattern. 
3.  Color and Texture. Buffer planting shall include at least ten (10) percent of materials with a contrasting leaf texture. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of trees and shrubs shall include flowering species. 
4.  Shrub Height. Right-of-way buffers of fifteen (15) feet or greater width shall be composed of the following, in addition to the required tree/palm planting: 
a.  Ground cover: Required height -six (6) inches to twenty-four (24) 
b.  Low Shrub: Required height - two (2) feet to three (3) feet 
c.  Medium Shrub: Required height - four (4) feet to six (6) feet 
d.  High Shrub: Required height - greater than six (6) feet 
5.  Non-living barriers in landscape buffer strips adjacent to a right-of-way. If a wall or fence or other non-living barrier is used, they shall be located on the interior edge of the required landscape buffer strip with the required landscaping located between the wall, fence or other non-living barrier and the right-of-way. If the placement of the wall, fence or non-living barrier conflicts with a pre-existing dedicated easement, the wall, fence or non-living barrier shall not encroach the easement, unless the provisions of Section 6.5.11 (Easement encroachment) are satisfied. Non-living barriers shall require additional landscaping to soften them and enhance their appearance. For each ten (10) feet of non-living barrier, two (2) shrubs or vines shall be planted along the street side of the barrier, in addition to tree requirements. 
6.  Right-of-Way buffer width reduction. Where properties are separated from the street by a canal, lake and/or passive open space with a total minimum width of fifty (50) feet or greater, the buffer width may be reduced by fifty (50) percent. The reduced buffer shall contain a minimum of five (5) clear feet for planting, or if a wall with a continuous footer is used, a minimum of ten (10) clear feet for planting. The quantity of required plant material shall be reduced in proportion to the reduction in the buffer width. 
7.  Clustering. Canopy trees and palms may be clustered in right-of-way buffers for non-residential developments only if the clusters: 
a.  are spaced a maximum of sixty (60) feet apart; 
b.  consist of trees of varied height, which when averaged, equal the minimum tree height required; and 
c.  are located on property containing a minimum of three hundred (300) linear feet along a right-of-way. 
B.  Perimeter Landscape Buffer. 
1.  General Tree, Shrub and Hedge Standard. 
a.  Canopy Tree Planting. In calculating the number of trees to be planted, fractional distances shall be rounded down. With Planning, Zoning and Building Director's approval, up to ten (10) percent of the total number of required trees may be reduced in height by ten (10) percent, provided that an additional tree, at least eight (8) feet in height is planted for each tree with reduced height. All canopy trees shall be container grown or root pruned in the field. The width of access ways which traverse required landscape strips shall be included in the calculation of linear dimension. Required trees shall at installation have no minimum clear trunk requirements and a minimum six (6) foot canopy spread, except as otherwise noted. In addition, trees shall be allowed to attain a minimum eight (8) foot canopy spread, except as otherwise noted. The diameter of spread of the canopy shall be determined by the average canopy radius at three (3) points measured from the trunk to the outermost branch tip. 
b.  Palm and Slash Pine Tree Planting. Palms and slash pines planted in perimeter buffers shall be installed in groups of no less than three (3). Each group of palms or slash pines shall average ten (10) feet in height and may be counted as one (1) required canopy tree. 
c.  Shrub. At the time of installation, required shrubs shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height, or eighteen (18) inches in height for native species. Required shrubs shall form a continuous solid opaque visual screen of at least thirty-six (36) inches in height within two (2) years of planting unless the shrubs forms a barrier hedge, in which case the hedge shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.6. 
d.  Alternative use of native vegetation. Existing native vegetation shall be deemed to satisfy the landscape buffer standards, in total or in part, upon the approval of the Development Review Committee. In determining whether native vegetation satisfies the buffer standards, the following shall be considered: 
i.  The effectiveness of the visual screening which will be provided; 
ii.  The quality of the vegetation being preserved; 
iii.  The proposed native buffer makes use of existing native 
iv.  vegetation, which may include trees. If no trees exist in the proposed buffer, no additional trees will be required if adequate screening is provided; and 
v.  Native vegetation from areas of the site to be developed may be relocated the buffer area. 
2.  Compatibility landscape buffer strips. 
a.  General. The entire perimeter landscaping shall be installed for residential and non-residential developments, other than Planned Development Districts, prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. For a phased residential development, the buffer strip shall be installed along the entire perimeter of each phase. The buffer strips shall be maintained and preserved along the entire length of the property. The width of landscape buffer strips shall not include utility easements. 
b.  Width. A five-foot wide buffer shall be required between all compatible use types, excluding single-family residential subdivisions or pods adjacent to single-family residential subdivisions or pods. Except for trees, the remainder of the landscape area shall be landscaped with grass or living ground cover and organic mulch. 
c.  Trees. A six-foot wall and minimum fourteen (14) foot tall trees spaced no more than twenty (20) feet on center. The minimum area of a tree planting area shall be twenty (20) square feet, and the minimum dimensions shall be four (4) feet by five (5) feet. The ground within the tree planting area shall receive appropriate landscape treatment, including mulch or ground cover and the wall shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 6.6.1.B. 
3.  Incompatibility landscape buffer strips. 
Table 7.3-8 
Incompatibility Landscape Buffer Standards 
Adjacent 
Property Use Single 
Family/Duplexes 
(Residential A, B, and C) Multifamily 
(Residential D, E, F, G, and H) Commercial Industrial Civic Single Family/duplexes (Residential A, B, C) Compatible Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Fifteen (15) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Twenty-Five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Multifamily (Residential D, E, F, G, and H) Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge Compatible Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 
1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - 
continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm 
Width - Ten (10) foot buffer Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Fifteen (15) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 
1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - 
continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - 
Twenty-five 
(25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees 
- 1/25 linear 
feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Commercial Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm 
Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm 
Width - Ten (10) foot buffer 
Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Compatible Width - Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - 
Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Industrial Width - Fifteen (15) foot buffer 
Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Fifteen (15) foot buffer 
Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Compatible Width - 
Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Civic Width - Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - 
Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Width - Twenty-five (25) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/25 linear feet 
Shrubs - continuous four (4) foot hedge 
Wall - six (6) foot visually opaque wall, fence or earth berm Compatible Commercial Recreation/Open Space Width - Twenty (20) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/800 sq. ft. or 1/ 40 linear feet 
Shrub - 1/100 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 60 linear feet Width - Twenty (20) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/800 sq. ft. or 1/40 linear feet 
Shrub - 1/100 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 60 linear feet Width - Twenty (20) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/800 sq. ft. or 1/40 linear feet 
Shrub - 1/100 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 60 linear feet Width - Twenty (20) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/800 sq. ft. or 1/40 linear feet 
Shrub - 1/100 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 60 linear feet Width - Twenty (20) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/800 sq. ft. or 1/40 linear feet 
Shrub - 1/100 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 60 linear feet Conservation Preservation Mitigation Width - Fifty (50) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/400 sq. ft. 
Shrub - 1/250 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 40 linear feet Width - Fifty (50) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/400 sq. ft. 
Shrub - 1/250 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 40 linear feet Width - Fifty (50) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/400 sq. ft. 
Shrub - 1/250 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 40 linear feet Width - Fifty (50) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/400 sq. ft. 
Shrub - 1/250 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 40 linear feet Width - Fifty (50) foot buffer 
Canopy Trees - 1/400 sq. ft. 
Shrub - 1/250 sq. ft. 
Tree Spacing - 40 linear feet  
Notes to Table 7.3-8: 
1. All walls shall be masonry construction or an alternative approved by the Planning & Zoning Director, and shall extend the full length of the property line. Both sides of the wall shall be given finished architectural treatment which is compatible and harmonious with abutting developments and the wall shall contain no openings except gates or similar means of access that may be approved during site plan approval. 
2. If a wall or fence is used, the landscaping shall be located between the landscape barrier and the adjacent property, unless approved otherwise by the Development Review Committee and must be in compliance with Section 6.6(A)(2). 
3. When hedges are used alone in a buffer, hedges shall present a continuous solid opaque visual screen a minimum of six (6) feet in height at time of installation. 
4. If the same type of landscape buffer exists on an abutting property, the width of one (1) buffer may be reduced fifty (50) percent and a minimum of five (5) clear feet for planting shall be required or if a wall with a continuous footer is used a minimum of ten (10) clear feet of planting. Back to back walls shall be avoided. 
5. The Development Review Committee may impose special standards on the following uses: recreation and civic uses within a residential subdivision or pod within a Planned Unit Development or property owned by the Village of Wellington or Palm Beach County School District. 
Sec. 7.3.11. - Upland buffers/Littoral Planting. 
    Lake areas (retention ponds) in excess of one (1) acre in area shall be planted to create a habitat that provides the optimal environment for aquatic and other species. Lakes provided for new construction or major modifications of existing projects shall be planted as follows: 
A.  Littoral plantings. To occupy a minimum of fifty (50) percent of lake perimeter with littoral plantings 
B.  Littoral shelf. To consist of a minimum of ten (10) square feet of littoral shelf per linear foot of lake. 
C.  Trees. To consist of a minimum of one (1) native tree per fifty (50) feet of linear lake frontage. 
D.  Vegetation. All vegetation installed contiguous, at a minimum 3:1 bank slope, one hundred (100) percent appropriate native vegetation, installed with proper spacing for full coverage of littoral shelf areas. 
    All littoral and upland plantings established consistent with these standards shall be maintained in accordance with a management plan approved by the Village at the time of site plan approval or permitting. The management plan shall include: i) a map showing the limits of the water bodies covered by the plan; ii) the chemicals being applied to the water bodies, including the amounts of each chemical and application schedule; iii) the specific aquatic vegetation being addressed including, but not limited to, water hyacinths, chara, cattails, broadleaf weeds, hydrilla, algae, coon-tail, milfoil, southern naiad, torpedo grass, alligatorweed, duckweed, ditchbank grasses and other waterborne weeds; and iv) the name and address of the aquatic vegetation control contractor along with the copies of appropriate licensees and insurances. 
Sec. 7.3.12. - Installation, maintenance, irrigation and replacement. 
    The following standards shall be considered the minimum required installation, maintenance, irrigation and replacement standards for all trees and landscape material. 
A.  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to acceptable nursery practices (American Society of Landscape Architects) in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth. Soil improvement measures may be required to ensure healthy plant growth. A plant or tree's growth characteristics shall be considered before planting to prevent conflicts with views, lighting, infrastructure, utilities or signage. Proposed lighting and signage plans shall be submitted with landscape plans for approval before installation. 
1.  Phasing. Required landscaping may be installed in phases, if it is designated on the approved site plan as follows: 
a.  Planned developments. The number of trees required to be planted or preserved in a construction phase of a planned development shall be a proportion of the total number of trees required to be planted in the overall planned development. This proportion shall be determined by comparing the area of the phase plan to the area of the entire planned development as shown on the approved plan. Areas of vegetation required to be preserved shall be excluded from the calculation. 
b.  Other developments. The entire perimeter landscaping shall be installed for residential and non-residential developments, prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy or completion or in accordance with an approved phasing plan by the DRC. 
2.  Construction. It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any structure or other improvement to place materials, machinery or temporary soil deposits within the drip line of any tree and during construction the builder shall be required to erect suitable protective barriers around all such trees to be preserved. Trees designated for protection during construction that do not survive will be replaced by a tree of equal size or an equivalent number of trees based on trunk diameter. The minimum barricading shall be in accordance with specifications set forth in the "Tree Protection Manual for Builders and Developers," by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. A monetary performance assurance instead of or in addition to a protective barricade may be required to ensure protection of a tree or trees or to guarantee restoration of an equivalency. The amount of said assurance shall be based upon the equivalent value of the tree or trees specifically covered. Any assurance required for a "protected tree" shall be four (4) times the equivalent value for that tree. 
3.  Protection. All trees shall be properly guyed and staked at the time of planting until establishment, however, no later than one (1) year from installation of the tree. The use of nails, wire or rope or any other method which damages the trees is prohibited. All plants shall be installed so that the top of the root ball remains even with the soil grade. All materials shall be treated with fertilizer tablets immediately after planting. Three (3) inches of mulch is required around all planting materials. For trees and shrubs, the planting soil shall consist of a mixture of fifty (50) percent mulch and fifty (50) percent of clean brown soil. 
B.  Maintenance. The property owner, or successors in interest, or agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the following: 
1.  Regular maintenance of all landscaping in a way that presents a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. All landscaping shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds and litter. This maintenance shall include weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging, mulching or other maintenance, as needed, consistent with acceptable horticultural practices; 
2.  Regular maintenance, repair or replacement of landscape barriers and maintenance of required landscape structures (e.g., walls, fences) in a structurally sound condition; 
3.  Perpetual maintenance to prohibit the reestablishment of prohibited and non-native species within landscaping and preservation areas; and 
4.  All trees shall be allowed to grow to their natural mature height and a full canopy. Large and medium canopy trees shall be required to attain a minimum twenty (20) foot canopy spread prior to pruning. In no case shall the canopy spread be reduced to less than twenty (20) feet in width. Maintenance shall be limited to periodic trimming to maintain healthy trees, removal of diseased limbs, or removal of limbs or foliage that present a hazard. 
5.  Landscape areas which are required to be created or preserved by this section shall not be used for the storage/display of materials or sale of products or services. 
6.  The owner or tenant shall maintain all landscaped areas in a manner consistent with the site plan or landscape plan approved for the property and consistent with the requirements of this section. If a property owner changes and/or removes without replacement thirty (30) percent or more of the required landscaping, excluding trees, then a landscaping permit with proposed landscape plan shall be submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning Division. If no site plan or landscape plan is in existence, then the property owner must meet existing code requirements. 
7.  Landscaping and barrier hedges shall be trimmed and maintained in a healthy and neat condition and shall not extend onto or over public properties, rights-of-way or easements. 
C.  Pruning. Pruning is permitted to allow for healthy tree growth, to promote safety considerations and enhance the aesthetic value of plant material. Trees which cause a conflict with views, signage or lighting shall not be pruned more than the maximum allowed nor pruned in conflict with the maintenance standards above. The Planning & Zoning Director may suspend the provisions of this section upon finding that additional pruning is necessary for plant growth, safety or aesthetics. 
1.  A maximum of one fourth (0.25) of tree canopy may be removed from a tree within a one (1) year period, provided that the removal conforms to the standards of crown reduction, crown cleaning, crown thinning, crown raising, vista pruning and crown restoration pruning techniques. All pruning shall comply with the American National Standards Institute, ANSI 300-1995 (Tree, Shrub and other Woody Plant Maintenance) as amended. The crown of a tree required by this Code or condition of approval shall not be reduced below the minimum spread or height requirements of Section 7.3(3)(6) or specific Village Council conditions of approval. A tree which is pruned in excess of these requirements shall be replaced with a tree that meets the minimum requirements of Section 7.3 and Table 7.3-3. 
2.  If other than the mature height and spread is desired for any required tree the size and shape shall be indicated on an approved landscape, planting or alternative landscaping plan. Shaping of a tree shall be permitted if the tree is to be used as an accent, focal point or as part of an overall landscape design. A maintenance program shall be clearly outlined on the approved landscape plan to explain the care and upkeep of a shaped tree. 
3.  In reducing overall size, attention shall be given to symmetrical appearance. Vertical growth is to be encouraged and the sides reduced in order to maintain a "tree-like" form. 
4.  When cutting back trees, care shall be taken to promote shape and form typical of their species in similar settings in the Village. 
5.  All cuts shall be made sufficiently close to the trunk or parent limb, without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub. Clean cuts shall be made at all times. 
6.  Climbing and pruning practices shall not injure the tree except for the pruning cuts. 
7.  Treatment of cuts and wounds with a tree wound dressing is to be carried out within twenty-four (24) hours of the cuts being made. Materials non-toxic to the cambium layer shall be used, and care shall be taken to treat only the exposed wood with a thin coat of dressing. 
8.  Tools shall be disinfected with diluted chlorine solution (bleach) or methyl alcohol at seventy (70) percent (denatured wood alcohol diluted appropriately with water) or suitable solution after each cut and between trees where there is known to be a danger of transmitting disease on tools. 
9.  Tree injuries are to be annually inspected. Those not closing properly and where callus growth is not completely established shall be treated. 
10.  Tree topping (hatracking) is prohibited and shall be defined as the cutting back of limbs to a point between branch collars/buds, larger than one (1) inch in diameter within the tree's crown. 
11.  No large or medium canopy trees shall be pruned before it has a minimum of twenty (20) foot canopy spread prior to pruning. 
12.  Palm pruning. 
a.  No more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of fronds shall be removed. 
b.  No cutting below the horizon line unless dead or diseased fronds. 
13.  Exceptions. 
The following trees and species are exempt from these pruning standards. 
a.  Trees affected by Federal Aviation Administration and airport safety regulations. 
b.  Trees that interfere with corner clips, utility lines or utility structures. 
c.  Trees having insect or disease damage, crown dieback, or decay greater than one-third ( 1/3 ) the tree canopy. 
d.  Trees having suffered damage due to natural or accidental causes 
e.  Trees in botanical gardens, or botanical research centers; 
f.  Trees controlled by the Village of Wellington. 
g.  Ficus species. 
D.  Irrigation. Landscaped areas shall be irrigated as necessary to maintain required plant materials in good and healthy condition. Irrigation systems shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available water supply with at least one (1) outlet, within seventy-five (75) feet of the plants to be maintained, except on non-residential sites where an automated system is required to provide one hundred (100) percent coverage. 
2.  Irrigation systems shall be designed and operated so as not to overlap water zones or to water impervious areas and shall be continuously maintained in working order. 
3.  Irrigation systems shall be designed and operated to apply water onto shrub and tree areas on a less frequent schedule than those irrigating lawn areas. A rain sensor switch, which will override the irrigation cycle of the sprinkler system when adequate rainfall has occurred pursuant to F.S. Section 373.62, shall be installed on systems with automatic controllers. 
4.  Irrigation systems shall not be installed, operated or maintained abutting any public street which causes water from the system to spray onto the roadway or to strike passing pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
5.  The use of irrigation quality or re-used water shall be required, where available, for parks and recreation facilities and medians that are: 
a.  within one (1) mile of reuse wastewater mains; or 
b.  where irrigation quality or re-used water is available and where such reuse is approved by the regulatory agencies. 
6.  Permanent irrigation systems are not required for areas set aside on approved site development plans for preservation of existing native vegetation. 
7.  All irrigation systems installed in new construction shall be a nonpotable water irrigation system. These systems shall be restricted to surface, well water, or water reuse only; the use of Village potable water is prohibited. 
8.  Temporary irrigation systems installed pursuant to acceptable xeriscape practices may be used to meet the standards of this section, upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Division. 
9.  Any landscape irrigation shall be restricted to the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. All daytime irrigation is prohibited. 
10.  Any declaration of water shortage restrictions, Phase I, II, III and IV issued by South Florida Water Management District in times of drought shall be followed and enforced immediately upon certification. South Florida Water Management District's Modified Phase I water-use restrictions are permanent restrictions. Failure to comply with the requirements of these restrictions will constitute a violation of the Village's regulations. 
11.  Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this Section. 
a.  Landscape irrigation by hand watering using a self-canceling nozzle or low volume irrigation system. 
b.  Landscape irrigation by systems from which the sole source is treated wastewater effluent. 
c.  Landscape irrigation by systems for system repair and maintenance; however, such operation shall be limited to ten (10) minutes per zone per week. 
d.  Flushing of water and sewer mains required for normal clearance and maintenance and for maintenance of water quality; however, where practical, contractors and utilities shall direct flushed water into pervious areas, flush at the minimum rate necessary for cleaning, and disperse the water in such a manner to benefit local vegetation. 
e.  Landscape irrigation for purpose of watering in fungicides, insecticides, herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers as required by the manufacturer or by federal state laws; however, this exemption applies only to licensed pest control operators and shall be limited to manufacturer's recommendations, which must be completed within twenty-four (24) hours of application. Further, such operators must be on premises when such watering takes place outside the hours allowed for irrigation. 
f.  Recirculating ornamental water features. 
g.  Firefighting, health or medical uses. 
h.  Agricultural irrigation. 
i.  Irrigation of clay tennis courts, limited to one (1) hour two (2) times per day. 
E.  Restoration and maintenance. Required or preserved vegetation that becomes damaged or diseased, or is dead shall be immediately replaced with equivalent vegetation to comply with the approved landscape plan, alternative landscape plan, or planting plan or with the requirements of this section (if an approved plan is not on file). Preserved trees for which credit was awarded and that are removed or damaged, shall be replaced in accord with the tree replacement credit standards of Table 7.3-5. Landscape trees planted or preserved to meet the minimum landscape code requirements may be removed provided a Tree Removal Permit is applied for and approved. 
Sec. 7.3.13. - Temporary suspension of landscape standards. 
A.  Suspension Circumstances. The installation of landscaping required by this section may be temporarily suspended, in individual cases, by the Planning, Zoning and Building Director or his/her designee under the following circumstances: 
1.  After a freeze when required landscape materials are not available; 
2.  During a period of drought in which the use of water is restricted by a governmental authority; or 
3.  Prior to a building certificate of occupancy in response to extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. 
B.  Performance surety. If the landscape standards of this section are suspended pursuant to this section, the Planning, Zoning and Building Department shall enter into an agreement with the property owner to allow issuance of the permit or Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion, only if the property owner provides adequate guarantee or surety that the terms of this section will be met. The guarantee shall consist of a performance bond or other surety agreement approved by the Village Attorney in an amount equal to one hundred and ten (110) percent of the direct costs of materials and labor, and other costs incidental to the installation of the required landscaping completion agreement. Performance bonds or other guarantees required pursuant to this subsection shall name the Village as beneficiary and specify the time frame for the completion of the landscape standards of this section. 
C.  Application requirements. An application for a temporary suspension of landscape standards shall be accompanied by a landscape plan identifying the plantings which have been postponed, the proposed planting schedule and the costs of the suspended planting. Planting cost estimates shall be verified by competent authority and provided to the Village along with the application. 
Sec. 7.3.14. - Administration. 
A.  Landscape Review. All site development plans shall be reviewed by the Planning, Zoning and Building Department for conformance to landscaping and screening requirements prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
B.  Field inspections. Unless otherwise provided in this section, all development subject to this section shall be inspected by the Planning, Zoning, and Building Department after installation of the required landscaping. Required landscaping shall be approved by the Planning, Zoning and Building Department prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Compliance. 
C.  Certification of Completion. In addition to the required field inspection, the property owner shall submit a Certificate of Compliance, in a form approved by the Planning, Zoning and Building Director, to the Planning, Zoning and Building Department as a condition of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. This certificate shall be prepared and signed by a landscape architect licensed by the State of Florida and demonstrate that all of the provisions of this section have been met. The certification statement shall appear on the certification report. 
1.  Field verification of certification. The Planning, Zoning, and Building Department may at its option conduct a field inspection to verify the Certificate of Compliance. 
2.  Acceptance of certification. If no field verification is conducted by the Planning, Zoning and Building Department within thirty (30) days, the Certificate of Compliance shall be deemed to have been accepted. Upon acceptance by the Department, the Certificate of Compliance shall be filed and maintained with the official records of the development. 
D.  Annual Inspection. Landscaping shall be inspected periodically by the Village to insure proper maintenance. The property owner shall be notified by the Village, in writing, of any areas which are not being maintained as provided in this section and shall, within thirty (30) days from the time of notification, restore the landscaping to a healthy condition. 
E.  Tree and landscaping services and arborists. 
1.  All tree and landscaping services shall register with the Planning, Zoning and Building Department and obtain a registration of occupancy or occupational license before beginning work. 
2.  Vehicles used by a tree service/arborist operating within the Village shall be clearly marked with the name of the tree service/arborist. Certified arborists shall display the certified logo and registration number, if any. 
3.  A photocopy of the current occupational license and Village registration shall be available for inspection at each job site. 
4.  Standards for cutting on or repair to dicotyledonous species shall be in accordance with the American National Standards Institute A-300 standards or similar accepted standards as published. 
5.  Persons engaged in business as a tree service in the Village shall adhere to the American National Standards Institute, A-300 standards or similar accepted standards as published, except for service to prohibited trees. 
6.  Persons engaged in business as a tree or landscaping service in the Village shall remove their own planting debris prior or upon leaving the work site. 
Sec. 7.3.15. - Enforcement. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of this section or any permit or approval granted or authorized hereunder shall constitute a violation of this section. The Planning, Zoning and Building Department may issue a Cease and Desist Order or withhold a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion until the provisions of this section have been met. 
A.  Fines. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by: 
1.  A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation; or 
2.  A quad permit fee for removal of trees without a valid tree removal permit; or, 
3.  Such fines and imprisonment as provided for in Sec. 125.69, Fla. Stat. 
B.  Violations. The following deficiencies shall be considered a separate and continuing violation of this section: 
1.  each tree or shrub which is not properly installed or properly maintained on site, as required by this section; 
2.  each day in which landscaping is not properly installed or properly maintained on site as required by this section; and 
3.  each tree removed without a permit. 
C.  Review board. Violations of this section may be referred to the Code Enforcement Board, Special Master or Tree Board for corrective actions and civil penalties. 
D.  Additional sanctions. The Village may take any appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, administrative action, requests for temporary and permanent injunctions, and other sanctions to enforce the provisions of this Section. 
[Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Sec. 7.3] 
CHAPTER 4. - PRESERVATION OF CRITICAL RESOURCES 

Sec. 7.4.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the policies of the Future Land Use and Conservation Elements in the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan by establishing an administrative review process to prevent the unnecessary removal or destruction of existing native upland vegetation and jurisdictional wetlands. Consistency with these policies will be achieved through: 
1.  Limitations on the timing and extent of removal of vegetation from a site. 
2.  Required compliance with state and federal wetland regulations. 
3.  Establishment of preserve areas for jurisdictional wetlands and a portion of native upland vegetation. 
B.  Intent. It is the intent of the Village of Wellington to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its residents by encouraging beneficial land, forest, and wetland management practices. The minimum standards and administrative procedures established by this section help achieve these goals by: 
1.  Conserving Natural Resources. Existing trees, vegetation, and wetlands, individually, in significant grouping, or in natural ecosystems, are essential elements of the Village's environmental heritage. 
2.  Serving Functional Values. Trees and vegetation serve a number of invaluable environmental, social, educational, and aesthetic functions, including: 
a.  Maintaining air quality through photosynthesis. 
b.  Maintaining permeable land areas for aquifer recharge and surface water filtration. 
c.  Reducing and reversing air, noise, heat, and water pollution. 
d.  Promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade, reducing heat gain in or on buildings or paved areas, and reducing the temperature of the microclimate through evapotranspiration. 
e.  Reducing erosion by stabilizing the soil. 
f.  Providing habitat and corridors for wildlife. 
g.  Providing direct and increasingly important psychological and physical benefits to human beings by reducing noise and glare, breaking up the monotony, and softening the harsh aspects of urban development. 
h.  Serving as educational, aesthetic, historic, and cultural resources. 
i.  Buffering and providing a transition area between otherwise incompatible types of development. 
j.  Increasing economic value of land by serving as a capital asset in site design. 
k.  Promoting the use of plant species native to South Florida through relocation and installation. 
3.  Preserving Land Values through Innovative Site Design. When properly incorporated into site design, natural features serve as a capital asset. 
4.  Preventing Destructive Land Development Practices. The land clearing practices of speculative clearing or grubbing without a bona fide development plan may result in the removal of native upland vegetation or wetlands that may have otherwise been preserved or relocated. 
5.  Encouraging Water Conservation. The preservation of existing plant communities, reestablishment of native plant communities, site development that retains stormwater runoff on site, and recognition of environmentally sensitive site development concepts prevent excessive use of water, reduce evaporation (compared to impervious surface areas), and generally conserve regional water resources. 
Sec. 7.4.2. - Applicability. 
A.  Affected Parcels. The provisions of this section shall apply to all undeveloped property except for: 
1.  Single-family lots with an area of 1.25 acres or less that are either lots of record, were legally subdivided, or were shown on a recorded map, plat, drawing, or survey prior to June 25, 2002, the date of adoption of this ordinance. 
2.  Undeveloped parcels or undeveloped portions of parcels with an existing valid development order; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall apply to any request to modify any development order or permit for such undeveloped parcels or portions of undeveloped parcels. 
B.  Conflict with Other Regulations. This section is intended to complement and not conflict with other Village, county, state, and federal environmental regulations. However, in cases of conflict, the more restrictive regulations shall apply to the extent of the conflict. Further, exemption from compliance with these regulations does not constitute exemption from other applicable state, federal, and local regulations, which must be fully complied with. 
Sec. 7.4.3. - Exempt Activities. 
    The following activities are exempt from these requirements: 
A.  Utilities and Easements. Any alteration to design specifications, pursuant to the direction of public or private utility organizations or agencies, water control district, or water management district within drainage easements where such activity has received all required construction and/or operating permits. 
B.  Management Plan Activities. Alterations or activities associated with the adopted management plan for government maintained parks, recreation areas, wildlife management areas, conservation areas, and preserves. 
C.  Enhancements and Restoration. The removal of vegetation by the Village or County, or their agents, for the purposes of environmental enhancement or environmental restoration as part of an approved mitigation, enhancement, or restoration plan. 
Sec. 7.4.4. - Wetlands. 
A.  Applicability. No net loss of function from wetlands, as defined by the state (Chapter 373, Florida Statutes) and federal (40CFR Part 232) government, shall be permitted within the Village of Wellington, except as specifically provided for in this section. 
B.  Verification. When a development application is submitted to the Village for master and/or site plan approval, the application shall include an environmental site assessment that identifies all wetland areas on the parcel. 
C.  Wetland Determination. If the environmental site assessment verifies the existence of wetlands, the application shall also include a written jurisdictional determination from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the South Florida Water Management District, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and the Army Corps of Engineers, and a determination of non-jurisdictional wetlands. 
D.  Upland Buffer Requirements. 
1.  All wetlands shall, at a minimum, be protected by a native upland buffer with an average width of twenty-five (25) feet and a minimum width at any one (1) point of fifteen (15) feet. 
2.  All wetlands and associated native buffers shall be set aside and designated on the site plan as preserve areas and be protected by a preserve management plan. 
E.  Mitigation. Any proposed impacts to wetlands shall be mitigated as required by the Village and/or appropriate state and federal agencies. A copy of the mitigation plan approved by applicable state and/or federal agencies shall be submitted to the Village prior to any legally authorized alteration of wetlands on a site. Wetland mitigation shall occur within the Village boundaries if feasible. 
Sec. 7.4.5. - Native Upland Vegetation. 
A.  Verification. All development applications for site plan approval shall include an environmental site assessment that identifies those areas of the site, if any, where native upland vegetation exists. 
B.  Minimum Preservation Requirements. 
1.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total native upland vegetation on site shall be preserved. 
2.  A native upland buffer around wetlands and/or native habitat preserved for listed species may be counted toward meeting the native upland vegetation preserve requirement. 
3.  If more than one (1) native upland plant community exists on the parcel, the more rare plant communities (such as sandhill, scrub, dry prairie, xeric hammock, and scrubby flatwoods) shall be given preference over the more common plant communities (such as mesic flatwoods and prairie hammock) when designating the preserve area(s). 
C.  Preserve Areas. 
1.  Location. Whenever possible, preserve areas should form a contiguous tract, be adjacent to wetlands, or link to adjacent parcel preserves. Wildlife corridors should be established where possible. 
2.  Minimum Size. The size of the preserve area should be adequate to maintain long-term viability and maximize wildlife utilization. Preserve areas should be at least one-fourth (1/4) acre, or ten thousand eight hundred ninety (10,890) square feet in size. 
3.  Designation and Management. All preserved native upland habitat shall be identified on the site plan, designated as preserve areas, and protected by a preserve management plan. 
D.  Mitigation. 
1.  The ability to mitigate for native upland preserve areas shall be determined by the Village during the development review process. This determination shall be based on the environmental site assessment, prepared by the applicant, addressing the reasons for mitigation, which may include one (1) or more of the following circumstances: 
a.  The native vegetation is not in a viable condition such that it could be restored. 
b.  The size of the resulting preserve area would not meet the minimum size of one fourth (1/4) acre nor can the preserve area be linked to other preserve areas to create a one-fourth (1/4) acre preserve. 
c.  The location of the proposed preserve area is such that a permitted use could not be reasonably established on the parcel. 
d.  The site is proposed for a public project that will provide substantial benefit to the health, safety, and welfare of citizens. 
2.  The mitigation options are: 
a.  Off-site Mitigation. The applicant may propose to preserve similar or more rare native upland vegetation elsewhere within the Village, at a ratio of three (3) units of preserved off-site native upland vegetation for each one (1) unit not preserved on site. The following conditions shall apply: 
i.  The off-site preserve area shall be property that is not already in conservation or preservation. 
ii.  The off-site preserve area shall be applied towards meeting the preservation requirements for only one (1) parcel of land or development. 
iii.  The preserve area requirements of Subsection 3 [c] above shall apply to all off-site mitigation preserve areas. 
iv.  Off-site preservation shall be complete prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the property that is the subject of the development application proposing off-site mitigation. 
b.  Environmental Restoration or Creation. Off-site restoration, reestablishment, or creation of native plant communities or habitat that will be beneficial to listed species and that is equal to three hundred (300) percent of the area required for preservation on the subject property may be accepted as mitigation provided these activities occur on publicly-owned lands within the Village. All proposed restorative, reestablishment, or creation work shall be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the property that is the subject of the development application proposing such off-site mitigation. 
c.  Payment in Lieu of Preservation. The Village may accept cash payments in lieu of preservation of native upland habitat if no other practicable mitigation options are available. These payments will be used to fund the acquisition of land containing similar native upland habitat or for ecological improvements to public lands. The amount of the cash payment shall be equivalent to three (3) times the fair market value of the land, as determined by a certified appraiser selected by the Village, using the proposed development of the parcel as the basis for valuation. These funds shall be deposited in the appropriate Village account prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the property. 
Sec. 7.4.6. - Listed Species. 
A.  Applicability. If the environmental site assessment for the property reveals the presence or probability of listed species, the following regulations shall apply. 
B.  Minimum Requirements. 
1.  Coordination. The applicant shall submit written evidence of coordination with all applicable agencies (e.g., US Fish and Wildlife Service and Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission) concerning the listed species at the time of development application submission. 
2.  Action. The applicant shall take whatever action is determined appropriate by the regulating agency to preserve the listed species, including increasing the size of native upland and/or wetland preserve areas to provide adequate habitat. Relocation of listed species to an off-site preserve may be permitted provided the regulating agency approves a relocation plan. A copy of the approved relocation plan shall be submitted to the Village prior to issuance of a final development order. 
Sec. 7.4.7. - Preserve Areas. 
A.  Applicability. All applicants for development approval on sites that contain native upland vegetation or wetland preserve areas shall demonstrate compliance with the following minimum standards. 
B.  Protection During Construction Activities. Preserve areas shall be protected during construction by a minimum ten-foot setback. This construction setback shall: 
1.  Have its perimeter marked using metal or wood stakes and flagging. 
2.  Be protected from stormwater runoff. 
3.  Be maintained in its natural state, except that invasive, non-native vegetation shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. No earthwork or construction or placement of structures (temporary or permanent) shall be permitted within the setback. 
4.  Be subject to the provisions of the Natural Resource Protection Regulations, Tree Protection, of the LDR. 
Construction activities on a site shall not commence until the Planning & Zoning Director has verified the existence of the required construction setback. 
C.  Protection after Construction. The perpetual protection of designated preserve areas shall be established by a conservation easement, consistent with the requirements of Section 704.06, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. The conservation easement shall be held by the Village of Wellington and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Attorney prior to issuance of a final development order. In addition to a conservation easement, perpetual protection and maintenance of the preserve may be assured through: 
1.  Dedication of the preserve area to an appropriate Village, county, state, or federal agency. The applicant shall provide written verification of this dedication (including a written statement from the public agency accepting the dedication) prior to issuance of a final development order. The written verification shall also address the availability of adequate technical and financial resources for maintenance and protection of the preserve. 
2.  Dedication of a preserve area to a homeowner's or property owner's association provided: 
a.  The preserve area shall remain undivided. The covenant shall provide that such areas have been encumbered for the perpetual benefit of the public, as well as members of the association, and all future use shall be consistent with the adopted preserve management plan. 
b.  The covenants shall contain an obligation by members of the association to pay for and ensure implementation of proper care and maintenance of the preserve areas. 
c.  The covenants are reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney prior to the issuance of the final development order. 
D.  Permitted Uses. The only uses permitted in preserve areas are passive recreation and observation uses, as well as preserve maintenance activities. These uses may be further limited if listed species are present in the preserve area. 
E.  Preserve Management Plans. All applicants for development approval on sites that contain wetland, native upland vegetation, or listed species preserve areas shall submit a preserve management plan for review and approval by the Planning & Zoning Director. The preserve management plan shall be incorporated into the development approval by reference and may not be changed without written approval from the Village. Preserve management plans shall contain the information listed below: 
1.  Multifamily Developments, Planned Unit Developments, Homeowner/Property Owner Associations, and Nonresidential Uses. Preserve management plans for these developments shall address the following: 
a.  Identify the location of the preserve area(s), including the size. 
b.  Identify the party responsible for maintenance of preserve and provide procedures for the transfer of responsibilities when applicable. 
c.  Restrictions on modification or alteration of preserve area size, vegetation type, or function without Village approval. In residential developments, the preserve management plan should identify the means to be used to notify individual lot owners of the existence, location, and regulations pertaining to the preserve area(s). 
d.  Removal and continued regular management of invasive, non-native vegetation and debris. For a period of five (5) years following the establishment of the preserve area, monitoring and complete removal of invasive, non-native vegetation shall occur every six (6) months. During this period, the preserve area shall be maintained with a minimum of eighty (80) percent desired vegetation. Between monitoring visits, no more than five (5) percent of the preserve area should be infested with invasive, non-native vegetation. If more than five (5) percent of the preserve area is consistently infested with invasive, non-native vegetation (as noted during monitoring visits), the Village may require more frequent monitoring. An annual report each year on the status of the preserve area, including photographs of the preserve area taken during the semi-annual monitoring, shall be provided to the Village. If more than five (5) percent of the preserve area is reported in the annual report as infested with invasive, non-native vegetation, the Village may require additional monitoring and complete removal of invasive, non-native vegetation. 
e.  Procedures for the removal of any illegally located structures, to limit encroachment of turf grasses, and to prevent destruction of wildlife by domestic and feral (meaning previously domesticated but now wild) animal populations. 
f.  Revegetation of preserve with native plant material, if necessary. 
g.  Protection of listed species in accordance with recommendations from applicable state and federal agencies. 
h.  Habitat management practices, including prescribed burning or other methods to stimulate natural processes. 
i.  Proposed permitted uses within preserve area, including the location of proposed nature trails and boardwalks, if any. 
j.  Control of off-road vehicles, dirt bikes, and other motorized vehicles. 
k.  Protection of the preserve area from existing and/or new drainage or irrigation that negatively affects the preserve. 
l.  Maintenance of natural hydroperiod, drainage patterns, and hydrologic connections for wetland preserves. 
m.  Visual identification of the limits of the preserve when it is adjacent to residential uses. 
n.  Any additional measures deemed necessary to protect and maintain the values and functions of the preserve area, including regular monitoring and reports on compliance. 
2.  Individual Single-Family Homes. The Village will provide the property owner with an abbreviated preserve management plan containing the following: 
a.  An outline of responsibilities to protect and preserve any native vegetation and limits for the type of maintenance that can be performed. 
b.  Guidelines for the removal of any invasive, non-native plant species by the least damaging method to the preserve area. 
c.  Restrictions stating that a preserve area cannot be modified or altered in size, vegetation type, or function without Village approval. 
d.  Responsibilities for protection of any listed species in accordance with state and federal laws. 
e.  Restrictions stating that no new drainage or irrigation that negatively affects the preserve shall be allowed. 
f.  Any additional measures deemed necessary to protect and maintain the values and functions of the preserve area. 
3.  Amendments to Preserve Management Plans. No alteration to a preserve management plan shall be allowed without a development order amendment. 
Sec. 7.4.8. - Appeals. 
    An applicant may appeal a final determination made by the Planning & Zoning Director to the Tree Board. 
Sec. 7.4.9. - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement. Violations of this section shall be subject to the village code enforcement procedures adopted pursuant to Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, including notice, hearing, and penalty provisions therein. Additionally, violations may be subject to abatement procedures and/or may be subject to any other means of enforcement allowed by law. 
B.  Violations. It shall be a violation of this section to alter native upland vegetation or wetlands without first obtaining written approval from the Village, unless expressly exempt under the provisions of this section. 
1.  A minimum violation of this section shall be the unauthorized alteration or removal of up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of native upland vegetation and/or wetlands. 
2.  The unauthorized alteration or removal of each additional one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, or portion thereof, of native upland vegetation and/or wetlands in violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation. 
3.  Cumulative violations shall be determined by the addition of each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet tract, or portion thereof, of native upland vegetation and/or wetlands altered or removed, whether in the same manner or in a different manner. 
4.  Alteration to a preserve area that includes the removal of individual trees shall also be subject to the provisions of the Natural Resource Protection Regulations I, Tree Protection, Enforcement. 
C.  Penalties. 
1.  Restoration. Each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, or portion thereof, damaged or destroyed shall be restored to pre-damage conditions at the property owner's expense. The violator shall submit a restoration plan to the Planning & Zoning Director for review. Once the restoration plan is approved, the violator shall post a bond in an amount equivalent to the costs for implementing the restoration plan. If the extent of the damage is such that viable restoration on site is not possible, off-site mitigation, as provided for in Subsection F.4.b.i and ii, shall be required at an increased ratio of one (1) unit damaged to three (3) units restored. Payment in lieu of restoration of an existing preserve shall not be accepted. 
2.  Fines. 
a.  A fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day shall be assessed starting on the day of the notice of violation and ending when a restoration plan is approved and bonded. 
b.  A fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day shall be assessed for a repeat violation starting on the day of the notice of violation and ending when a restoration plan is approved and bonded. 
c.  A fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day may be imposed if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature. 
3.  Suspension of Review. If a restoration plan for damaged preserve areas is not submitted within thirty (30) days following the notice of violation, the Village may suspend issuance of further permits for the property (including building permits, inspections, and occupational licenses). 
4.  Additional Sanctions. If, after sixty (60) days of the notice of violation, a restoration plan has not been submitted, the Village may place a lien on the property in an amount equal to the sum of any unpaid fines and the reasonable cost for repairing the damage. Once collected, these funds may be used for the acquisition, restoration, or enhancement of publicly-owned conservation parcels. 
Sec. 7.4.10. - Variation from Minimum Property Development Regulations. 
    In order to accommodate the preservation of wetlands, native upland vegetation, and habitat for listed species, the Planning & Zoning Director may: 
    Waive up to twenty (20) percent of a required property line setback standard; 
    or 
    Waive up to ten (10) percent of the required parking spaces for nonresidential development. 
    If the applicant has requested variations to either of these standards for other reasons, the decision to allow a further variation for preservation purposes shall be made by the Village Council, based on a recommendation from the Planning & Zoning Director. 
CHAPTER 5. - TREE PROTECTION 

Sec. 7.5.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the policies of the Future Land Use and Conservation Elements in the Village of Wellington Comprehensive Plan by establishing an administrative review and permitting process to prohibit the unnecessary removal or destruction of native trees and requires the removal of certain invasive, non-native plant species by: 
1.  Limiting the removal of vegetation from a site until the approval of a bona fide site development plan. 
2.  Preserving and incorporating specimen trees into the site design. 
3.  Prohibiting speculative clearing. 
4.  Providing protection for individual trees located outside preserve areas. 
5.  Requiring the removal of invasive, non-native plants prior to occupancy or use of a parcel. 
B.  Intent. It is the intent of the Village to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its residents by encouraging the protection of native vegetation. The minimum standards of this section help achieve this goal by: 
1.  Conserving Natural Resources. Existing trees and vegetation, individually, in significant grouping, or in natural ecosystems, are essential elements of the Village's environmental heritage. 
2.  Serving Functional Values. Trees and vegetation serve a number of invaluable environmental, economic, social, educational, and aesthetic functions, including: 
a.  Maintaining air quality through photosynthesis. 
b.  Maintaining permeable land areas for aquifer recharge and surface water filtration. 
c.  Reducing and reversing air, noise, heat, and water pollution. 
d.  Promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade, reducing heat gain in or on buildings or paved areas, and reducing the temperature of the microclimate through evapotranspiration. 
e.  Reducing erosion by stabilizing the soil. 
f.  Providing habitat and corridors for wildlife. 
g.  Providing direct and increasingly important psychological and physical benefits to human beings by reducing noise and glare, breaking up the monotony, and softening the harsh aspects of urban development. 
h.  Serving as educational, aesthetic, historic, and cultural resources. 
i.  Buffering and providing a transition area between otherwise incompatible types of development. 
j.  Increasing economic value of land by serving as a capital asset in site design. 
k.  Promoting the use of plant species native to South Florida through relocation and installation. 
3.  Preventing Destructive Land Development Practices. The land clearing practices of grubbing or speculative clearing of lots without a bona fide site development plan or a comparable preservation management plan may result in the removal of native vegetation that may have otherwise been preserved or relocated. 
Sec. 7.5.2. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all property within the Village of Wellington. This section is intended to complement and not conflict with other Village, state, and federal environmental regulations. However, in cases of conflict, the more restrictive regulations shall apply to the extent of the conflict. 
Sec. 7.5.3. - Exempt Activities. 
    The following activities are exempt from these requirements: 
A.  Land Surveying. The minimal removal of trees or understory by a Florida licensed land surveyor necessary for the performance of his or her duties provided the swath cleared shall not exceed five (5) feet in width and hand clearing shall be used to remove vegetation. If survey lines greater than five (5) feet in width are required, the Village shall be notified, and a permit shall be required. 
B.  Utilities and Easements. Any alteration to design specification, pursuant to the direction of public or private utility organizations or agencies, water control district, or water management district within drainage easements where such activity has received all required construction and/or operating permits. 
C.  Management Plan Activities. Alterations or activities associated with the adopted management plan for government-maintained parks, recreation areas, wildlife-management areas, conservation areas, and preserves. 
D.  Enhancements and Restoration. The removal of vegetation by the Village, county, or their agents, for the purposes of environmental enhancement or environmental restoration. 
E.  Natural Emergencies. The provisions of this section may be suspended or waived by the Planning & Zoning Director during a period of officially declared emergency, such as a hurricane, a windstorm, a tropical storm, flood, or other similar disaster. 
F.  Forest Management Activities. Selective tree removal for forest management activities as defined in the current Forest Management Plan as approved by the Florida Division of Forestry for that specific site. 
G.  Botanical Gardens, Botanical Research Centers, or Licensed Commercial Nurseries. Following the approved initial clearing of the site for one (1) of these activities, subsequent harvesting or other plant removal shall not require a tree removal permit. 
Sec. 7.5.4. - Permits. 
    A tree removal permit shall be required for the removal of all trees. The permit review fees shall be waived for the removal of invasive, non-native trees and dead native trees. 
A.  Requirements. 
1.  Existing Development. The property owner shall submit a tree removal permit application to the Department, along with the associated review fee established by the Council and any additional information the Planning & Zoning Director deems necessary to complete the review of the application. Applications to remove more than five (5) trees shall include a tree survey. 
2.  Proposed Development. As part of the site plan review process, the applicant shall include a tree survey of all native trees located within the proposed development area(s). For any tree(s) that cannot be incorporated into the site plan pursuant to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall submit a tree removal permit along with a modified copy of the tree survey that indicates the location of and proposed method of mitigation for the tree(s) to be removed. 
B.  Criteria for Review. A tree removal permit shall be issued if one (1) or more of the following criteria are evidenced in the application: 
1.  Due to natural circumstances, the vegetation is irreparably damaged, dead, and/or is nonfunctioning. 
2.  The vegetation is in danger of falling and is located too close to existing structures so as to endanger them. 
3.  The vegetation interferes with utility services. 
4.  The vegetation creates unsafe vision clearance for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
5.  The vegetation is located in the buildable area of the site, unreasonably restricts the permitted use, and cannot be relocated on site due to viability, age, type, or size. 
6.  Removal of the tree is in the public interest. 
C.  Issuance and Expiration. 
1.  Existing Development. Tree removal permits will be issued following review and approval of the application. 
2.  Proposed Development. Tree removal permits shall be issued concurrent with building permits or other site development permit where vegetation is affected. 
3.  Expiration. All tree removal permits shall expire sixty (60) days after the date of issuance. Any work not completed within this period shall require submission of a new tree removal permit application and associated review fees. The Planning & Zoning Director may administratively extend the sixty-day time frame in conjunction with an approved development order. 
Sec. 7.5.5. - Tree Protection Standards. 
A.  Prohibition on Speculative Clearing. Speculative clearing or grubbing of a site is prohibited. 
B.  Preservation of Native Trees. 
1.  Native trees shall be maintained on site and in their existing locations unless otherwise permitted by this section. 
2.  In the event a native tree cannot be preserved in its existing location, the tree may be relocated to one (1) of the following areas on the site (listed in order of preference): preserve area, buffer, or interior landscaping. 
C.  Mitigation. 
1.  Trees planted in mitigation shall be two (2) inch DBH minimum, ten (10) feet in height planted a minimum of twenty (20) feet on center. For calculation purposes, all trees will be counted as two (2) inch DBH. 
2.  If preservation in place or through relocation is not possible, on-site mitigation shall be required with a mitigation ratio of 1:1. 
3.  If on-site mitigation is not possible, off-site mitigation within the Village shall be required with a mitigation ratio of 1:1.5. 
4.  If any native trees cannot be preserved, relocated, or mitigated on site, in accordance with appropriate spacing requirements, and off-site mitigation within the Village is not possible, then a fee-in-lieu equivalent to three (3) times the retail value of each tree, plus installation costs, plus the equivalent cost property necessary to provide a minimum tree spacing of twenty (20) feet on center, shall be required for each native tree not preserved, relocated, or mitigated on the property or mitigated off-site. This fee shall be paid to the Village and used for the installation of native trees on publicly-owned land within the Village. 
D.  Tree Credits. Native trees preserved, relocated, or mitigated on site may be credited towards meeting the landscaping requirements of Section 7.3. 
E.  Relocation and Replacement Standards. Permitted or required tree relocation and replacement activity shall be done in accordance with standard forestry practices and procedures, and all such plantings shall be reasonably maintained and attended to promote successful establishment thereof. 
F.  Removal of Invasive, Non-Native Plants. All invasive, non-native plant species shall be removed from the site prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
G.  Protection of Preserved/Relocated Trees During Construction. In order to protect preserved and relocated trees from damage during construction, the following measures shall be implemented: 
1.  No excess soil, additional fill, equipment, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the drip line of any tree preserved in its original location. 
2.  No attachments or wires other than those of a protective or non-damaging nature shall be attached to any tree. 
3.  No soil shall be removed from within the drip line of any tree to remain in its original location, unless otherwise authorized by the tree removal permit. 
4.  Protective barriers shall be installed and maintained for the period of time beginning with the commencement of any land clearing or building operations and ending with the completion of the permitted clearing or building construction work on the site. (See "Technical Guide for the Village of Wellington's Natural Resources Protection Code" for the Village's protective barrier requirements) 
H.  Vegetation Management Plan. Native trees preserved on site shall be protected by a vegetation management plan. The vegetation management plan shall be submitted as part of the development application and shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning & Zoning Director. The vegetation management plan shall be incorporated into the development approval by reference and shall include provisions for: 
1.  Replacement of trees damaged during construction and those that do not survive the first year following transplantation. 
2.  Submission of annual reports on the semi-annual monitoring and removal of invasive, non-native vegetation. 
3.  Proper maintenance of preserved trees. 
Sec. 7.5.6. - Specimen Trees. 
    Trees that have attained the size and stature to meet the "specimen" designation are trees that are an important natural resource of the Village of Wellington and deserve special protection. All applications for development approval shall comply with the conditions and requirements of this subsection. 
A.  Specimen Tree List. The following list includes the most commonly found native trees in Palm Beach County with the specimen size trunk diameter at breast height (DBH) and circumference calculations in inches: 
Table 1: 
Specimen Tree Trunk DBH and Circumference 
Common Tree Name Scientific Name Specimen Trunk Size 
(in inches) DBH Circumference Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum 13 42 FL Strangler Fig Ficus aurea 25 78 Green Buttonwood Conocarpus erecta 13 42 Gumbo Limbo Bursera simaruba 13 41 Laurel Oak Quercus laurifolia 17 56 Live Oak Quercus virginiana 22 72 Red Maple Acer rubrum 13 40 Red Mulberry Morus rubra 13 43 Sand Pine Pinus clausa 8 27 Seagrape Coccoloba uvifera 10 32 Slash Pine Pinus elliott var. densa 14 45 Southern Red Cedar Juniperus silicicola 21 64 Sweet Bay Magnolia virginiana 12 38  
B.  Non-specimen Trees. The following trees are not considered specimen trees: 
1.  Non-native fruit trees that are cultivated or grown for the specific purpose of producing edible fruit, such as citrus, avocados, mangos. 
2.  Invasive, non-native plant species, including the Norfolk pine (Araucaria excelsia). 
3.  All non-native, multi-trunk palms. 
C.  Requirements. All sites proposed for development containing specimen trees shall comply with the following conditions: 
1.  Site plans shall be developed to incorporate specimen trees in place in the site design to the greatest extent possible. 
2.  Specimen trees shall be relocated on site if there is no construction alternative that allows incorporation of the tree into the site design. 
3.  If specimen tree cannot be preserved in place, or relocated on site, then the specimen tree can be relocated off site. 
4.  Relocated specimen trees shall be provided with irrigation, mulching, and other means to ensure survivorship. If relocated specimen trees do not survive, they shall be replaced with native tree species on a one-for-one or DBH inch-by-inch basis, whichever maintains the greatest amount of tree canopy. 
5.  Trees planted in mitigation shall be two (2) inch DBH minimum, ten (10) feet in height planted a minimum of twenty (20) feet on center. For calculation purposes, all trees will be counted as two (2) inch DBH. 
6.  If preservation in place or through relocation is not possible, on-site mitigation shall be required with a mitigation ratio of 2:1. 
7.  If on-site mitigation is not possible, off-site mitigation within the Village shall be required with a mitigation ratio of 4:1. 
8.  If any specimen trees cannot be preserved, relocated, or mitigated on site, in accordance with appropriate spacing requirements, and off-site mitigation within the Village is not possible, then a fee-in-lieu equivalent to three (3) times the retail value of each tree, plus installation costs, plus the equivalent cost property necessary to provide a minimum tree spacing of twenty (20) feet on center, shall be required for each specimen tree not preserved, relocated, or mitigated on the property or mitigated off-site. This fee shall be paid to the Village and used for the installation of specimen species trees on publicly-owned land within the Village. 
Sec. 7.5.7. - Appeals. 
    An applicant may appeal a final determination made by the Planning & Zoning Director to the Tree Board. 
Sec. 7.5.8. - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement. Violations of this section shall be subject to the village code enforcement procedures adopted pursuant to Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, including notice, hearing, and penalty provisions therein. Additionally, violations may be subject to abatement procedures and/or may be subject to any other means of enforcement allowed by law. 
B.  Violations. It shall be a violation of this section to remove any tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit from the Village, unless expressly exempt under the provisions of this section. 
1.  The removal of any tree, in violation of this section, shall constitute a separate violation. Each day a violation exists for such unlawful removal shall constitute a separate violation. 
2.  Removal of each additional tree in violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation. Each day a violation exists for such unlawful removal shall constitute a separate violation. 
C.  Penalties. 
1.  Invasive, Non-Native Trees. If the unlawfully removed tree was an invasive, non-native tree, the property owner will be advised in writing of the requirement to obtain a tree removal permit. Repeated, unauthorized removal of invasive, non-native trees may result in a fine of up to three (3) times the permit review fee for removal of a native tree. 
2.  Native Trees. 
a.  Replacement. The violator shall be required to mitigate for the removed tree(s) pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 7.5.6 above. A restoration plan shall be submitted to the Planning & Zoning Director for review and approval. Once approved, the violator shall post a bond in an amount equivalent to the costs for implementing the restoration plan. 
b.  Fines. 
c.  A fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day shall be assessed starting on the day of the notice of violation and ending when a restoration plan is approved and bonded. 
d.  A fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day shall be assessed for a repeat violation starting on the day of the notice of violation and ending when a restoration plan is approved and bonded. 
e.  A fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day may be imposed if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature. 
i.  Suspension of Review. If a restoration plan for unlawfully removed native trees is not approved and bonded within thirty (30) days following notice of violation, the Village may suspend issuance of further permits for the property (including building permits, inspections, and occupational licenses). 
ii.  Additional Sanctions. If, after sixty (60) days of the notice of violation a restoration plan has not been approved and bonded, the Village may place a lien on the property in an amount equal to the sum of any unpaid fines and the reasonable costs for replacing and installing the unlawfully removed tree(s) on public property. 
3.  Specimen Trees. The provisions of Subsection b above shall apply, except that the amount of the fines assessed in each case may be doubled. 
Sec. 7.5.9. - Variation from Minimum Property Development Regulations. 
    In order to accommodate the preservation of native and specimen trees, the Planning & Zoning Director may: 
    Waive up to twenty (20) percent of a required property line setback standard; 
    or 
    Waive up to ten (10) percent of the required parking spaces for nonresidential development. 
    If the applicant has requested variations to either of these standards for other reasons, the decision to allow a further variation for preservation purposes shall be made by the Village Council, based on a recommendation from the Planning & Zoning Director. 
CHAPTER 6. - EXCAVATION 

Sec. 7.6.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this section to: 
A.  Site development and land excavation practices. Regulate site development and land excavation practices which, individually or in cumulative effect, are destructive to the Village's natural resources; 
B.  Public health, safety and welfare. Ensure that mining and excavation activities do not adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of The Village; 
C.  Impact deterrence. Deter the negative immediate and long-term environmental and economic impacts of poor land development practices; 
D.  Sound land development practices. Encourage the use of economically feasible and environmentally sound land development practices; 
E.  Preserve land values. Preserve land values by ensuring that alteration of a parcel by non-commercial land excavation does not result in conditions that would prevent that parcel from meeting minimum Zoning Code requirements for other valid uses; 
F.  Site reclamation. Encourage the incorporation of excavated sites into other beneficial uses by promoting economical, effective and timely site reclamation; 
G.  Protection of properties. Protect existing and future beneficial use of surrounding properties; 
H.  Excess excavation. Recognize that excess excavation material may be disposed of off-site provided that the excavation site is subject to a bona fide site development plan; 
I.  Regulatory framework. Establish a regulatory framework of clear, reasonable, effective, and enforceable standards and requirements for the regulation of excavation, mining, and related activities; and 
J.  Public safety. Ensure that excavation and mining activities and resulting mined lakes are not allowed to become public safety hazards, and/or sources of water resource degradation or pollution. 
Sec. 7.6.2. - Applicability. 
    All mining and excavation activities within The Village shall comply with the regulations established in this section and other State and local requirements, as applicable. The regulations of this section may be known as the "The Village Excavation Code". 
A.  Compliance. Compliance with regulations of other applicable government agencies including but not limited to: the permitting process and standards of the SFWMD, Fresh Water Fish and Game Commission, DNR, DER, and ERM. 
B.  Conflicts. Where conflicts with applicable regulations occur, the more stringent regulation shall apply. 
Sec. 7.6.3. - Exemptions. 
    The following excavation activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this section: 
A.  Previously approved existing mined lakes which are: 
1.  Regulated by a national Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit; or 
2.  Regulated by a Florida Department of Environmental Regulation industrial wastewater operation permit; or 
3.  Located within an approved residential, commercial, industrial or mixed-use development; utilize a minimum of ninety (90) percent of the excavated material on site or receive approval to remove more than ten (10) percent of the excavated material from the site pursuant to Section 7.6.7.C.2.b; and function as a stormwater management facility pursuant to either: 
a.  a surface water management permit or approval issued through the South Florida Water Management District; or 
b.  an applicable Village land development process depicting proposed littoral and upland slopes of a mined lake; as long as the existing mined lake continues to meet the water quality standards contained in Chapter 17-302, F.A.C. 
B.  Swimming pools. Swimming pools, as allow by Section 6.6.1.H. Swimming Pools and Clubs, commercial and private. 
C.  Ponds. Small lily ponds, goldfish ponds, reflecting ponds, and other small ornamental water features with a maximum depth of four (4) feet OHW and not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet in surface area in conjunction with a valid building permit for a principal use. 
D.  Burial plots. Burial plots in approved cemeteries. 
E.  Govermental agencies. Excavations by The Village or the Florida Department of Transportation in the ultimate right-of-way of a road when that road is under construction. 
F.  Utility companies. Excavations for installation of utilities, including septic tanks. 
G.  Repair, maintenance and dredging. The performance of repair, reconstructing, and maintenance dredging of existing non-tidal man-made canals, channels, control structures and associated riprap, erosion controls, and intake and discharge structures, where the spoil material is to be removed and deposited on a self-contained, upland spoil site which will prevent the escape of the spoil material and drainage from the spoil site into surface waters of the state, provided no more dredging is performed than is necessary to restore the canal, channels, and intake and discharge structures to original design specifications, and provided that control devices are used at the dredge site to prevent turbidity and toxic or deleterious substances from discharging into adjacent waters during maintenance dredging. 
H.  Canals. Canals of conveyance located in the West County Agriculture Area which are less than fifteen (15) feet in depth from OHW or canals that require permits from SFWMD, DER, or ERM pursuant to Sec 9.4. 
I.  Mitigation projects. Mitigation projects permitted by SFWMD, DER, or ERM, pursuant to Chapters 403 and 373, Fla. Stat., and Chapter 17-312, F.A.C., as amended, and Article 9 of this Code, including projects approved to implement an adopted Surface Water Improvement & Management (SWIM) plan. 
J.  Permitted activities. All excavation activities that have received permits pursuant to Sep. 9.4 of this Code. 
K.  Agricultural. Agricultural ditches for vegetation production (i.e. groves, row crops, and tree farming) constructed solely in uplands that are less than six (6) feet in depth from OHW which meet the standards of bona fide agriculture (pursuant to Articles 3 and 6). These ditches shall not connect to canals of conveyance or waters of the State without the appropriate Federal, State, and Local approvals or permits. 
Sec. 7.6.4. - Prohibited Excavations. 
    The following types of excavation activities shall be prohibited: 
A.  Archaeological site. Excavation in any archaeological site until the find has been examined, recorded, and the preservation status is determined. 
B.  Others. Type I (A) Section 7.6.5.A., Type I (B) Section 7.6.5.B., and Agricultural Section 7.6.5.C. excavations that require dewatering, unless otherwise permitted by a State or Federal permitting agency. 
Sec. 7.6.5. - Excavation Types. 
    Before commencement of any excavation, approvals shall be obtained pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section of the Code. The following excavation types are defined: 
A.  Type I (A) excavation. Type I (A) excavations shall be accessory to the construction of a single family residence with a lot area greater than one (1.0) acre. For excavation activities that meet these criteria see Sec.7.6.7.C (Specific criteria for Type I (A) excavation). 
B.  Type I (B) excavation. Type I (B) excavation means excavation necessary for the creation of a pond which shall be accessory to a single family dwelling permitted by right in any zoning district on a lot greater than two (2) and one half (2.5) acres. Sec.7.6.7.D (Specific criteria for Type I (B) excavation). 
C.  Agricultural excavation. Agricultural excavation shall be permitted as a right in districts which permit bona fide agricultural production activities, provided the excavation is the minimum necessary to support the agricultural production operation, and the excavation activities comply with the procedures and standards of this subsection. For excavation activities that meet these criteria, see Section 7.6.7.A (Specific Criteria for Agricultural Excavation). 
D.  West County Agricultural Area (WCAA) Excavations. All excavations required for bona fide agricultural activities that may be located within the Village in the area bounded roughly by Lake Okeechobee, Palm Beach-Hendry County Line, and the South Florida Water Management District Levees L-4, L-5, L-6, L-7 and L-8 and has the agriculture production designation on the land use map in the land use element of the Village Comprehensive Plan. For excavation activities that meet these criteria, see Section 7.6.7.B (Specific Criteria for WCAA Excavations). 
E.  Type II excavation. Type II excavations shall be considered accessory to an activity for which a final site development plan has been approved. At a minimum, ninety (90) percent of the material to be excavated is to be used on-site. If less than ninety (90) percent of the material to be excavated is to be used on-site, special additional requirements listed in Sec.7.6.7.C.2.b as applicable, must be met. For excavation activities that meet these criteria, see Section 7.6.7.E (Specific Criteria for Type II Excavations). 
F.  Type III excavation. Type III excavation is permitted only after approval as a Class "A" Conditional use, pursuant to Article 5 (Class "A" Conditional use) and this section. For excavation activities that meet these criteria, see Section 7.6.7.F (Specific Criteria for Type III Excavations). 
Sec. 7.6.6. - General Criteria for Excavations. 
    The following criteria are general requirements for excavation activities except where specified or noted differently: 
A.  Setbacks. The mined lake shall not be constructed within: 
1.  Wellfield Zone 1 or three hundred (300) feet from a public water supply well, whichever is more restrictive; 
2.  Two hundred (200) feet from a wetland; 
3.  Three hundred (300) feet from a Class I or Class II Landfill; 
4.  Three hundred (300) feet from a site with known contamination; 
5.  One hundred (100) feet from a sanitary hazard; or 
6.  One hundred (100) feet from a private drinking water well. 
B.  Sloping and Grading. 
1.  Sloping and grading shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize soil erosion and to make the land surface suitable for revegetation. In order to enhance slope stabilization, enhance site aesthetics and maximize potential for beneficial end use of the reclaimed site, no slope shall be steeper than four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical to existing grade. Slopes shall be adequately vegetated within thirty (30) days of final grading and thereafter maintained to prevent wind and water erosion. 
2.  Overland sheet flow directly into the mined lake shall be minimized. Those areas within a maximum of fifty (50) feet of the mined lake may discharge run-off to the lake. Provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to any catchment discharging runoff to a mined lake designated as a water management tract and incorporated in an approved stormwater management plan for treatment and control of runoff from a development site, where the boundaries of said catchment are delineated in the approved plan. 
C.  Depth. 
1.  Due to chloride or other water quality considerations, the maximum depth of the mined lake shall be twenty (20) feet of water at OHW. 
2.  The maximum depth of the mined lake shall be fifteen (15) feet OHW in the West County Agriculture Area, due to chloride considerations. This maximum may be exceeded if approved by ERM in writing if the applicant can provide adequate assurances that chloride levels shall not exceed two hundred and fifty (250) parts per million (PPM) within the mined lake based on ground water sampling prior to construction. Additional sampling may be required during and after construction. 
3.  A sediment sump may be constructed at the mined lake inlet to a depth of twenty-five (25) feet 0HW. However, this sump shall be no greater than five (5) percent of the mined lake area. 
D.  Littoral Zones. 
1.  Planted littoral zones shall be provided which comprise, at a minimum, an area equivalent to eight (8) square feet per linear foot of shoreline. The required area of planted littoral zone may be created by extending contiguous littoral zone areas waterward or by creating islands within the water body; both options are encouraged. Any areas of planted littoral zone shall not be steeper than six (6) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. The planted littoral zone can vary in elevation from a maximum elevation of one (+1) down to an elevation of three (-3) OHW. The maximum depth of the planted area shall be minus three (-3) feet from OHW. The littoral zone shall be provided with a minimum of three (3) inches of topsoil to promote vegetative growth. The littoral zone shall be planted with appropriate native wetland vegetation, spaced not more than three (3) feet on center or as approved by ERM. 
2.  Unplanted littoral zone areas shall not be steeper than four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical to a minimum depth of minus two (-2) feet from OHW. The littoral zone shall be provided with a minimum of three (3) inches of topsoil to promote vegetative growth. 
3.  Bulkheads may be allowed, provided that for each linear foot of bulkhead, an additional eight (8) square feet of compensatory planted littoral zone shall be required. The compensatory planted littoral zone shall be provided in addition to the planted littoral zone required under (a) above; thus for every linear foot of bulkhead, sixteen (16) square feet of littoral shall be required. 
4.  Slopes below a depth of minus two (-2) or minus three (-3) feet from OHW for planted littoral areas shall not exceed two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical or the natural angle of repose for the specific conditions encountered. 
5.  Planting procedure and plans. Plans shall be submitted to and receive written approval from the Director of ERM in conjunction with the Notice of Intent to Construct pursuant to Sections 7.6.7.A.2.c, 7.6.7.C.2.c, or 7.6.7.D.2.c final site plan certification. If no final site plan certification is required, written approval for plans shall be received. Plans shall be submitted at the time of the submission of the preliminary plat, or if no plat approval is involved, prior to commencement of construction, regrading, or modification. The plans shall detail the species of plants to be used, the location and dimensions of the littoral area, the location and dimensions of any structure for which a compensatory littoral area is required, the location and dimensions of the compensatory littoral area, the methods for planting and ensuring survival of the plants, and other reasonable matters required by the Director of ERM. 
6.  Plans. The design and species shall be such that the plants as shown on the plans have an anticipated survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent at the end of one (1) year after planting. The signatory of the plans and specifications shall have a personal familiarity with the site and soil conditions based upon a field review. The plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulation for this type of project. After the plans have been reviewed for compliance to the standards listed in section 7.6.6.D, the Director of ERM shall approve the plans in writing. 
7.  List of plants. The Director of ERM shall maintain a list of acceptable species of plants for use in littoral zones. The list may be amended for general application as more information becomes available. The list shall be open for public inspection and distribution. 
8.  Timing of Planting. Planting of the entire mined lake shall occur no later than immediately prior to the issuance of the first certification of occupancy for any lot adjacent to or abutting the bank of that lake. For large single lake systems. ERM may approve in writing a phasing plan for planting the system that would allow lake planting to be phased. For multi-lake systems, each separate lake shall be treated individually for planting purposes. At all times, applicant is responsible for minimizing erosion of the littoral shelves until the planting is completed. 
9.  Maintenance and monitoring. The following maintenance and monitoring program shall be followed for all planted littoral zones. 
a.  The littoral zone shall be inspected and monitored for one (1) year after planting. During this one (1) year maintenance and monitoring period, maintenance and monitoring shall occur ninety (90), one hundred eighty (180) and three hundred sixty (360) days after planting. The maintenance and monitoring program shall consist of the following: 
i.  Inspections, monitoring, exotic removal and replanting during each monitoring period to maintain the minimum eighty (80) percent survivorship criteria for the planted littoral zone; 
ii.  Complete removal of exotic and invasive plant species such as cattails, primrose willows and water hyacinth, from the planted littoral zone until the required planted species attain coverage of seventy (70) percent of the planted littoral zone. 
iii.  The submittal of a monitoring report to ERM representing a time zero monitoring, to be completed within thirty (30) days of initial planting; ninety (90) day, one hundred eighty (180) day and three hundred sixty (360) day monitoring reports, each report submitted to ERM within thirty (30) days of the completion of the monitoring period. 
iv.  Each monitoring report shall assess the species, numbers, locations of planted littoral zone shelves, and multiple photographs (panoramas are preferred) of the site clearly depicting the entire, littoral zone planting. Photographs must be taken at approximately the same location(s) each time. In addition, the report shall detail the species, numbers and locations of additional plantings that were made to attain the eighty (80) percent survivorship criterion, if such plantings were necessary. 
b.  After the first year, the land owner or entity having maintenance responsibility for the planted littoral zone shall maintain the littoral zone in the following manner: 
i.  A minimum of eighty (80) percent survivorship and a minimum of seventy (70) percent coverage of the planted littoral zone is required. 
ii.  Exotic and invasive plant species such as cattails, primrose willows and water hyacinth, shall be restricted to less than ten (10) percent of the required planted littoral zone. 
10.  Littoral area of record. The littoral area shall be graphically or verbally identified on the applicable plat, or if the plat is already recorded or the property is not required to be platted, by a separate instrument to be recorded. Said area shall be specifically and separately reserved to owner, or if applicable, to the property owners' association as its perpetual maintenance responsibility, without recourse to The Village or other governmental entity or agency. The plat or instrument shall provide that the littoral area shall exist from the edge of water at OHW to a depth of not more than minus three (-3) feet and with sufficient square footage to comply with the provisions of this section. The plat or property owners association documents or other instrument of record shall contain the following statement: 
It is a punishable violation of The Village Laws, Ordinances, Codes, Regulations and approvals to alter the approved slopes, contours or cross sections or to chemically or manually remove, damage, destroy, cut or trim any plants in the littoral zone in the water management tract except upon the written approval of the Director of ERM. It is the responsibility of the owner or property owners association, its successors or assigns, to maintain the littoral zone(s). 
11.  Repair, reconstruction modification. Any repair, reconstruction, installation of structures or modification, except ordinary maintenance, to the water management tract, lake maintenance easement, littoral zone, or any planting or structure approved pursuant to this subsection, shall be done only after receipt of written approval from the Director of ERM pursuant to this subsection. 
E.  Water quality. The mined lake shall be designed and maintained to meet minimum criteria for surface water as set forth under Chapter 17-302, F.A.C. 
F.  Hauling material off site. All trucks hauling materials off-site shall be covered to prevent debris and fill from spilling on the road. The Village Engineer may impose appropriate special conditions for Type II (that require removal of more than ten (10) percent excess fill off site) and III excavations to ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of this section. 
G.  Objectionable odors. The excavation activity shall be conducted in such a mariner as to prevent the occurrence of water which creates objectionable odors. 
H.  Existing topsoil. Where feasible, existing topsoil shall be stored and redistributed on-site to provide adequate growing conditions for the revegetation of plant species. Where such storage is not feasible, the area shall be restored with soil of an equal or better quality than that of the excavated topsoil and be redistributed to provide adequate-growing conditions. 
I.  Hours of operation. Excavation activity shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (WCAA exempt). 
J.  Emissions of fugitive particulate matter. Excavations shall be operated so as to prevent the emission of dust or other solid matter into the air or on adjacent properties pursuant to Section 7.8.1.F. (Smoke, emissions and particulate matter) and Rule 17-2.610(3), F.A.C. 
K.  Final site conditions. No sharp declivities, pits, depressions, or debris accumulation shall remain after rehabilitation. Final grading shall conform to the contour lines and grades on the approved site rehabilitation plan. 
L.  Surety Requirements for Littoral Plantings for Agricultural and Type III Excavations. 
1.  Except in the case of an application by a political subdivision or agency of the State, all applicants shall, prior to approval, guarantee performance of the project according to the terms of the Notice of Approval by providing to ERM one (1) of the following instruments: 
a.  Cash deposit or certificate of deposit assigned to the Village; 
b.  An escrow agreement for the benefit of The Village; 
c.  A performance bond issued by a Florida registered surety company having a Best's rating of A+. Said bond may be canceled only upon written sixty-day advance notice given to ERM; 
d.  A clean, irrevocable letter of credit which must be executed on a form provided by the Village; or 
e.  Unless otherwise approved in writing by ERM, performance bonds or letters of credit shall be on forms provided by the Village. 
2.  The performance guarantee shall be a minimum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and shall be an amount of no less than of one hundred and ten (110) percent of the total estimated cost for planting, maintaining, and monitoring the required littoral shelves. ERM retains the option for requesting a second cost estimate for which the performance guarantee is based. 
3.  The performance guarantee shall be executed by a person or entity with a legal or financial interest in the property and shall remain in effect a minimum of seven hundred thirty (730) days (two (2) years) after the mining operation or reclamation is completed in accordance with this section and is accepted by ERM in writing. Transfer of title to the subject property shall not relieve the need for the performance guarantee. The seller shall maintain, in full force and effect, the original performance guarantee until it is replaced by the purchaser. 
4.  Should the Village find it necessary to use the performance guarantee to undertake any corrective work on the littoral shelves or to correct water resource impacts from the excavation, the applicant shall be financially responsible for all legal fees and associated costs incurred by the Village in recovering its expenses from the firm, corporation or institution that provided the performance guarantee. 
5.  The surety shall be released upon successful completion of all conditions of the Notice of Approval, such as meeting the survivorship criteria and completing the required maintenance and monitoring program. 
6.  The applicant shall submit a signed affidavit stating that a restriction shall be placed on the property deed so that all littoral plantings shall be maintained in perpetuity. 
M.  Additional surety requirements for Type M Excavations (upland reclamation). 
1.  Except in the case of an application by a political subdivision or agency of the State, a rehabilitation and reclamation surety shall be posted in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per acre for the total acreage included in the conditional use, unless bonded in phases, as approved by the Director of Zoning. 
2.  The surety shall: 
a.  Be assigned to the Village Council. 
b.  Be one (1) of the following instruments: 
i.  A cash deposit or certificate of deposit assigned to the Village; 
ii.  An escrow agreement for the benefit of the Village; 
iii.  A performance bond issued by a Florida registered surety company having a Best's rating of A+. Said bond may be canceled only upon written sixty-day advance notice given to PZB; or 
iv.  A clean, irrevocable letter of credit must be executed on a form provided by the Village. 
3.  The performance guarantee shall be executed by a person or entity with a legal or financial interest in the property and shall remain in effect a minimum of seven hundred thirty (730) days (two (2) years) after the mining operation or reclamation is completed in accordance with this section and accepted by the Director of Zoning. Transfer of title to subject property shall not relieve the need for the performance guarantee. The seller shall maintain, in full force and effect, the original performance guarantee until it is replaced by the purchaser. 
4.  Should the Village find it necessary to use the performance guarantee to undertake any corrective work on the mined area, to complete the mined area or reclamation under the terms of this section, the applicant shall be financially responsible for all legal fees and associated costs incurred by the Village in recovering its expenses from the firm, corporation or institution that provided the performance guarantee. 
5.  The surety shall be released upon the submission and approval of all the following items to the Development Review Committee: 
a.  Written certification by an engineer registered in the State of Florida that all performance guarantees have been satisfied; and 
b.  A certified "as-built" drawing as required by the Code. 
6.  Reclamation shall occur immediately following the end of excavation or immediately following each phase of excavation. In the event that rehabilitation and reclamation are to be conducted in phases, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
a.  A phasing plan is to be submitted indicating: 
i.  Exact acreage of each phase; 
ii.  Proposed duration of excavation and rehabilitation of each phase; and 
iii.  Proposed replacement tree planting plan. 
b.  The Development Review Committee must approve the phasing plan. 
c.  Reclamation and rehabilitation surety for the specific phases shall not be released until reclamation and rehabilitation has been completed in accordance with the approved reclamation and rehabilitation plan and certified in writing by an engineer registered in the State of Florida. 
d.  Upon commencement of reclamation and rehabilitation of the initial phase of excavation, the next phase of excavation may commence upon written authorization by ERM. The applicable, bond must be on file prior to authorization for the commencement of excavation on any subsequent phase. 
Sec. 7.6.7. - Specific Criteria. 
    All non-exempt excavation activities must meet the requirements contained in the General Criteria Section 7.6.6 (except where exempted by this section) and the following specific criteria for the type of excavation activity as listed below: 
A.  Agricultural Excavations. All Agricultural Excavations must meet all the General Criteria in Section 7.6.6 and the following additional requirements: 
1.  Standards. 
a.  Minimum Necessary To Support Bona fide Agricultural Use. 
i.  A detailed site plan showing all proposed excavation, including boundaries and acreage, depths, and the standards of Section 7.6.6.(A, B, C, & D.1); 
ii.  A listing of the nature of the excavation operation, including materials expected to be excavated; 
iii.  A detailed (written and graphic) explanation of the proposed bona fide agricultural use. This explanation shall demonstrate consistency with applicable Industry Standards and shall satisfy the definition requirements of bona fide agriculture pursuant, to Article 3. 
b.  Setback. No excavation shall be conducted within fifty (50) feet of the property line or in any area prohibited in this Code or any other regulation, state, federal or local. 
2.  Application Procedures. 
a.  For Land Use. Any person proposing to initiate Agricultural Excavation activities, shall submit an application for an Agricultural Excavation approval to the Planning & Zoning Director. This application shall include the requirements of Section 7.6.7.A.1. 
b.  Determination of sufficiency review and decision. 
i.  Agricultural excavation one (1) acre or less in surface area. Excavation consisting of one (1) acre or less in surface area shall be subject to Development Review Committee review and approval, pursuant to Article 5 of this Code. After the application has been determined complete, it shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied in writing by the Development Review Committee. 
ii.  Agricultural excavation greater than one (1) acre in surface area. Agricultural excavation greater than one (1) acre in surface area shall be subject to the submission, review and approval, approval with conditions or denial procedures and standards of a conditional use "A" process, pursuant to Article 5 of this Code and all standards for agricultural excavation herein. 
c.  For Construction. The following items are required: 
i.  Notice of Intent to Construct. A Notice of Intent to Construct shall be submitted to ERM prior to the construction of any mined lake. The Notice shall be accompanied by drawings of sufficient detail to demonstrate adherence to the provisions of this section, including the littoral zone planting plan, and the General Criteria Section and shall be signed and sealed by a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulation for this type of project; and 
ii.  A Fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
iii.  Upon receipt by ERM of a Notice of Intent to Construct and appropriate fee with all information necessary to demonstrate that the provisions of these sections will be met, ERM shall issue a Notice of Approval within thirty (30) days. 
B.  West County Agricultural Area (WCAA) Excavations. WCAA excavations must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  Standards. The following criteria shall apply to all mined lakes in the WCAA: 
a.  General Criteria Section 7.6.7.A, C, E, F, G ,H ,J, and K; and 
b.  Slopes shall not be steeper than four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical to a minimum depth of minus two (-2) feet OHW. 
2.  Application Procedures. 
a.  For Construction. The following items are required: 
i.  Notice of Intent to Construct. A Notice of Intent to Construct shall be submitted to ERM prior to the construction of any mined lake. The Notice shall be accompanied by drawings of sufficient detail to demonstrate adherence to the provisions of this section and the General Criteria Section as required and shall be signed and sealed by a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulation for this type of project; and 
ii.  A Fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
iii.  Upon receipt by ERM of a Notice of Intent to Construct and appropriate fee with all information necessary to demonstrate that the provisions of these sections will be met, ERM shall issue a Notice of Approval within thirty (30) days. 
C.  Type I (A) excavation. Type I (A) excavation shall be accessory to the construction of a single family residence on a lot area greater than one (1.0) acre in size. 
1.  Procedure. Prior to initiation of type I (A) excavation activities, approval to excavate shall be received concurrent with the receipt of a building permit from the PZB Department, pursuant to the procedural and substantive standards of this subsection. 
2.  Application. Any person requesting approval for Type I (A) excavation shall submit concurrently with a building permit application: 
a.  Site Plan. A general site plan showing the standards listed below in item c. (Standards for Type I A excavation). 
b.  Statement. A statement estimating the amount of material, in cubic yards of material to be excavated; 
c.  Authorization. Notarized authorization from the property owner to excavate. 
d.  Determination of sufficiency, review and decision. The PZ&B Department shall determine if the permit for type I (A) excavation is complete within ten (10) working days. If the form is not complete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficiencies. After the application has been determined complete, it shall be reviewed by the Planning & Zoning Director and approved, approved with conditions, or denied based on the standards listed in Article 7.6 (excavation). 
e.  Review of reclamation prior to issuance of Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. The property owner shall submit to the PZ&B Department a Certificate Of Compliance depicting an as-built survey or a form board survey showing the location, size, depth of the excavation utilizing the standards of Section 7.6 (Excavation) and bearing the seal of a Registered Land Surveyor. This certificate shall be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. For single family lots where no permanent water body is created, the building permit site plan shall serve as the reclamation plan. 
3.  Standards for Type I (A) excavation. All Type I (A) excavation shall conform to the following standards. 
a.  Off-site removal. Off-site removal of fill shall be prohibited. 
b.  Depth. No excavation shall exceed ten (10) feet in depth below Ordinary High Water (OHW). 
c.  Slope. Side slopes no steeper than four (4) to one (1) from the top of bank to a depth of minus two (-2) feet OHW. However, a minimum four (4) foot high gated fence completely enclosing the excavation may be substituted for the required slopes. 
4.  Surface area of Type I (A) excavation measured at OHW shall be reviewed according to the following criteria: 
a.  Permitted the maximum surface area of all Type I (A) excavations on the premises shall be less than one-eighth (0.125) acre. 
b.  Special Conditions the maximum surface area of all Type I (A) excavations on the premises shall be at a maximum the minimum necessary to construct the proposed single family structure or one-fifth (0.2) acre, whichever is less. Provided that in addition to the requirement set forth in note 88.c. (Type I(A) Excavation) the applicant must submit: 
i.  Justification. A justification statement in the form of a letter to the Planning & Zoning Director detailing the need for the increased surface area of the Type I(A) excavation; 
ii.  Calculations. Cut and fill calculations, bearing the seal of a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulations for this type of project, to warrant the increase surface area of the Type I(A) excavation; and, 
iii.  Authorization. Written authorization from the Palm Beach County Health Department. Excavation associated with septic tank installation, demucking, and grading activities shall not be considered in these calculations. 
5.  Building permit. The excavation is approved in conjunction and concurrent with a valid building permit for the site. 
6.  Setback. No excavation (measured from the edge of water) shall be conducted within fifteen (15) feet at the time of construction to any of adjacent property lines, nor within fifty 50 feet of any potable water well or one hundred (100) feet of any septic tank, pursuant to Section 16.1 and 16.2, Environmental Control Rules I and II. In addition, a five (5) foot minimum setback is required from the top bank of an excavation to all property lines. 
7.  Reclamation. All side slopes for type I (A) excavation shall be stabilized and planted with the appropriate ground cover from top of bank to the edge of the water. If seeding is to be used, it shall be required to have fifty (50) percent coverage of seeded areas prior to CO. 
D.  Type I (B) excavation. Type I (B) excavation shall be accessory to the construction and use of a single family residence with a lot area greater than two and one-half (2.5) acres in accordance with Article 7, Section 6 of this Code. 
1.  Procedure. Prior to initiation of type I (B) excavation activities, approval to excavate shall be received concurrent with the receipt of a valid building permit from the PZ&B Department, pursuant to the procedural and substantive standards of this subsection. 
2.  Application. Any person requesting approval of type I (B) excavation shall submit to the Planning & Zoning Director an application on a form established by the Planning & Zoning Director. The application requirements shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Site Plan. A site plan showing the proposed excavation, including but not limited to: all structures, improvements, easements, rights-of-way existing and proposed, and any other information as required by this Code; 
b.  Statement. A statement listing the nature of the excavation operation, including but not limited to: the amount of materials expected to be excavated, the duration of the excavation activity, the amount of fill to be removed from site, the amount of fill to remain on site and, the proposed method of excavation; 
c.  Aerial. A 1:200 aerial or better clearly depicting the site; and, 
d.  Fee. A fee, as adopted by the established fee schedule. 
e.  Determination of sufficiency, review and decision. After the application has been determined complete, it shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee for certification to assure compliance with the standards established in Section 5.6, and 
3.  Standards Type I B Excavation. All Type I(B) excavation shall meet the requirements of Section 7.6.6.A.10,and 11 (General Criteria For Excavations), in addition to the following items: 
a.  Depth. No excavation shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in depth below the OHW. 
b.  Surface area. The maximum surface area of all excavation on the premises shall be less than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross lot area and shall not exceed two (2.0) acres in surface area. 
c.  Building permit. The excavation is approved in conjunction and concurrent with a valid building permit for the site. 
d.  Setback. No excavation shall be conducted within fifty (50) feet of an adjacent property line, nor within fifty (50) feet of any potable water. 
e.  Slopes. All side slopes shall be planted or seeded with the appropriate ground cover from the top of bank to the edge of water. All seeded areas must have a fifty (50) percent coverage prior to final inspection. 
f.  Duration. No special type I (B) excavation permit shall be valid after one hundred twenty (120) days from the issuance of the special type I (B) excavation permit. 
E.  Type II Excavations. All Type II Excavations must meet all the General Criteria in Section 7.6.6 (except 7.6.6.L and 7.6.6.M) and the following additional requirements: 
1.  Standards. 
a.  Setback. No excavation shall be conducted within fifty (50) feet of the property line or in any area prohibited in this Code or any other regulation, state, federal or local. 
2.  Application Procedures. 
a.  For Land Use. Any person proposing to initiate Type II excavation activities as part of the development of a site development plan, shall submit to PZB a Development Review Committee application and a letter of intent to excavate on a form provided by the Zoning Division. This letter of intent shall include the following items: 
i.  A detailed site plan showing all proposed excavation, including boundaries and acreage, depths, and the standards of Section 7.6.6.(A, B ,C, & D.1); 
ii.  A listing of the nature of the excavation operation, including materials expected to be excavated; 
iii.  A complete vegetation removal permit application; 
iv.  Calculations for the entire project detailing the amount of material to be excavated, the amount of excavated material to be used on-site, and the percentage of excavated material to be disposed of off-site; 
v.  1:200 aerial or better clearly depicting the site; and 
vi.  A fee, as adopted by the established Fee Schedule. 
b.  Determination of sufficiency, review and decision. The application shall be reviewed as part of the application for the development permit. The Type II excavation component of the site development plan application shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied based on the standards established in Section 7.6.7.E.(1.a. & 2.a.) and the following requirements: 
i.  If less than ninety (90) percent of the excavated material is proposed to be used on-site, the applicant may opt to demonstrate that due to certain unusual site conditions, more than ten (10) percent of the excavated material must be removed to develop the approved site plan. If staff agrees that such abnormal conditions exist, the application may be approved pursuant to Section 7.6.7.A.2.b.ii, 7.6.7.E.2.b (Determination of sufficiency, review and decision). Such unusual conditions may, for example, be the existence of an abnormal amount of silt, rock, muck, or excess fill resulting from required drainage improvements. 
ii.  If less than ninety (90) percent of the excavated material is proposed to be used on-site and no unusual conditions exist justifying removal of more than ten (10) percent of the excavated material from the site, the applicant must obtain Class "A" Conditional use approval of the excavation activity pursuant to the standards of Article 5 (Class "A" Conditional uses) and Section 7.6.7.F. (Type III excavation), prior to approval of the site plan. 
c.  For Construction. The following items are required: 
i.  Notice of Intent to Construct. A Notice of Intent to Construct shall be submitted to ERM prior to the construction of any mined lake. The Notice shall be accompanied by drawings of sufficient detail to demonstrate adherence to the provisions of this section, including the littoral zone planting plan, and the General Criteria Section as required and shall be signed and sealed by a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulation for this type of project; and 
ii.  A Fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
iii.  Upon receipt by ERM of a Notice of Intent to Construct and appropriate fee with all information necessary to demonstrate that the provisions of this section will be met, ERM shall issue a Notice of Approval within thirty (30) days. 
F.  Type III Excavations. All Type III Excavations must meet all the General Criteria in Section 7.6.6 and the following additional requirements: 
1.  Standards. 
a.  Incompatibility of land uses. All Type III excavations shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed excavation is compatible with the surrounding land uses. PZB shall not recommend that an application be approved by the Village Council where staff finds that the approval would create an incompatibility of land uses. The "incompatibility of land uses" refers to issues arising from the proximity or direct association of contradictory, incongruous, or discordant land uses or activities, including the impacts of noise, vibration, smoke, odors, toxic matter, radiation, and similar environmental conditions. 
b.  Buffer Size. Type III excavation activities shall be separated and buffered from incompatible uses as provided by Table 7.6-1 below. Separations shall be measured from the nearest adjacent property line inward to the top slope line of the nearest excavation activity. The Zoning Division may recommend to the Village Council that the required separation distance be altered based on the compatibility of the use with the adjacent area, and the remoteness or proximity and number of adjacent incompatible uses. 
Table 7.6 - Perimeter Buffers 
Adjacent Land Use Minimum Separation Minimum Buffer Height Minimum Buffer Width Residential 1/2 mile 12 feet 25 feet Commercial 1/8 mile 6 feet 15 feet Light Mfg. 1/8 mile 6 feet 15 feet Agricultural 1/8 mile 6 feet 15 feet  
c.  Buffer Planting. The buffer shall consist of a planted earthen berm or a solid landscape barrier, or combination of berm and landscaping, of the height and width described in Table 7.6-1 above. The buffer shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the standards of Section 7.3. 
d.  Setbacks. No buildings or structures accessory to Type III excavation activities shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any property line, canal or easement. Where deemed necessary, the Planning & Zoning Director shall increase the width of the setback area to a greater dimension if it is necessary to adequately buffer conflicting land uses. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest adjoining property line inward. Except for the planted buffer area and an approved access area, existing native vegetation within the setbacks shall not be disturbed or removed. In all cases the disturbed excavated area shall have a setback of fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 
e.  Rehabilitated Perimeter. A rehabilitated perimeter around the excavation shall have the following dimensions surrounding the total perimeter of the conditional use: 
i.  One hundred eighty (180) foot width surrounding fifty (50) percent of the total conditional use area. 
ii.  One hundred (100) foot width surrounding the remaining fifty (50) percent of the total conditional use area. 
f.  Upland Reclamation Requirements. A minimum of five (5) native plant species shall be used to satisfy the following requirements: 
i.  The equivalent of one (1) native tree measuring eight (8) feet in height and two (2) native understory seedlings measuring eighteen (18) inches in height per three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of disturbed excavated area designated as a reclamation area. 
ii.  All disturbed areas shall be planted or seeded with native ground cover to reduce the loss of topsoil and to prevent the establishment of prohibited plant species. 
2.  Application Procedures. 
a.  For Land Use. All Type III excavation activities shall be approved as a Class "A" Conditional Use. These standards shall prevail over less restrictive standards applicable to such operations imposed by this Code or other laws. Any person requesting approval for Type III excavation shall submit an excavation application for the entire parcel to the Zoning Division. 
The application for Type III excavation shall include the following items: 
i.  All application contents required by a Conditional use A application; 
ii.  A precise site plan showing all proposed excavation, including boundaries, depths, acreages, and the standards of Sections 7.6.6 (General Criteria), and 7.6.7.F.1. (Specific Criteria); 
iii.  A listing of the nature of the operation including expected amount and type of materials to be excavated; 
iv.  A site plan showing fencing and buffering, including a detailed landscaping plan; 
v.  An erosion and fugitive particulate control plan; erosion control strategies may include plants as approved by ERM, mulching, stabilizing, or other techniques; 
vi.  The reclamation plan submitted to and approved by PZB based on the standards set forth below. Except where Type III Excavation is conducted prior to development of an approved planned development, the bona fide site plan shall serve as the reclamation plan; 
vii.  A complete vegetation removal permit application; 
viii.  1:200 aerial or better clearly depicting the site; and 
ix.  A fee, as adopted by the established Fee Schedule. 
b.  Determination of sufficiency, review and decision. After receipt of an application requesting a Type III excavation permit, the Planning & Zoning Director shall determine whether it is complete within ten (10) working days. If it is determined the application is not complete, notice shall be served on the applicant specifying the deficiencies. No excavation application shall be certified for the planning commission preheating conference unless the application has been determined sufficient. After the application has been certified, it shall be reviewed consistent with the conditions and provisions of Chapter I Sec. 102 and Article 5 and Sections 7.6.6. (General Criteria), and 7.6.7.F.1. (Specific Criteria) of this Code and be approved, approved with conditions or denied. 
3.  For Construction. For following items are required: 
a.  Notice of Intent to Construct. A Notice of Intent to Construct shall be submitted to ERM prior to the construction of any mined lake. The Notice shall be accompanied by drawings of sufficient detail to demonstrate adherence to the provisions of this section, including the littoral zone planting plan, and the General Criteria Section and shall be signed and sealed by a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulation for this type of project; and 
b.  A Fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
c.  Upon receipt by ERM of a Notice of Intent to Construct and appropriate fee with all information necessary to demonstrate that the provisions of this section will be met, ERM shall issue a Notice of Approval within thirty (30) days. 
Sec. 7.6.8. - Variance From Construction Criteria for Type II, III, Agricultural, and WCAA Excavations. 
A.  Granting of variance. A variance from the construction criteria contained in Section 7.6.6 for Agricultural, WCAA, Type II, and III excavations may be granted by ERM to a person who demonstrates, by a preponderance of evidence, that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, and that special or unique circumstances exist to justify the variance based on one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
1.  That the literal application of these standards will create an unreasonable hardship and that the special and unique circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
2.  That appropriate technology and methods will be used to insure consistency with the intent of the Code; or 
3.  That granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the Code. 
B.  Variance request standards. The variance request shall be accompanied by drawings of sufficient detail to provide the information needed to determine if a variance is appropriate. The variance request and drawings shall be signed and sealed by a professional recognized and approved by the Florida Department of Professional Regulation for this type of project. The variance request shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Approved Fee Schedule. 
C.  General. No variance shall be approved within Wellfield Zone I or within three (300) feet of a public drinking water well, whichever is more restrictive, nor for any mining operation location which will reduce hydraulic recharge distances to a public water supply well in excess of two (2) percent. 
D.  Review Process. Upon receipt of a request for a Variance from the Construction Criteria, ERM shall have thirty (30) days to request any additional information. 
1.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the requested additional information, ERM may only request information needed to clarify the additional information supplied or to answer new questions raised by or directly related to the additional information. 
2.  If ERM does not make a request for additional information within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request for a Variance from Construction Criteria, the variance request shall be deemed complete upon receipt. 
3.  If an applicant fails to respond to a ERM request for a variance request fee or any additional information within sixty (60) days, the variance request may be denied without prejudice. However, ERM may grant an extension of time as is reasonably necessary to fulfill the request for additional information. 
4.  Upon receipt of a completed request for a Variance from Construction Criteria, ERM shall have sixty (60) days to take final action, unless the time period is waived by the applicant. ERM action shall be approval of the variance request and issuance of a Notice of Approval or denial of the variance request. 
Sec. 7.6.9. - Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties. 
A.  Violations. For each day or portion thereof, it shall be a violation of this Code to: 
1.  Fail to comply with the requirements of this section or of any approval or exemption granted or authorized hereunder; 
2.  Alter or destroy the approved depths, slopes, contours, or cross-sections; 
3.  To chemically or manually remove, damage, destroy, cut, or trim any plants in the littoral zones, except upon written approval by the Director of ERM; 
4.  To dredge, excavate, or mine an area without prior receipt of approval(s) from ERM and/or PZB; or 
5.  To cause water quality violations in excess of the standards contained in F.A.C. Chapter 17-302. 
B.  Fines. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by: 
1.  Triple fees for approvals not obtained prior to violations; and 
2.  A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation; or 
3.  Imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both fine and imprisonment upon conviction, pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 125.69, Fla. Stat. 
C.  Restoration. Damage to the littoral shelves and/or littoral plants may result in an order to restore to the approved conditions. Excavations that have occurred without prior approval may result in an order to restore to preexisting conditions. 
D.  Review board. Violations of this section must be referred to the appropriate board or committee for corrective actions and civil penalties. 
E.  Additional Sanctions. In addition to the sanctions contained herein, the Village may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to, temporary and permanent injunctions, to enforce the provisions of this Section. 
Sec. 7.6.10. - Appeals. 
    An applicant may appeal a final determination made by the Director of either PZB or ERM to the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board pursuant to this Section. The applicant shall comply with the following appeal procedures: 
A.  Submittal. An appeal must be made within twenty (20) days of the applicant's receipt of the final action. 
B.  Hearing. Each hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of submittal of all documents which the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board deems necessary to evaluate the appeal. 
1.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board shall orally render its decision (order), based on the evidence entered into record. 
2.  The decision shall be stated in a written order and mailed to the applicant not later than ten (10) days after the hearing. 
3.  Written order of the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board shall be final. 
C.  Judicial Relief. An applicant, ERM or PZB may appeal a final written order of the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board within thirty (30) days of the rendition of the written order by filing a petition for Writ of Certiorari in Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit in and for Palm Beach County, Florida. 
CHAPTER 7. - DRIVEWAYS AND ACCESS 

Sec. 7.7.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this section to promote safe and efficient traffic movement while affording reasonable access to abutting land. 
Sec. 7.7.2. - Driveways. 
    Driveways shall be subject to the following standards. 
A.  Spacing 
1.  Local or residential access streets. Lots located on local or residential access streets shall have a maximum of two (2) driveways except that the Village Engineer may approve a third driveway in the following locations if it is determined that the public health, safety, and welfare is not adversely impacted by such approval: 
a.  On lots 1.75 acres or greater; and 
b.  On all corners lots within the Aero Club Subdivision; and 
c.  For all lots located within a subdivision consisting of individual lots a minimum of one acre or greater, for which the third driveway provides access to a permitted accessory detached structure such as a garage or hangar. 
Driveways for lots located on local or residential access streets at interior locations shall maintain a minimum setback from a side or rear lot line as follows: 
a.  Single Family or Multifamily driveways: Two (2) feet. 
b.  Zero Lot Line Driveways: One (1) foot. 
c.  Townhouse Driveways: One (1) foot. 
2.  Arterial and collector streets. Driveway locations and spacing shall be accordance with the Village standards for street connections along arterial and collector roads. Provided, however, that driveway connections to any road which is part of the State Highway System, as defined in Sec. 334.03, Fla. Stat., shall meet the permit requirements of FDOT for street connections, pursuant to Sec. 335.18, Fla. Stat. 
B.  Construction. Driveway connections to streets under the jurisdiction of Palm Beach County shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable Village or County standards. Construction standards and details for driveways shall be available from the DEPW. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, § 1, 10-27-2015) 
Sec. 7.7.3. - Double frontage lots. 
    Where a double frontage residential lot is located adjacent to a collector or an arterial road, it shall also be required to front on a local or residential access street. A limited access easement shall be placed along the land line that abuts either the collector or arterial road. 
Sec. 7.7.4. - Exceptions. 
    The Village Engineer shall have the authority to grant a permit for driveway and access plans with lesser or greater dimensions than designated in this section, giving consideration to the following factors: 
A.  Lot size; 
B.  Lot configurations; 
C.  Proposed land use; 
D.  Traffic generation or anticipated traffic volume along adjoining rights-of-way; 
E.  Traffic characteristics of the land use; 
F.  Driveway locations on contiguous land or land on the opposite side of the street; 
G.  Median opening locations; 
H.  Safe sight distance; and 
I.  Such other factors as may be deemed pertinent by the Village Engineer. 
CHAPTER 8. - MISCELLANEOUS STANDARDS 

Sec. 7.8.1. - Performance Standards. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to eliminate and regulate sources and occurrences of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive hazards or glare that interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of land or which arc contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or constitute a nuisance to the public at-large. 
B.  Applicability. This section still apply to all development within unincorporated Village unless specifically exempted pursuant to Section 7.8.1.C. 
C.  Exemptions. The following shall be exempted from the standards of this section. 
1.  Sound emitted from the operation of motor vehicles legally operating on any public right-of-way which are regulated by Chapter 316, Fla. Stat., the Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
2.  Any noise generated by interstate motor and rail carriers and aircraft or airport operations. Any other subjects to the extent preempted by applicable State or Federal laws or regulations. 
3.  Any noise generated as a result of emergency work, as a danger warning device, or for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of any emergency. 
4.  Any noise generated by any government sanctioned activity conducted on public land. 
5.  Any noise generated within any public right-of-way, including parades, when appropriately sanctioned by the governing body. 
6.  Non-amplified crowd noises at sporting events. 
7.  Any noise emitted from a source located within the Research and Technology Overlay (R&T-0) district. 
D.  Public nuisance/injunctive relief. Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the limitations established in or pursuant to this section shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Upon receipt of written complaint of violation of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer may investigate and request the Village Attorney to file injunctive proceedings to abate the nuisance. Such proceedings shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties provided herein. 
E.  Vibration. 
1.  Non-industrial districts. In all districts except the IL, IG and PIPD districts, no use shall be operated so as to produce ground vibration noticeable without instruments, at the lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
F.  Smoke, emissions and particulate matter. 
1.  Generally. No use or activity shall be operated except in full compliance with the standards controlling air pollution as provided in the laws of the State of Florida, Palm Beach County Public Health Unit (PBCPHU) and the ordinances of the Village. 
2.  Smoke. In all districts, unless otherwise covered by a specific visible emission limiting standard by a FDER Rule or Village Ordinance, every use shall be operated so as to prevent the emission of smoke from any source whatever, the density of which is equal to or greater than that designated as Number 1 on the Ringlemann Chart, or the opacity of which is equal to or grew than twenty (20) percent. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart, as published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, or Method 9, as published in Chapter 17-2 F.A.C. and used by DER, is incorporated herein by reference. All measurements shall be at the point of emission. 
3.  Dust and particulates. Every use shall be operated to prevent the emission into the air of dust or other solid particulate matter which may cause danger to land and the health of persons or animals at or beyond the lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
G.  Odors. No use shall be operated so as to produce the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the land on which the use is located. Table III chapter 5, Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the Manufacturing Chemists' Associating, Inc., Washington, D.C., is hereby adopted as a guide in determining the quantities of offensive odors, as are the guides and standards contained in the prohibitions against air pollution of the FDER. 
H.  Toxic or noxious matter. No use shall for any period of time, discharge across the boundaries of a lot on which it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or general welfare, or cause injury or damage to persons, land, or the use of land, or render unclean the waters of the state to the extent of being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of such waters for domestic water supply, industrial purposes, recreation, or other legitimate and necessary uses. 
I.  Radiation. Any operation involving radiation, i.e., the use of gamma rays, X-rays, alpha and beta particles, high speed electrons, neutrons, protons, and other atomic or nuclear particles, shall be permitted only in accordance with the codes, rules, and regulations of the State Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, Office of Radiation Control and FDER. 
J.  Electromagnetic radiation and interference. 
1.  Radiation. No person shall operate or cause to be operated for any purpose any planned or unplanned source of electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Any operation in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission regulation shall be deemed unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation of performance of any electromagnetic receptor of quality and proper design. The determination of "abnormal degradation of performance" and "of quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering principles and the standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Electronic Industries Association. 
2.  Interference. No use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in any district. 
K.  Drainage. For all development in all districts, drainage shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the drainage and stormwater management standards of Article 8, Subdivisions, Platting. and Required Improvements. 
Sec. 7.8.2. - Outdoor lighting standards. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to reduce the hazard and nuisance caused by the spillover of light and glare on to drivers, pedestrians and land uses near artificial lights. By allowing safe and efficient lighting of outdoor areas and by reducing the negative effects of exterior lighting, the regulations contained in this section am intended to promote land use compatibility, traffic and pedestrian safety, energy efficiency and community appearance. Outdoor lighting shall also be consistent with the applicable provisions of the Village codes and the Palm Beach County Security Code. 
B.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all exterior lighting in the Village, except street lights that meet the requirements of the appropriate public utility. 
C.  Outdoor lighting standards. Outdoor lighting shall meet the following standards. 
1.  Light confinement. All outdoor lights shall, to the greatest extent possible, confine emitted light to the property an which the light is located, and shall not be directed upwards, to avoid urban sky glow. 
2.  Spillover light. Spillover light on to residential property shall not exceed three-tenths (0.3) of one (1) foot-candle when measured six (6) feet above grade at the residential property line. 
D.  Prohibited lights. The following types of lights are prohibited in unincorporated the Village: 
1.  Any unshielded light source in a luminaire with no light cutoff that is visible within the normal range of vision from any residential property; 
2.  Any light that creates glare observable within the normal range of vision of any public right-of-way or glare that creates a safety hazard; 
3.  Any light that resembles an authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or that interferes with, misleads or confuses vehicular traffic as determined by the Planning & Zoning Director; and 
4.  Beacon or search lights except for temporary grand openings or special events, as required by state or federal law. 
E.  Certification. For all developments that include free-standing luminaires exceeding sixty (60) feet in height, written certification of compliance with this section, bearing the seal of an engineer registered to practice in Florida, shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
F.  Measurement. Illumination levels shall be measured in foot-candles with a direct-reading, portable light meter. The light meter shall be placed not more than six (6) inches above ground level at the property line of the subject parcel. Measurements shall be made after dark with the lights in question on, then with the same lights off. The difference between the two (2) readings shall be compared to the maximum permitted illumination in order to determine compliance with this section. 
G.  Effect on previous approvals. Exterior lights installed prior to February 1, 1990, shall not be considered nonconforming. 
Sec. 7.8.3. - Major Intersection criteria. 
    As specified in this Code, certain specific uses shall be located at major intersections or internal to a planned development district that is located at a major intersection. For the purpose of this section, to be considered a major intersection each roadway at the intersection shall meet at least one (1) of the following standards: 
A.  Four (4) lanes. The roadway currently exists at four (4) lanes or more, link to link, and is shown on the Thoroughfare Right-of-Way Protection Map. Dedication of right-of-way or construction of additional lanes solely in front of a property shall not satisfy this standard; 
B.  Five-year road plan. The roadway appears in the Five Year Road Plan to be constructed as a major arterial of at least four (4) lanes; 
C.  Traffic volume. The average traffic volume on the roadway is greater than ten thousand (10,000) trips per day as shown on the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) Traffic Volume Map; 
D.  Right-of-way. The roadway is shown on the Thoroughfare Plan as one hundred twenty (120) foot right-of-way or greater; 
E.  Upgrade agreement. The applicant agrees to improve the roadway system to meet the standards in this section, as a condition of approval. 
CHAPTER 13. - ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES PROTECTION 

Sec. 7.13.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    It is hereby declared that the protection, enhancement and examination of significant archaeological resources is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Village of Wellington. It is acknowledged that within the Village of Wellington there exist sites which are of significant archaeological value as prehistoric, historic and cultural resources. 
    The purposes of this section are to: 
A.  Procedure for review. Establish a procedure for review of development proposals on lands which have been identified as containing archaeological resources and which will be applicable to lands identified by the predictive model when added to this section by amendment. 
B.  Method to review. Establish a method to review the potential archaeological value of previously unidentified sites after the discovery of prehistoric and historical artifacts, skeletal or fossilized human remains, or non-human vertebrate fossils during development. 
C.  Protection. Establish a mechanism to protect, when appropriate, resources of significant archaeological value identified pursuant to this section that am deemed important by a qualified archaeologist to the prehistory or history of the Village, County, State or Nation. 
D.  Facilitate protection. Facilitate protection of resources of significant archaeological value without substantially delaying development. 
Sec. 7.13.2. - Applicability. 
    This section is applicable in the Village of Wellington and shall apply to: 
A.  Archaeological site. All parcels of land which are identified as archaeological sites. 
B.  Previously unidentified site. A parcel on which a previously unidentified artifact or any human skeletal or fossilized human remain or non-human vertebrate fossils of significant archaeological value is found during site development or during any other activity which may disturb an archeological site; and, 
C.  Type III excavation. All applications for Type III Excavation. 
Sec. 7.13.3. - Development subject to archaeological review. 
    Development shall be subject to this section as follows: 
A.  Parcels on identified sites. Parcels with known archaeological sites and proposals for type III excavation. Owners of known Archaeological Sites or Owners of parcels requesting approval for Type III Excavation must receive a Certificate to Dig prior to issuance of a development order. 
B.  Parcels on previously unidentified sites. Previously unidentified archaeological sites discovered during development. When one (1) or more artifacts or human skeletal or fossilized remains or non-human vertebrate fossils which were previously undiscovered are found on a site during development or during other activity disturbing the site, all development or disruptive activity directly over the find shall cease. Before any further development or disruptive activity continues, the following procedure shall apply: 
1.  The area directly over the find shall be staked by the property owner or agent of the property owner, contractor or subcontractor, or other party discovering the potential find; 
2.  Within one (1) working day of discovering the potential find, the Department and, if applicable, the property owner shall be notified; 
3.  Within ten (10) working days, the Department shall request inspection and evaluation of the site by a qualified archaeologist for the purpose of determining whether artifacts or human skeletal or fossilized remains or non-human vertebrate fossils are located on a site. The property owner or developer shall pay costs associated with the archaeological evaluation. If the qualified archaeologist determines a significant archaeological resource is on site or likely to be on site, the Director of the Planning, Zoning and Building Department shall issue an order suspending construction and define the area where the order suspending construction applies, based upon the archaeologist's assessment. Such order does not have the effect of a stop work order and shall not stop construction activity not directly impacting the defined potential archaeological site; 
4.  The Archaeologist shall evaluate the significance of the archaeological find and send a written Archaeological Evaluation Report to the property owner and the Planning, Zoning, and Building Department Director postmarked within fifteen (15) working days from issuance of the suspension order. 
5.  Using the Archaeological Evaluation Report, the Department shall require an application for a Certificate to Dig be prepared if the archaeologist determines the site contains artifacts of significant archaeological value. If the Archaeologist determines that there is no reasonable possibility that artifacts of significant archaeological value are contained on the site, the archaeologist shall make such a finding to the Department in the Archaeological Evaluation Report, and the Department shall lift the suspension order. 
6.  In order to encourage individuals to bring potential artifacts to the Village's attention, private citizens engaged in disruptive activity which does not require a development order and uncover a potential artifact, fossil, or remains, may request a waiver of application fees and shall not be subject to the timeframes required in this subsection. 
C.  Sites containing human skeletal remains. If human skeletal remains are found, then Section 872.05, Florida Statutes (2001), as amended from time to time, controls. 
Sec. 7.13.4. - Certificate to dig. 
A.  Application. Owner of parcels required by 7.13.3., above, (Development Subject to Archaeological Review, Parcels with known Archaeological potential and Proposals for Type III Excavation, and Previously Unidentified Archaeological Sites Discovered During Development), to make application for a Certificate to Dig to the Department for review by the PZAB shall make such application prior to the issuance of a development order. The application for the Certificate to Dig shall be made on a form available from the Department. Only one (1) Certificate to Dig shall be required to develop a site unless additional resources are found during site development. 
B.  Report contents of a certificate to dig. The application for a Certificate to Dig shall be subject to a fee established by the Department, governed by Section 7.13.4.C.4., below, and include a report prepared by a qualified archaeologist. The report shall at minimum contain a documented search of the Florida Master Site Files, a brief history of the area, an archaeological survey and field inspection performed in a professionally acceptable manner, an assessment of the archaeological significance of the site, and a proposed plan for management. 
    All reports submitted to the Department on properties determined to be of archaeological significance shall include the preparation of a Florida Master Site File (FMSF) form, which shall be forwarded by the Department to the Division of Historical Resources of the Florida Department of State. Copies of FMSF forms shall be available at the Department. 
C.  Standards for issuance of a certificate to dig. Within ten (10) working days of receiving an application, the Department shall make a determination of the completeness of the application. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Department shall request additional information by certified mail. When the application is complete, the Department shall forward the application to the PZAB. The PZAB shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the application by the PZAB. The Department shall prepare its evaluation of the application and notify the applicant of its findings at least ten (10) working days prior to the public hearing. Evaluation of the application by the Department and the PZAB shall be based upon guidelines in this section, recommendations included in the archaeologist's report, and the recommendation of the Archaeologist, if required. The PZAB's evaluation shall do one (1) of the following: 
1.  If the property is determined to have no significant archaeological value or insignificant value, the PZAB shall, if applicable, issue the Certificate to Dig, or lift the construction suspension order, if applicable, and the development may proceed; or 
2.  If the property is determined to have significant archaeological value, the Board shall issue a Certificate to Dig with conditions that are deemed necessary to protect or permit the excavation of any part of the site found to be of significance, including conditions regarding site design. In order to protect archaeological resources of significant value, the Board may require the applicant to do one (1) or more of the following as part of receiving the Certificate to Dig: 
a.  Preserve the archaeological site within open space of the development. 
b.  Redesign the development to accommodate preservation of all or a portion of a site containing the significant archaeological resources. 
c.  The property owner may voluntarily fund or seek funding for excavation of the resource, if agreed to by the Village. 
3.  If the PZAB finds it is impossible to adequately preserve the significant archaeological resource using the standards and procedures in b., above, and the proposed development plan would adversely affect any significant archaeological resources found on the site, the PZAB may delay issuance of a Certificate to Dig for up to eight (8) weeks after the submittal of a completed application so that either: 
a.  Appropriate archaeological excavation may be conducted to properly extract and interpret the significant archaeological resources found on the site; or 
b.  The Village may approach any recognized historic preservation agency to seek alternate solutions; or 
c.  A buyer may be found to purchase a site for either site preservation or in order to allow detailed excavation, analysis and interpretation of the site. 
4.  Fee for application for certificate to dig. The Department shall charge a fee covering the direct and indirect costs associated with reviewing an Application for a Certificate to Dig, issuing the certificate and monitoring compliance with the certificate. Fees for the issuance of a Certificate to Dig shall be added to the Department Fee Schedule by resolution approved by the Village Council. 
Sec. 7.13.5. - Appeals. 
    Within thirty (30) days of a written decision by the PZAB regarding an application for a certificate to dig, an aggrieved party may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal, and pay a filing fee, established by the Village Council, with the Village Clerk. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be filed with the Department. The notice of appeal shall state the decision which is being appealed, the grounds for the appeal, and a brief summary of the relief which is sought. Within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the appeal or the first Village Council meeting which is scheduled, whichever is later in time, the Village Council shall conduct a public hearing at which time they may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the PZAB. The applicant shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date, time, and place of such hearing. At this hearing, the party shall set forth the alleged inconsistencies or non-conformities with procedures or criteria set forth in this Code; however, no new material or evidence shall be presented to or considered by the Village Council. The Village Council shall vote to approve, modify, or overrule the decision of the PZAB. The decision of the Village Council shall be in writing, and a copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the appealing party. An applicant may appeal a final decision of the Village Council within thirty (30) days of the rendition of the decision by filing a petition for Writ of Certiorari in Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit in and for Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Sec. 7.13.6. - Procedure for addressing violations, hearing, and penalties. 
    Upon detection by the Village that a property owner, agent of property owner, contractor, or subcontractor has violated this section, the Village shall notify the violator(s) and the property owner, if applicable, that a hearing has been set before the Code Enforcement Board. The notice, hearing, and fines shall occur pursuant to Chapter 2, Article IV Code of Ordinances of 
    Village of Wellington. In addition to the sanctions contained above, the Village may take any other appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, requests for temporary and/or permanent injunctions to enforce the provisions of this section. It is the purpose of this section to provide additional cumulative remedies. 
CHAPTER 14. - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), adopted Nov. 24, 2009, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 7.14.1-7.14.20, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-16, adopted June 28, 2005; Ord. No. 2005-03, February 9, 2005. 

Sec. 7.14.1. - Applicability and scope. 
A.  Preliminary Land Development Regulations. This revised chapter of the Code of Ordinance resulted from a comprehensive evaluation and update of the Village's Sign Code which, prior to this revision, had remained substantially intact for a decade. Several workshops were held at a Village Council meeting level and the Planning and Zoning Board of Adjustment and Architectural Review Board levels as well as with local business and Chambers of Commerce to obtain input and advice for this new chapter's formulation. The Village has examined many of the deviations which have been periodically granted in order to develop a sign code that reduces an apparent need for consistent administrative relief. 
    In enacting this comprehensive revision, the Village has weighed and balanced various competing interests with two (2) enactment goals in mind: firstly, the new legislation will avoid the need to further amend the Village's sign law for a very long time (hopefully at least another decade) except when necessary to comply with evolving case law or court orders, and secondly, the new legislation will reduce dramatically the number of applications for site specific administrative relief. The Village's elected officers wish to thank the public, the Chamber of Commerce, the members of the Planning and Zoning Board, the Architectural Review Board, the Village's Planning, Zoning and Economic Development Departments, other Village staff, and specifically commenting developers and property owners for their contributions to this comprehensive legislative effort. 
B.  Purpose of intent. 
1.  Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this chapter to: 
a.  Promote and protect the general health, safety, welfare and community environment by establishing a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs; 
b.  Maintain or improve, or both, economic stability through an attractive sign program; 
c.  Protect the general public from damage and injury which may be caused by the faculty and uncontrolled construction of permanent signs within the Village; 
d.  Protect pedestrians and motorists of the Village of Wellington from damage or injury caused, or partially attributable to the distractions and obstructions caused by improperly situated signs; 
e.  Promote the public safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of travel and the free flow of traffic within the Village of Wellington; 
f.  Create a more attractive community by reducing visual blight caused by unregulated signage; 
g.  Enhance, protect, and maintain the physical beauty of the property within the Village of Wellington; 
h.  Preserve the beauty and unique landscape character of the Village of Wellington; 
i.  Directly advance the Village's interest in preserving and enhancing the Village's aesthetic appeal; 
j.  Ensure that signage is clear, compatible with the character of the adjacent architecture and provides the essential identify of, and direction to, facilities in the community; 
k.  Lessen hazardous conditions, confusion, and visual clutter that could be caused by the proliferation, unnecessary illumination, animation, and excessive height, area, and bulk of signs which would compete for the attention of the pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
l.  Establish sign regulations in general relationship to zoning classifications, building site size, size of buildings, and different types of frontage; 
m.  Permit reasonable amounts and avenues for communication of noncommercial and commercial messages by use of signs; 
n.  Discourage off-premises signs; and 
o.  Ensure that commercial on-premises signs concern lawful activity allowed on such property. 
C.  Applicability and Scope. The provisions of these sign regulations shall apply to all signs unless specifically exempted herein. Signs shall be a permitted use in all districts in accordance with the provisions contained within this Chapter. Signs shall not be installed or altered without first obtaining a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.2. - Effect on previously permitted signs. 
A.  Nonconforming Signs. Previously permitted signs and sign structures which do not comply with the provisions of this Section shall be considered nonconforming uses or structures subject to Sections 1.6-1.9 of the Land Development Regulations. 
B.  Enlargement, Alteration, or Relocation. Other than, as may be provided herein, a nonconforming sign may not be enlarged, altered, or moved without the entire sign being brought into compliance with these regulations. 
C.  Damage. If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement costs at time of destruction, the sign shall not be reconstructed or replaced except in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
D.  Sign Face Replacement. The sign face for an existing nonconforming sign may be replaced with a valid building permit, but not enlarged nor increased in degree of nonconformity. Building permits for lighting and electrical alterations may be issued for these structures. 
E.  Existing Development Orders. The provisions listed below shall apply to any sign included within a valid development order: 
1.  Construction. Any sign expressly permitted by an existing development order approved by the Village Council or a development order for a development of regional impact approved by the Village Council, may be constructed in accordance with applicable Master Sign Plan, site plan, and related permitting requirements. A sign of this nature may be constructed even if such sign is not consistent with the requirements of this Article. 
2.  Nonconforming Status. Any sign constructed in accordance with an existing development order that is inconsistent with the requirements of this Article shall be deemed a legal nonconforming sign and subject to all applicable provisions affecting such signs as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.3. - Annexation. 
    Signs located on property annexed into the Village shall be addressed as indicated below: 
A.  Annexation Agreement. The Village Council, as part of an annexation agreement, may allow nonconforming signs to continue for a specific number of years prior to complying with the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  No Annexation Agreement. All signs located on property not included as part of or not subject to an annexation agreement shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter regarding nonconforming signs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.4. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be utilized in the administration of the Article: 
    CANOPY means a roof-like structure, generally self-supporting and freestanding, which may be attached to a principle structure, providing shade, and weather protection, typically utilized over drive-thru facilities and gasoline pumps. 
    COMMERCIAL MESSAGE means information or advertising that is conveyed via a sign or other permitted medium regarding name of a business, owner, or occupant of a premises; business conducted; services available or rendered; or goods available, produced or for sale. 
    COPY, ADVERTISING means written or graphic material, which is placed, displayed, or depicted or otherwise indicated on a sign. 
    DEPARTMENT STORE means a full-line retail store consisting of a minimum of one hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) square feet of gross leasable area, which carries merchandise and services commonly referred to in the industry as "department store type merchandise" and which is traditionally found at regional retail malls. 
    FAÇADE means the entire building front, including the parapet. 
    FLAG means a piece of material, typically cloth, on which is depicted a national, state, municipal, government agency, civic, or house of worship symbol, nautical symbol, commercial name, information, or logo, or internationally recognized symbol. 
    FRONTAGE, STREET means that portion of a building abutting or facing a public right-of-way. 
    GRADE means the average finished ground level of a parcel on which a sign is located. 
    GRAPHICS means copy, logo, color use, or combination thereof, as determined by the building official, to comprise or be part of a sign. 
    INNER RING ROAD means the access drive adjacent to the mail building in a regional shopping center. 
    INTERNAL POINT OF PURCHASE SIGN means the signs shown on Wellington Green's Master Conceptual Sign Plan on the mall access roads and the outer ring road at the vehicular access points to the MUPDs adjacent to the Regional Shopping Center. 
    INSTITUTIONAL USE means a site or facility operated by a nonprofit organization, open to the public, and providing religious, social, educational, governmental, or recreational services. 
    LOGO means a graphic representation depicting the name, trademark, or symbol of a use, tenant, business or business entity, association, development, or project. 
    LOT means the smallest division of land identified as a single unit of ownership for conveyance and legal development purposes, and delineated by a closed boundary which is either: depicted on a record plat; depicted on a survey, map or drawing for which an affidavit or waiver of affidavit of exemption has been recorded; or described on a recorded deed or agreement for deed. The total area of abutting lands joined pursuant to a recorded unity of title shall be deemed a single lot for the purposes of this Code. As used herein, the term shall be synonymous with the terms "plot," "parcel," or "tract" when referring to lands within a closed boundary not further divided by one or more interior property lines. 
    MARQUEE means any hood, awning, or canopy of permanent construction which projects from the wall of a building. 
    MASTER SIGN PLAN means a drawing which illustrates the proposed sign program for the overall development, including size, location, type, architectural design, design standards, materials, color, illumination, and content. 
    NATIONAL/REGIONAL TENANT means a commonly recognized, multi-store retailer with building prototypes and a prototypical signage program with a minimum building square footage of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
    NONCONFORMING SIGN means sign or advertising structure existing within the Village limits on April 11, 2000 (effective date of this ordinance), which by its design, height, type, content, square foot area, location, use, structural support, or otherwise does not conform to the requirements of this Article. 
    OUTER RING ROAD means the access drive on the perimeter of a regional shopping center's parking fields. 
    PARAPET means a false front or wall extension above the rooflines. 
    REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER means an enclosed shopping center: (i) containing a minimum of eight hundred thousand (800,000) square feet of gross leasable area accessible from a central common area, (ii) with the stores facing each other and fronting the common area, and (iii) containing at least three (3) department stores. 
    SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY means an institution of learning as defined in Article 3, Chapter 2. 
    SIGN means any object, device, display, or structure or part thereof situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
    SIGN, ABANDONED means a sign advertising a business, service, or use that has not existed on site for a period of at least sixty (60) days. 
    SIGN, A FRAME means a movable, temporary sign, usually constructed to form an "A" or tent-like shape and used to advertise a product, service, or activity located on the same or nearby property. Also known as a "sandwich sign" or sidewalk sign. 
    SIGN AREA means the entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding but not including the supporting structure. 
    SIGN FACE means the part of a sign that is or may be used for advertising purposes. 
    SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING means any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
    SIGN, AWNING, CANOPY, OR MARQUEE means a sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by ordinance. 
    SIGN, BANNER means a sign made of cloth, fabric, paper, non-rigid plastic or similar type of material. 
    SIGN, BILLBOARD means a sign, which advertises a use, establishment, product, commodity, business, or service that is sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than on the property on which the sign is located. 
    SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY means a sign, other than a time or temperature sign, designed for displaying copy that is not permanently affixed to or made a part of the sign. 
    SIGN, COPY CAT signs that resemble any official signage or markers and that, by reason of content, location, position, shape or color, may be reasonably confused with or construed as traffic-control devices. 
    SIGN, DIGITAL means a sign that utilizes an electronic display, including liquid crystal display (LCD), plasma display or projected images, to show advertising. 
    SIGN, DIRECTIONAL means signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance," and "exit." 
    SIGN, DIRECTORY means a sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building or group of buildings and indicating their respective professions or business activities. 
    SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED means a sign with two (2) faces, which are usually but not necessarily, parallel. 
    SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD means a sign, excluding time or temperature signs, with a display consisting of text or graphics illuminated with light emitting diodes or similar technology that can be changed on a frequent basis. 
    SIGN, ENTRY FEATURE means a designed entry feature and a sign or signs, located at one or both sides of a vehicular access point providing entry into a commercial or industrial development. 
    SIGN, EQUESTRIAN OR AGRICULTURAL means a sign advertising or identifying equestrian or agricultural activities associated with a parcel of land, including type of name of farm or corporation, logo, type of animals or products, and type of animals or products for sale. 
    SIGN, EXEMPT means a sign that is exempt from the requirements of this Article and generally may be erected without a sign permit, unless such permit is otherwise required. 
    SIGN, FLASHING means any sign, excluding time and temperature signs which use intermittent lighting, which contains a continually intermittent or sequential flashing light source or signs with lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color, such as electronic message boards. The term also includes flashing lights with or without copy or logo(s), which are either freestanding, affixed to a structure, or affixed or part of a window sign. 
    SIGN, RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE SALES means a sign which identifies a property that is for sale, lease or rent. 
    SIGN, NONRESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE SALES means a sign which identifies a property that is for sale, but not for lease or rent. 
    SIGN, FREE SPEECH means a noncommercial sign allowing an individual to express an opinion on an issue of public interest, public policy, elections, or similar topic. 
    SIGN, FREESTANDING means any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building. 
    SIGN, FREESTANDING CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN means any sign that may be used in lieu of an entry feature sign for a center or project located within a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
    SIGN, FREESTANDING MULTIPLE TENANT means a sign that displays the name of specific tenants or the generic service or activity of one or more tenants, such as "baker," "law office," "insurance," and similar types of activity. 
    SIGN, GARAGE SALE means a temporary sign identifying the location and date of a garage sale. 
    SIGN, GASOLINE PRICE means a changeable copy sign indicating prices for gasoline and similar petroleum products available on-site. 
    SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL means a sign erected and maintained in furtherance of any governmental functions or required by law, ordinance, or other governmental regulation. 
    SIGN, GROUND means any sign in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is freestanding and independent of any other structure. 
    SIGN, HOLIDAY DECORATION means temporary signs, in the nature of decoration, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local, or religious holiday. 
    SIGN, HANGING means a sign attached to and suspended from or supported by a building or other structure and which depends or extends from any angle therefrom. 
    SIGN, ILLEGAL means a sign installed without a permit or a sign that does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter. 
    SIGN, ILLUMINATED means a sign that is internally or externally illuminated by artificial means. 
    SIGN, MENU PRICING means a sign with changeable copy, listing food items and purchase price. 
    SIGN, MODEL NAME means a sign which designates a particular dwelling unit design which is not for sale, but rather represents other units of a similar design, that are for sale. 
    SIGN, MODEL SALES OFFICE means a sign identifying a project-model sales office. 
    SIGN, MONUMENT means a low-profile, freestanding sign with a solid base located on the ground, typically incorporating materials which complement the architecture and landscaping of the principal structure on the site. 
    SIGN, OFF-PREMISE means any sign, which advertises a use, establishment, product, commodity, business, or service that is sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than on the property on which the sign is located. Also called an outside advertising sign or billboard. 
    SIGN, ON-SITE DIRECTIONAL means a sign providing directions for visitors to tenants, uses or activities within a nonresidential development, and may include signs marking entrances and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pick-up and delivery areas. 
    SIGN, ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL. See Sign, On-Site Directional. 
    SIGN, POLE BANNER, TEMPORARY means a banner sign mounted on a portable or non-permanent pole. 
    SIGN, POLE BANNER, PERMANENT means a banner sign mounted on a permanent pole. 
    SIGN, POLITICAL means a temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state, or local election. 
    SIGN, PORTABLE means a sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. 
    SIGN, PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT means a temporary sign advertising private sales of personal property, such as "house sales," "garage sales," "rummage sales," and the like, or private not-for-profit events, such as picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs, craft shows, and Christmas tree sales. 
    SIGN PROJECTION means, for a sign attached to a wall, the distance from the exterior wall surface to the sign element farthest distance from such surface. 
    SIGN, RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT means a sign, which identifies the name of a development or subdivision and primary address numbers. 
    SIGN, ROOF means a sign erected over, across, or on the roof of any building, which is dependent on the roof, parapet, or upper walls of any building for support. 
    SIGN, SNIPE means a small sign of any material, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, wood, or metal, which is tacked, nailed posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences, or other objects. 
    SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT means a sign, which calls attention to a civic event or activity or other similar activity of a temporary nature. 
    SIGN, SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE means a sign designating or identifying a particular residential subdivision or area. 
    SIGN, TEMPORARY means a sign designed, constructed, and intended to be used on a short-term basis, including special events and municipal service signs. 
    SIGN, TEMPORARY DEVELOPMENT means a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
    SIGN, VEHICLE means a sign on a vehicle not customarily and regularly used to transport persons or properties. 
    SIGN, VENDING MACHINE means any sign, display or other graphic attached to or part of a coin-operated machine dispensing food, beverages, or other products. 
    SIGN, WALL means a sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than twelve (12) inches from such building or structure. 
    SIGN, REAL ESTATE means a temporary sign erected by a property owner or agent, advertising for sale, rent, or lease the property upon which the sign is located. 
    TENANT, LOCAL means a tenant other than one of the three (3) major tenants located in a commercial or industrial center of at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
    TENANT, MAJOR means a tenant of at least forty thousand (40,000) gross square feet located in a commercial or industrial center. 
    VILLAGE means the Village of Wellington, Florida. 
    WALL means an exterior load-bearing or non-load-bearing vertical structure, encompassing the area between the final grade elevation and the eaves of a building, used to enclose the space within a building. 
    WINDOW AREA means the entire glass area of a window or door used for calculation of permitted sign area, including any mullions or transoms within a window or door, but excluding the supporting structures of such window or door. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.5. - General sign standards. 
    Every sign shall be subject to the general requirements listed below: 
A.  Maintenance. All signs shall be kept in good condition, compliant with all requirements of the building code, present a neat appearance, and be maintained free of debris, stains, mold, discoloration, or deterioration. 
B.  Hazard. A sign shall not directly or indirectly create a traffic or fire hazard or interfere with the free and unobstructed use of streets or sidewalks. 
C.  Intersections. A sign shall not be erected or maintained at any location in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision at the intersection of any streets, drives, or other public or private vehicular access ways. 
D.  Traffic Control. A sign shall not be erected or maintained at any location where, by reason of the position, illumination, shape, or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device. 
E.  Prohibited Words. A sign shall not make use of such words as "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
F.  Ingress and Egress. A sign shall not be attached to or placed against a building in such a manner as to prevent ingress or egress through any door or window of any building, nor shall any sign obstruct or be attached to a fire escape. 
G.  Compatibility. All signs shall be compatible with the predominant architectural theme of the development or subdivision, and shall be of a compatible color and design with all other signs to be erected. Colors and materials shall be in keeping with the standards of the surrounding area. 
H.  Materials. Signs shall be constructed of materials that are compatible with the architectural styles and materials of the principal structures. 
I.  Lighting. All lighting shall be subdued, non-glaring, and compatible with the proposed architectural character of the surrounding development and the community. All lighting shall be directed away from adjoining properties. Lighting from illuminated signs shall be placed or shielded to prevent glare from adversely affecting the vision of drivers in vehicles on roadways adjacent to such signs. 
J.  Screening. All mechanical or electrical elements of the signs shall be fully screened or concealed. 
K.  Landscaping Standards. All signs shall be appropriately landscaped to ensure that the structure blends with the character of the surrounding community. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in a manner not to interfere with visibility of a sign. 
L.  Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured from the average grade of surrounding property. Grade elevations raised solely to increase sign height shall not be used to determine allowable height. However, grade elevations raised as part of overall improvements for landscaping, installation of berms, and installation of other approved entry features may be utilized to determine allowable height. 
M.  Abandoned Signs. Abandoned signs shall be removed within sixty (60) days after the use advertised by the sign is abandoned. 
N.  Addresses. Numbers and letters indicating building addresses shall not exceed one (1) foot in height. 
O.  Safe-Sight Triangles. Signs shall not be located within the safe-sight triangles established by the Village. 
P.  Colors. Colors applied to all portions of a sign shall be consistent with the approved overall sign program or as provided herein. Signs shall be compatible with the design, style, materials, and color of the principal building or buildings to which they are associated. Colors applied to any portion of a sign that are garish, gaudy, showy, glaring, overly bright, or fluorescent are prohibited. Appeal of any decision relating to sign colors shall be filed with the Architectural Review Board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.6. - Computation of sign number and area. 
A.  Number. Each single display surface shall be considered one sign except as otherwise provided. In the case of double-faced signs, on-site, double-faced signs with the same message on both sides advertising the same business shall be considered as one (1) sign. 
B.  Area. The surface area of a sign shall be the entire face of a sign, including any framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting structure. In the case of double-faced signs, if the two (2) faces are parallel or constructed at an angle of fifteen (15) degrees or less, the two (2) faces shall be considered as one (1) sign face. If the angle of a double-faced sign is greater than fifteen (15) degrees, each sign face shall be included for the purpose of determining the total aggregate area of the sign (see Figure 1). 
C.  Determination of Frontage. For the purpose of computing the number and area of signs, the frontage of a lot shall be established by orientation of the frontage of the buildings thereon or of the principal entrance points to the premises if building frontage does not clearly indicate lot frontage. If neither of these methods is determinative, the Planning and Zoning Manager shall select on the basis of traffic flow on adjacent streets, and the lot shall be considered to front on the street with the greater traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.7. - Prohibited signs. 
    The signs listed below are prohibited within the Village of Wellington: 
A.  Off-premise Signs. Off-premise signs and billboards; unless otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Pole-mounted Signs. Pole-mounted signs 
C.  Pole Signs. Pole-mounted signs 
D.  Roof Signs. Roof signs 
E.  Projecting Signs. Projecting signs 
F.  Signs above a Roofline. Signs which project above or beyond the roofline of the building to which the sign is attached, except where expressly permitted in this section. 
G.  Roof- or Parapet-mounted Sign. Signs which are attached to or mounted on the roof or parapet of a building. 
H.  Moving Signs. Signs with lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color, such as electronic message boards, unless such signs are specifically permitted in this Chapter. 
I.  Inflatable Signs. Inflatable signs. 
J.  Strings of Light Bulbs. Strings of light bulbs used on commercially developed parcels for commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations. 
K.  Live Animals. Signs that involve the use of live animals. This shall not be construed to include religious displays. 
L.  Banners, Flags and Similar Signs. Signs consisting of one or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, or balloons, unless otherwise allowed. 
M.  Emitting Signs. Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter such as smoke or steam. 
N.  Painted Signs. Painted wall or roof signs. 
O.  Copy Cat Signs. Signs that resemble any official signage or markers and that, by reason of content, location, position, shape or color, may be reasonably confused with or construed as traffic-control devices. 
P.  Obstructing Signs. Signs that obstruct the vision of pedestrians, cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering public streets. 
Q.  Searchlights. Searchlights used to advertise or promote a business or to attract customers to a property unless approved in connection with a special event permit. 
R.  Pavement and Curb Signs. Signs that are painted, pasted, or printed on any curbstone, flagstone, pavement, or any portion of any sidewalk or street, except house numbers, street names, and traffic-control signs. 
S.  Bus Bench and Shelter Signs. Signs placed upon benches, bus shelters, or waste receptacles. 
T.  Unauthorized Signs. Any sign erected on or attached to private property, real or personal, without the express permission of the owner of such property. 
U.  Street or Right-of-Way Banners. Banners erected over or across any public street or right-of-way, except as may otherwise be expressly permitted by the Village. 
V.  Portable or Mobile Signs. Signs of a portable or mobile nature, including signs mounted on top of or on the rear of a vehicle, and signs attached to or located within a trailer or other equipment towed by a vehicle. 
W.  Public Right-of-Way Signs. Signs located within public rights-of-way, except as may otherwise be expressly permitted herein. 
X.  Neon Signs. Neon signs, excluding neon signs utilized as part of a permitted window sign. 
Y.  Snipe Signs. Snipe signs. 
Z.  Obscene Signs. Signs which exhibit obscene material. 
AA.  Residential Signs. Residential signs, except those permitted herein. 
BB.  Murals. Murals painted on a wall, side, or roof of a building. 
CC.  Other Signs. Any other sign not specifically permitted by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.8. - Exempt signs. 
    The signs listed below are exempt from the requirements of this Article and may be erected without a sign permit, unless otherwise provided herein. 
A.  Public Signs. Signs erected by a governmental body such as traffic control, safety, directional or informational or flashing signs that inform the public of civic meetings, information, events or facilities, including the following: public notices required by federal, state or local law; and traffic control signs on private property which are consistent with applicable state standards and contain no commercial messages. 
B.  Village Signs. Signs of all types installed or placed by the Village on a permanent or temporary basis. 
C.  Signs within a Building. Signs within a building not visible to the public from the outside of the building and signs within a building located at least three (3) feet from a window, provided such signs are installed in compliance with all applicable portions of the building code. 
D.  Corporate Identity. Signs incorporated into machinery or equipment by a manufacturer or distributor, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily associated with menu boards and gasoline pumps. 
E.  Umbrellas. Words or letters printed on an umbrella affixed to a permanent table or located within an approved outdoor seating where the use of the umbrella is lawfully allowed. 
F.  Warning Signs. Public warning signs on private property to indicate the dangers of trespassing, swimming, vehicle parking, animals, or similar hazards. Such signs shall not be larger than eighteen (18) inches in height by twenty-four (24) inches in width, unless specifically provided for by law. Signs shall be spaced a minimum of two hundred (200) feet apart, unless superseded by Florida Statutes. 
G.  Garage Sale Signs. Garage sale signs shall comply with the standards provided below: 
1.  Size. Signs shall not exceed four (4) feet in height or four (4) square feet in sign area. 
2.  Number. One (1) sign may be posted at the location at which the sale is held. One (1) sign may be posted at any one intersection, provided such sign is not placed in a median, will not create a safety hazard, and is not located closer than four (4) feet to the edge of the median. 
3.  Posting. Signs may be posted as follows: Fridays, beginning at 6:00 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays; and national holidays. Signs shall be removed immediately following completion of the final day of the garage sale. 
H.  Vehicle Signs. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose and intent shall be to regulate and limit vehicles with advertising from continuously parking adjacent to a right-of-way. 
2.  Parking Prohibited. Unless there is only one (1) row of parking between a building and the right-of-way, vehicles with advertising shall not park in the row of parking or any area adjacent to the right-of-way. 
3.  Exemptions. The vehicles listed below are exempt from the limits of this section: 
a.  Deliveries. Vehicles with advertising signs, when the vehicles are making deliveries to that business, such as the U.S. Postal Service or other mail and package services, or vehicles used in conjunction with a special promotion with a valid permit. 
b.  Industrial zones. Vehicles in an industrial zone parked in vehicular use areas. 
I.  Addresses. Required exterior premises identification/numbering signs and required procedure. 
1.  Residential. 
a.  Single Family. One (1) exterior premises identification/numbering sign shall be required for each principal building or use on premises showing only the numeric address designation of the structure upon which they are maintained. Address numbers shall be located on the primary façade of the structure. The primary façade is hereby defined as the façade which faces the street or roadway for which the structure is addressed. Numbers shall be consistently placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or roadway fronting the property. Numbers shall be placed no more than six (6) inches above the garage door, if the garage is on the primary façade, or no more than six (6) inches above the front door of the residence. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Residential address numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters and shall be a minimum of four (4) inches high. 
b.  Alternative Sign Location. On any lot, including, but not limited to, the developments of Aero Club, Pinewood, Rustic Ranches and Palm Beach Little Ranches as well as lots within the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District, where the front setback or tree coverage is such that numbers placed on a structure as required by Section 7.14.8.I.1.a. cannot be seen from the street or roadway for which the structure is addressed, exterior premises identification numbers shall be placed on both the residential structure and a permanent feature such as: the front fence, if a fence within the front setback is permitted; entry feature, mailbox, or other permanent feature. If the entry feature which premises identification numbers are to be placed upon is a mailbox, then both sides of the mailbox shall be required to have the numbers. Premises identification numbers must be clearly visible from the roadway and shall contrast with their background. Premises identification numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters and shall be a minimum of three (3) inches high. 
c.  Multi-Family. Multi-family residential buildings are required to have unit identification numbers/letters a minimum of four (4) inches in height. Address numbers shall be consistently placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or roadway fronting the property. Numbers shall be placed no more than six (6) inches above the garage door, if garage is on the primary façade, or no more than six (6) inches above the front door of the residence. Address numbers shall be located on the primary façade of the structure. The primary façade is hereby defined as the façade which faces the street or roadway for which the structure is addressed. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Residential address numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters. 
2.  Commercial Buildings: 
a.  Required identification numbers. Commercial buildings are required to have unit identification numbers/letters a minimum of six (6) inches in height. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters. 
b.  Buildings with two (2) or more stories. Commercial buildings, two (2) stories and up, directional unit identification signs shall be posted outside of each elevator/stairwell. This shall apply only when there is an option for direction of travel. 
c.  Rear access. If a Commercial building can be accessed from the rear, the building shall also have the identification numbers/letters posted on the rear of the building. When property layout, landscaping, or driveway design limits visibility of the address, sufficient additional signs shall be posted to identify buildings or direction of travel to reach buildings. Numbers/letters shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in height. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters. 
d.  Roadside or marquee signs. Commercial buildings which utilize a roadside marquee/signboard are required to post the full range of building addresses on such marquee/signboard. These numbers shall contrast with their background. The exterior premises identification/numbering signs shall be required for each principal building or use on premises showing only the numeric address designation of the structure upon which they are maintained. Address numbers shall be placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street and/or roadway fronting the property. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters. Identification numbers for buildings shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches high. When buildings utilize multiple addresses, such as multiple occupant mercantile buildings, the address range shall be posted on a marquee/signboard as indicated above. In addition, each occupant shall have address/identification numbers/letters a minimum of four (4) inches high located so that the top of the numbers/letters abuts the top frame of the main entry door. These numbers shall contrast with their background and be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters. 
J.  Temporary Development Signs. Temporary signs denoting architect, engineer, landscape architect, planner, or contractor on a construction site. Signs of this nature are subject to the restrictions listed below: 
1.  Number. One (1) sign per street or road frontage shall be allowed. 
2.  Removal. All signs shall be immediately removed upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or abandonment of work. Removal of temporary signs prior to a declared weather emergency, including a "hurricane watch" or "hurricane warning," is the responsibility of the contractor or party responsible for installation of the sign. 
3.  Size. Temporary development signs shall comply with the size limitations stated below. Size limitations shall include both new construction and renovations, additions, alterations, and similar improvements. 
a.  Single family. Single family residential dwelling: Four (4) square feet, and not more than four (4) feet in height. 
b.  Residential development or subdivision. Residential development or subdivision: Thirty-two (32) square feet, and not more than eight (8) feet in height. 
c.  Nonresidential development. Nonresidential development: Thirty-two (32) square feet, and not more than eight (8) feet in height. 
4.  Time of Installation. Temporary development signs shall not be installed until a land development permit is issued for initiating site improvements. 
5.  Compliance with Wind Load Standards. Temporary signs shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code regarding wind load and related standards. 
K.  Federal Bankruptcy Signs. Signs authorized by a federal bankruptcy order. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.9. - Sign approval process and technical deviations. 
    All signs require a building permit except for those listed as exempt in Section 7.14.8. 
A.  Application Requirements. An application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the information and documentation required by the Planning and Zoning Division. Unless otherwise provided herein, a Master Sign Plan shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of a building permit. 
B.  Master Sign Plan. 
1.  Purpose. The Master Sign Plan shall serve as the controlling document for review of all applications for sign approval within a designated development, including planned developments, conditional uses, or other developments with more than one (1) building or parcel, including all outparcels. The purpose and intent of a Master Sign Plan is to provide a master record of signs on a parcel and to assure compatible sign applications. Further, the intent is to create unification of signage within parcels but not between parcels that are common to a planned commercial development, and out-parcels shall be treated separately. All permanent signs, including any permanent sign permitted by this chapter that were previously not permitted signage, shall be included within a Master Sign Plan. 
2.  Contents. The Master Sign Plan shall indicate the type, location, size and dimensions, illumination, content, landscaping, color, materials, and architectural style of all proposed signs. 
3.  Exception. Development of a single parcel with a single user, not associated with any development requiring a sign plan, is exempt from the requirement of providing an overall sign plan for the property. All signs constructed must comply with the requirements of this Article. 
4.  Sign Tag. The Village may establish a sign tag program, as part of issuing sign permits. 
5.  Fees. The building permit fee shall be quadrupled if a sign is installed without the necessary permit or permits. 
6.  Maintenance. The repainting, changing of parts and preventive maintenance of signs not normally requiring a building permit shall be permitted. However, such maintenance shall be consistent with the originally approved sign plan and shall be otherwise in conformance with this Article. 
C.  Technical Deviations. In the case of special signage needs where the use or location of a building is of a nature that the requirements of these regulations negatively impact a proposed use, an applicant may submit a request for a technical deviation from these requirements for a particular sign as a part of the overall Master Sign Plan. A justification statement shall be submitted setting forth the nature and extent of the requested deviations. Approval of a technical deviation shall extend only to the specific sign identified in the application for the technical deviation and shall not be construed to modify the overall Master Sign Plan. 
Technical deviations may be approved by the Architectural Review Board if the following criteria have been satisfied: 
1.  Prohibited Signs. A deviation shall not be granted which has the effect of permitting any sign which is specifically prohibited by these regulations. 
2.  Effect of Deviation. The deviation must enhance the aesthetic result of the overall sign program or mitigate a unique feature of a user, structure, or location that warrants a technical deviation from the code in the opinion of the ARB. 
3.  Negative Impacts Prohibited. 
a.  Other tenants or buildings. Approval of the deviation must not negatively impact another tenant or building shown on the Master Sign Plan. 
b.  Off-site impacts. The technical deviation must not cause any negative off-site impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.10. - Residential development signage. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the incorporation of signage into entry features which include landscaping and other amenities that express and enhance the residential character of the development. An entry wall or feature with signage shall be for the purpose of identifying the development and shall only provide the name of the subdivision and primary address numerals. 
B.  Placement. A sign shall not be placed on fences or walls in any residential zoning district except a development identification sign located at an entrance and placed on an entry wall or feature in that development. 
C.  Requirements for Entry Feature Signs. Entry feature signage shall comply with the requirements listed below: 
1.  Size and Location. Signage may consist of a maximum of two (2) signs per entranceway and shall be located: 
a.  A minimum of five (5) feet from any property lines; and 
b.  Within one hundred (100) feet of any access point. 
2.  Easements and Rights-of-Way. Signage shall not be located within any street right-of-way or utility easements, unless approved by the Village Engineer, the Planning, Zoning and Building Department, and with written permission of the utility company or companies holding interest in the easement on the property. 
3.  Size. Signs located on entrance walls or features shall comply with the size limitations listed below: 
a.  Maximum height and area. Signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the surface area of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per entrance wall or feature. 
b.  Maximum lines of copy. A maximum of two (2) lines of copy may be permitted if the combined lettering height does not exceed thirty-six (36) inches. 
c.  Maximum logo size. Logos utilized in an entry sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
D.  Requirements for Entrance Signs. Entrance signage shall comply with the requirements listed below. Entrance signs may be used in lieu of entry feature signs. Entrance signs shall be monument signs. 
1.  Number and Location. Signage may consist of a maximum of two (2) signs per entranceway and shall be located: 
a.  A minimum of five (5) feet from any property lines; and 
b.  Within one hundred (100) feet of any access point. 
2.  Easements and Rights-of-Way. Entrance signage shall not be located within any street right-of-way or utility easements, unless approved by the Village Engineer, the Planning, Zoning and Building Department, and with written permission of the utility company or companies holding interest in the easement on the property. 
3.  Size. Entrance signs shall comply with the size limitations listed below: 
a.  Within rights-of-way. Signs located within any public or private right-of-way or entrance drives shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height and ten (10) feet in length. 
b.  Not within rights-of-way. Signs located outside a right-of-way or entrance drive shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height and ten (10) feet in length. 
c.  Maximum lines of copy. A maximum of two (2) lines of copy may be permitted if the combined lettering height does not exceed thirty-six (36) inches. 
d.  Maximum logo size. Logos utilized in an entry sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
e.  Maximum size. Entrance signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. 
E.  Lighting. Lighting of the entrance sign or feature may be provided by internal lighting, backlighting, the general lighting of the sign area, or by shielded spotlights. Lighting shall be subdued, non-glaring and shall not spill over onto residential lots or adjacent roadways. 
F.  Landscaping. All entry feature and entrance feature signs shall be landscaped to ensure that the structure blends with the surrounding community and character of its landscaping. The landscaped area surrounding the entry feature signs and entrance wall signs shall be an area not less than the area of the entrance wall or feature or entrance sign. 
G.  Internal Directional Signage. Directional signage within residential developments and subdivisions shall communicate directions within the residential community. The regulations listed below shall apply: 
1.  Type and Style of Signage. The directional signs shall be of similar type and style throughout the residential development. 
2.  Maximum Size. The directional signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, a maximum width of four (4) feet, and a maximum height of four (4) feet. 
3.  Advertising Copy Prohibited. The directional sign shall contain no advertising copy, other than logo, or residential development, or company name. 
4.  Prohibited and Permitted Locations. Residential directional signs shall not be located within a public or private right-of-way, but may be located within an easement or other site specified within an approved plat or site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.11. - Sign requirements for commercial and industrial uses. 
A.  Master Sign Plan for Existing Uses. Existing commercial or industrial properties shall submit any previously approved Master Sign Plan to the Department for certification by the Architectural Review Board. The Architectural Review Board shall certify the existing signs conform to the approved Master Sign Plan. 
1.  Date of Submittal. The approved Master Sign Plan shall be submitted to the Village by July 1, 2000. 
2.  Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
B.  Master Sign Plan for New Commercial and Industrial Uses. Unless otherwise provided herein, a Master Sign Plan for all commercial and industrial uses must be considered by the Architectural Review Board. New commercial and industrial developments shall apply for approval of a Master Sign Plan at the time of the final site plan certification. The Master Sign Plan must include all signage to be included as part of the project, and shall specify the type, location, size and dimensions, illumination, content, landscaping, color, materials, and architectural style of all proposed signs. All signs shall comply with the regulations listed below. Master Sign Plans shall be subject to review by the Architectural Review Board. 
1.  Compatibility. All signs shall be of similar graphic character, shall be harmonious in color, and shall be compatible with the architectural theme of the buildings found on site. 
2.  Grouping Requirements. All lettering within the following groupings shall be similar in size, colors, and graphic style: major tenant, local retail, under canopy, window, and ground-mounted signs. 
3.  Screening. All mechanical and electrical elements of the sign shall be fully screened or concealed. 
4.  Maximum Distance. Signs shall not be mounted more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the building. Specific mounting dimensions and related information shall be supplied. 
5.  Materials. Materials shall be used which blend and are compatible with the proposed building construction. Signs and buildings should be designed with a unifying architectural theme. 
6.  Lighting. Lighting shall be subdued, non-glaring and compatible with the proposed architectural character and development and the community. Specific information regarding the nature, amount direction, etc., of illumination shall be provided as part of the Master Sign Plan. 
7.  Maintenance. All signs erected in accordance with this section shall be maintained in good appearance and repair and in accordance with the approved Master Sign Plan and applicable specific sign standards of this Article. 
8.  Logos. Logos or any federally registered trademark shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  If designed as an integral part of the advertising copy; 
b.  If consistent with an approved color scheme of the Master Sign Plan; and 
c.  If displayed as registered. 
9.  Colors. Color must be consistent with the Master Sign Program approved for the overall development. 
C.  Entry Features and Freestanding Center Identification Monument Signs. The following standards shall be applied to all commercial or industrial entry features or freestanding center identification monument signs in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
1.  Maximum Size. 
a.  Entry features shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in length. The signage incorporated into the entrance features shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
b.  Freestanding center identification monument signs not incorporated into entry features shall be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
c.  Maximum height of monument signs shall be eight (8) feet. 
d.  Maximum width of monument signs shall be ten (10) feet. 
2.  Letter Size. Lettering affixed to entry features and freestanding center identification monument signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height for a single line of copy and thirty-six (36) inches in height for two (2) lines of copy. The lettering shall be graphically consistent with the signs found in the remainder of the property. 
3.  Lines of Copy Permitted. 
a.  Lines of copy permitted. Unless otherwise permitted herein, a maximum of two (2) lines of copy shall be permitted for entry signs and freestanding center identification signs so long as the combined height of the lettering does not exceed thirty-six (36) inches. 
b.  Additional lines of copy. For an entry sign or a freestanding center identification monument sign, two (2) additional lines of copy may be permitted. The additional lines of copy may include the name of one tenant and may include the logo of such tenant or in the alternative may include sales or leasing contact information regarding property within a center. Each additional line of copy shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height. The combined height of the two (2) additional lines of copy shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height, including the height of a logo. 
4.  Number Allowed. At each side of a vehicular access, an entry feature and signage is allowed. Each entry feature may include a center identification sign. In lieu of entry feature signage, one (1) freestanding center identification monument sign shall be allowed to be located at each vehicular access, subject to a minimum distance separation of two hundred (200) feet between signs. If road entrances to a center, park or development are closer than two hundred (200) feet apart, then only one of the entrances shall be allowed a freestanding center identification monument sign. 
5.  Setbacks. Ground-mounted signs shall maintain a minimum five (5) foot setback from all property lines. 
6.  Sign Content. 
a.  Permitted information. Entry features signs shall display only the project or development name. Signs may include two (2) additional lines of copy for a single tenant or in the alternative may include sales or leasing contact information regarding property within a center. 
b.  Permitted information. Freestanding center identification monument signs shall display the project or development name, and may include two (2) additional lines of copy for a single tenant or in the alternative may include sales or leasing contact information regarding property within a center. 
7.  Landscaping. All entry features or freestanding identification signs shall be landscaped around the base of the signs or features to ensure that the structure blends with the site and character of the overall landscape plan. 
D.  Multiple Tenant Monument Signs. The following standards shall be applied to multiple tenant monument signs in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
1.  Number Allowed. One multiple tenant monument sign shall be permitted for each frontage abutting a public collector or arterial right-of-way. 
2.  Maximum Size. 
a.  Multiple tenant monument signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length. 
b.  The signage incorporated into a multiple tenant monument sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
3.  Letter size. Lettering affixed to multiple tenant monument signs shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height for a single tenant. The lettering shall be graphically consistent with the signs found in the remainder of the property. 
4.  Number of Tenants Permitted. 
a.  A maximum of eight (8) tenant names in four (4) lines of copy shall be permitted in multiple tenant monument signs, so long as the combined height of the lettering does not exceed forty-eight (48) inches. 
b.  Multiple tenant monument signs may include tenant logos, provided such logos do not exceed twelve (12) inches in height or in the alternative may include sales or leasing contact information regarding property within a center. 
5.  Landscaping. All multiple tenant monument signs shall be landscaped around the base of the signs or features to ensure that the structure blends with the site and character of the overall landscape plan. 
6.  Inclusion in Master Sign Plan. Each multiple tenant monument sign shall be included within a Master Sign Plan. If a Master Sign Plan exists for a commercial or industrial property, the addition of one or more multiple tenant monument signs may be approved as an administrative amendment to such plan, provided the proposed sign or signs are consistent with the style, size, colors and materials approved as part of the Master Sign Plan. 
E.  Major and Local Tenant Wall Signs. The following standards shall be applied to major and local tenant wall signs in commercial and industrial zoning districts: 
1.  Number of Square Feet. Wall signs shall be limited to a maximum size of two (2) square feet per lineal foot of principal storefront façade, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet per tenant. 
2.  Maximum Sign Sizes. Major tenant signs shall not exceed sixty-six (66) inches in height. Local tenant signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
3.  Maximum Length. Sign length shall not exceed the lesser of seventy percent (70%) of bay width or twenty (20) feet. 
4.  Copy Lines. Wall signs shall contain not more than two (2) lines of copy for any single sign. 
5.  Mounting. Wall signs shall be mounted consistent with the standards listed below: 
a.  Equipment. Wall signs shall be mounted to conceal all mechanical or electrical equipment. 
b.  Projection. Wall signs shall not project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the surface to which they are attached. 
c.  Building façade. Wall signs shall be mounted parallel to the building façade. 
d.  Extensions. Wall signs shall not extend above or below the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted. Wall signs shall not be erected, constructed, or maintained upon or above the roofline of any building. This shall not preclude the placement of a wall sign against a mansard of a building providing the sign face is horizontally parallel to the building wall and does not extend neither above the highest point nor below the lowest point of the mansard to which it is affixed. 
e.  Other wall signs. An awning, canopy, or mansard may be used for the placement of the allowable square footage for wall signs. 
6.  Number of Wall Signs. One (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each principal storefront façade of an individual bay or store. 
a.  End location wall signs. One (1) additional wall sign, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the maximum square footage allowed for the principal wall sign shall be permitted if the store is located on the end of the shopping center structure. 
b.  Residential zoning district limitation. Wall signage facing a residential zoning district shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum square footage allowed for the principal wall sign. 
c.  Required architectural treatment. A second wall sign of this nature shall be allowed only if the architectural treatment of the primary façade is extended to include the wall located at the end of a shopping center. 
7.  Rear Wall Signs. Signage located on a rear wall is prohibited. However, a nameplate or owner designation sign on or near the rear door of each business conducted on the premises shall be allowed. Rear wall signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in size. 
F.  Window Signs. The following standards shall apply to all signs displayed in store windows: 
1.  Sign Area. A window sign, including logos and other non-copy types of advertisement, shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the window area in which such sign is placed. 
2.  Letter Size. A maximum of two (2) lines of copy shall be permitted on any window. First row letters shall not exceed nine (9) inches in height. Second row letters shall not exceed three (3) inches in height. 
3.  Content. Window signs shall identify only products or services offered within the establishment displaying such advertisement. Window signs may include "Open" or "Closed" signs. 
4.  Illuminated Signs. Illuminated signage, including neon signs, may be placed or displayed in the window area. The total of all illuminated signage not to exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
5.  Number. One (1) window sign shall be permitted for each display window. Any sign located within three (3) feet behind the window shall be considered a window sign. 
6.  Temporary Signs. Temporary signs promoting public and civic events, not to exceed four (4) square feet, may be located in a window. Temporary signs shall not be included within the overall sign area permitted for windows. 
7.  Door Signs. For the purposes of this section, glass doors shall be allowed signage in the same manner as window signs and may be included in calculation of total sign area. 
G.  Under-Canopy Signs. The standards listed below shall apply to all under-canopy signs. 
1.  Sign Area. Under-canopy signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
2.  Mounting. Under-canopy signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight (8) feet above the surface of the walkway. Signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the façade of the adjacent storefront. 
3.  Number. One (1) under-canopy sign shall be permitted for each storefront. 
4.  Content. Only tenant information, such as store name, product or service, and logo, may be displayed. 
5.  Master Sign Plan. All under-canopy signs shall be shown on the Master Sign Plan and shall be in conformance with the standards contained herein. 
H.  Menu Signs. Menu signs may be installed by restaurants, subject to the limits established below: 
1.  Location. Menu signs shall be located within ten (10) feet of the front door or entry. 
2.  Mounting. Menu signs shall be mounted on an exterior wall or within a window. 
3.  Enclosure. Menu signs may be enclosed within a display cabinet or frame. 
4.  Number and Size. One (1) menu sign per restaurant shall be permitted. Menu signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in size. 
I.  Monument Signs for Commercial or Industrial Outparcels or Freestanding Businesses. The following standards shall be applied to all monument signs for commercial or industrial outparcels or properties functioning as an outparcel or freestanding businesses, and not classified as a freestanding center identification sign as provided in Section 7.14.11.C. 
1.  Height. Monument signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  Length. Monument signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length. 
3.  Sign Area. Monument signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
4.  Letter Size. Lettering shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height and, if applicable, shall be graphically consistent with the signs found on the remainder of the property. For a freestanding monument sign, two (2) additional lines of copy may be permitted. The additional lines of copy may include the name of one tenant and may include the logo of such tenant or in the alternative may include sales or leasing contact information regarding property within a center. The two (2) lines of copy shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height, including the height of a logo. 
5.  Copy. A maximum of two (2) lines of copy shall be permitted so long as the combined height of the lettering does not exceed thirty-six (36) inches. 
6.  Number Allowed. One (1) monument sign shall be permitted for each detached principal building. Not more than three (3) monument signs shall be permitted for an entire commercial center or industrial park. 
7.  Setbacks. Monument signs shall be maintained at a minimum five (5) feet setback from all property lines. 
8.  Sign Copy. Monument signs may advertise only businesses or tenants located upon the subject property. 
9.  Installation. All monument signs shall be ground mounted on a continuous foundation or footing, or otherwise constructed so as to present a finished appearance. 
10.  Color. Color and construction materials must be consistent with the Master Sign Plan. 
11.  Separation. Monument signs shall be located a minimum distance of two hundred (200) lineal feet from any commercial or industrial center identification sign or any other monument sign. 
12.  Landscaping. All monument signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign to ensure that the structure blends in with the site and the character of the overall landscape plan. The area of landscaping shall not be less that the area of the sign face. 
J.  Gas/Service Station/Convenience Store Signs. The requirements listed below shall apply to signs related to properties that include the retail sale of gasoline. 
1.  Ground Mounted Monument Signs. 
a.  Number. One (1) ground mounted monument sign per street frontage shall be allowed. The monument sign may include corporate logo, grade, and service type. A monument sign for a service station selling gasoline must include the prices of gasoline that is being sold. 
b.  Size. The monument sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and ten (10) feet in length. 
c.  Maximum height. Maximum height shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
d.  Sign Area. The monument sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and may be designed to incorporate a changeable copy price sign. That portion of the sign containing price information shall not be larger than a maximum of three (3) feet wide or a maximum of four (4) feet high or larger than a total of twelve (12) square feet. 
e.  Letter Size. Letters designating the fuel grade or type shall not exceed five and one-half (5.5) inches in height. The lettering relating to price shall not exceed eight and one-half (8.5) inches in height. All other lettering shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
f.  Logos. The use of corporate logos and corporate colors may be permitted only if designed as an integral part of the advertising copy. 
g.  Landscaping. All monument signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign to ensure that the structure blends in with the site and the character of the overall landscape plan. The area of landscaping shall not be less that the area of the sign face. 
2.  Canopy Signs. 
a.  Number. Canopy signs are permitted subject to the limits contained herein. 
b.  Size. The total size of canopy signs shall be the lesser of one hundred (100) square feet or two (2) square feet of canopy signage per lineal foot of frontage along public rights-of-way. 
c.  Letter Size. The lettering shall be limited to twenty-four (24) inches in height and shall not extend above or below the face of the canopy. 
d.  Content. The content of the canopy sign shall be limited to the corporate name of the brand of fuels sold on site. The use of corporate logos or corporate colors may be permitted only if designed as an integral part of the advertising copy. 
K.  Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs for movie theaters, live performance theaters, museums, and play houses may be located as and substitute for a permitted wall sign, subject to locational, size, and other requirements provided in Section 7.14.11.D. 
L.  Drive-Through Window Signs. Drive-through window signs shall comply with the standards listed below: 
1.  Size. The sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and five (5) feet in length. The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area. 
2.  Illumination. Illumination, if provided, shall be furnished internally. Use of neon lighting is prohibited. 
3.  Communications. Drive-through window signs are allowed a communications system to give and receive orders. 
4.  Setbacks. Drive-through window signs shall meet the required setbacks of the principal structure. 
M.  A Frame Signs. A frame signs shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Size. A sign shall not exceed two (2) feet by three (3) feet. The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. 
2.  Permitted Location. A sign shall be located within 25 feet of the principal entrance of the retail or commercial or industrial activity. The signs shall not interfere with normal pedestrian traffic and public safety, and shall not present a hazard to vehicular traffic. 
3.  Prohibited Location. A sign shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a public right-of-way or a residential property line. 
4.  Number of Signs Permitted. Each commercial or industrial activity shall be allowed one (1) sign per principal entrance. 
5.  Removal. Each sign shall be removed from exterior display nightly. 
6.  Sign Preparation and Appearance. 
a.  Preparation. Each sign shall be prepared in a professional and workmanlike manner and the color and lettering of such signs shall be consistent with the character, color and style of the approved Master Sign Plan of the building within which the commercial or industrial activity is located. 
b.  Removal or relocation. The Village shall require removal or relocation of signs that are improperly placed, dilapidated or otherwise not consistent with the standards provided herein. 
N.  Permanent Pole Banners. Pole banners installed within a center or project shall be consistent with the standards listed below. 
1.  Installation Location. The banners may be installed upon utility poles, lighting poles or poles installed for the purpose of hanging banners. 
2.  Maximum Height. A banner shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
3.  Maximum Size. Maximum size shall be three (3) feet in width by five (5) feet in height. 
4.  Maximum Area. Maximum sign area shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
5.  Permitted Locations. Banners can be located within any center or project provided a banner is located at least one hundred (100) feet from any public right-of-way providing access to the center or project. 
6.  Inclusion in Sign Plan. 
a.  Inclusion required. Permanent signs shall be included within an approved sign plan. A sign plan amendment to include such signs shall be approved prior to issuance of a building permit for sign installation. 
b.  Form of amendment. If a Master Sign Plan exists for a commercial or industrial property, the addition of one (1) or more nonresidential real estate signs may be approved as part of an administrative amendment to the plan. 
7.  Appearance. Signs shall be consistent with the overall character, colors and materials of signs approved as part of an approved sign plan. 
8.  Pole Owner Consent. Prior to installation of a pole banner or banners, an applicant must provide the consent of the utility pole owner for the installation. 
O.  Internal Directional Signage. 
1.  Intent. Directional signage is intend to provide directions for visitors and clients to the various tenants, uses or activities within a nonresidential development, and may include information regarding entrances and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pick-up and delivery areas. 
2.  Standards for Internal Director Signs. The regulations listed below shall apply: 
a.  Type and Style of Signage. The directional signs shall be of similar type, color and style throughout the nonresidential development. Individual type fonts or logos associated with a tenant or user may be utilized, otherwise a standard font shall be used. All fonts shall be the same color. 
b.  Maximum Size and Dimensions. The directional signs shall not exceed a maximum sign area of twelve (12) square feet, a maximum width of four (4) feet, and a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
c.  Information to be included. The directional sign may contain tenant names and may include logos for individual tenants or users or in the alternative may include sales or leasing contact information regarding property within a center. 
3.  Prohibited and Permitted Locations. Directional signs shall be located as provided in an approved sign plan, and shall not be located within a safe sight triangle or other location that interferes with visibility for both pedestrians and drivers of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.12. - Sign requirements for institutional uses. 
A.  Identification Signs. The standards listed below shall apply to freestanding identification signs for institutional uses, including governmental buildings and facilities, public and private schools, places of worship, libraries, fire stations, and cultural or recreational properties. The standards of this section shall not apply to signs installed by the Village. 
1.  Size. The sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in length or eight (8) feet in height. Institutional signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
2.  Lettering. The sign letters shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height for a single line of copy. Two (2) lines of copy shall be permitted, so long as the combined lettering height does not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. 
3.  Number. One (1) identification sign shall be permitted for each street frontage. 
4.  Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs for institutional uses shall meet the standards listed below: 
a.  Maximum size. The area for changeable copy shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and five (5) feet in width. 
b.  Commercial messages prohibited. The sign shall not contain a commercial message. 
c.  Maximum lettering size. Lettering shall not exceed ten (10) inches in height. 
d.  Number permitted. One (1) changeable copy sign shall be permitted. 
B.  School Sponsor Signs. When visible from a public-right-of-way, sponsorship signs for public and private elementary and secondary schools may be installed, subject to each of the following standards. 
1.  Size. The signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
2.  Color. The backs of signs shall be a uniform color. 
3.  Visibility. The text and graphics of a sign shall not be visible from a public right-of-way. 
4.  Illumination. Illumination of school sponsor signs is prohibited. 
5.  Location. The signs may only be located along fences or walls adjacent to or enclosing athletic fields, playgrounds, or similar areas. The signs shall not be located along perimeter or security fencing, or along buildings or walls not adjacent to athletic fields, playgrounds or similar areas. The signs shall not be located along a fence or wall adjacent to an environmental preserve. 
6.  Installation and Maintenance. Signs shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. Dilapidated or deteriorated signs including signs that are faded, discolored, tattered or otherwise of unacceptable appearance, shall be removed by the school or at the request of the Village. Signs shall be installed or fastened in a manner consistent with standard practices and such installation or fastening shall be maintained in a manner consistent with standard practices. 
7.  Sign Program. Each school, or the School District of Palm Beach County, shall submit a sign program for school sponsor signs. The sign program shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Manager. The sign program submitted to the Village shall consist of the items listed below. 
a.  Name. School name and address. 
b.  Principal's Contact. Name and telephone number of the school principal. 
c.  Colors. Proposed colors for sponsor signs, including the color proposed for the back of signs and color or colors proposed for the text and graphics located on the front of signs. 
d.  Location. Proposed location for installation of signs. It is the intent of this section to have the location of sponsor signs consolidated into a single area or areas commonly utilized for sponsor signs, such as signs along the bottom of outfield fences associated with baseball fields. 
8.  Exception. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the types of signs listed below. 
a.  Interior signs. Signs located within school buildings, within courtyards or similar areas visible only from within a school, or in similar locations. 
b.  Stadiums and athletic fields. Signs installed along the bottom of outfield walls in a stadium or along bleachers associated with an athletic field. 
c.  School name. Signs and lettering containing only the school name and logo. 
d.  Traffic control and information. Signs associated with traffic control, directional signs or similar informational signs. 
C.  Temporary House of Worship Signs. Temporary house of worship signs at public or private schools may be installed and shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Special Use Permit. 
a.  Special use permit required. A special use permit shall be obtained for display of a temporary sign. The permit shall be valid for a period of not to exceed one (1) year. The special use permit shall include approval by the owner of the school. 
b.  Special use permit approval. An approved special use permit shall include permitted sign location, permitted sign colors, and information to be displayed. 
2.  Maximum number. Not more than one (1) temporary sign per school campus is allowed. 
3.  Times of Display. A temporary sign may be displayed not more than three (3) hours prior to a religious observance and shall be removed not later than three (3) hours following the conclusion of the observance. 
4.  Maximum size. A temporary sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
5.  Location. A temporary sign may be located to face a frontage road. 
6.  Installation and maintenance. The sign shall be fastened to a chain link fence and shall be fastened in a manner consistent with standard practices. 
D.  Project Graduation Signs and Permitted Display. Project Graduation, or signs supporting similar events for public or private elementary or secondary schools, shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Period of Installation. A Project Graduation sign may be installed during the period beginning January 1st of each year and ending within one (1) week after the last day of the regular school year. Within one (1) week following the last day of the regular school year, a Project Graduation sign shall be removed. 
2.  Number. One sign is permitted per school. 
3.  Size. Signs shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in size, and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and eight (8) feet in width. 
4.  Location. 
a.  Prohibited locations. Signs shall not be located within a right-of-way, safe sight triangle, nor otherwise within an area that may obscure a motorist's view of pedestrians, bicyclists, or others using sidewalks or paths. 
b.  Minimum setback. Signs shall maintain a minimum setback of at least five (5) feet from all property lines. 
5.  Illumination. Signs may be illuminated in compliance with this chapter. 
6.  Landscaping. Signs shall be landscaped consistent with the standards listed below. 
a.  Minimum area. The landscaped area shall consist of not less than one-half (1/2) of the sign area. 
b.  Landscape materials. The landscaping shall consist of a combination of ground cover, shrubs, hedges and small trees as approved by the Planning and Zoning Manager. 
7.  Appearance and Maintenance. Signs shall be prepared in a professional manner, and shall be maintained in a neat and workmanlike manner. All elements, including structural elements, of a sign shall be painted. 
8.  Construction Standards. Project graduation signs shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code regarding wind load and related standards. 
E.  Electronic Message Board Signs. An electronic message board sign shall be permitted for any of the following uses: public and private elementary, secondary and post-secondary schools, including colleges and universities; places of worship; public or private hospitals; public or private not-for-profit artistic and cultural agencies; and public facilities operated by a federal, state, county or municipal government or agency. Electronic message board signs shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Maximum Size. The maximum size of sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and ten (10) feet in length. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
2.  Illumination. External illumination is prohibited. Internal illumination is permitted. Use of neon lighting is prohibited, and illumination shall not include colored lighting, unless otherwise provided herein. Illumination shall consist of light emitting diodes or similar technology in a white or neutral color suitable for and commonly used with this type of sign. 
3.  Size of Lettering, Numbering and Graphics. The letters and numbers shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. Graphics may exceed the maximum permitted size of letters and numbers. 
4.  Message Content. Commercial messages are prohibited. The sign content of an electronic message sign must relate to providing information for events and activities associated with the principal use or information of a public or community nature. 
5.  Number and Location. 
a.  Number permitted. One (1) electronic message board sign is permitted per principal use. The sign must be located along the principal street frontage of the project. 
b.  Minimum set back. Signs shall maintain a minimum setback of at least ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
c.  Off-premise sign standards. Off-premise signs may be permitted, subject to the standards listed below. 
i.  The sign is approved by the Architectural Review Board. 
ii.  The sign is located within a public right-of-way in an easement approved by the Village Council or the sign is approved by the property owner for a location within a private road right-of-way or easement. 
iii.  The sign is included within an approved Master Sign Plan for a residential or nonresidential development, including size, location, appearance, colors and materials. 
iv.  The sign is located on an arterial or collector road. 
6.  Nonconforming Signs. If an electronic message board sign exists as of August 1, 2009, the sign shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure. Repair or replacement of such sign shall be subject to the provisions of Article 1, Chapter 8, regarding nonconforming structures. 
7.  Landscaping. All signs shall be landscaped immediately around the base of the sign. The area of landscaping shall be not less than twice the area of the sign face and shall consist of materials that do not affect the visibility of the sign face. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.13. - Temporary special event signs. 
A.  Temporary Special Event Signs. The standards listed below shall apply to all special event signs for non-residential properties, including model home centers, grand openings, special events, and special sales as provided herein: 
1.  Dimensions. Unless otherwise provided herein, signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches by forty-eight (48) inches, or equivalent square footage. 
2.  Number Allowed. One (1) sign shall be allowed for each street frontage. A minimum one hundred (100) foot separation shall be maintained between signs. 
3.  Setbacks and Safe-Sight Distance. Temporary special event signs shall maintain a minimum five (5) foot setback from all property lines and shall not encroach any safe-sight distances or any public rights-of-way. 
4.  Copy. Signs shall display only the event type, sponsors, date of the event, and operating hours. 
5.  Materials and Installation. Signs shall be made of wood, plastic, or other durable material. Signs shall be securely fastened to the ground, and maintained in a clean and orderly appearance. 
6.  Display and Removal. Sign may be displayed for no more than seven (7) days total, including the days of the event, and must be removed immediately following the conclusion of the event. 
B.  Temporary Pole Banners Signs. The standards listed below shall apply to all temporary pole banner signs for non-residential properties: 
1.  Mounting. A banner sign shall be mounted on a temporary pole that is installed in the ground. 
2.  Dimensions. A banner signs shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches by ten (10) feet. 
3.  Number Allowed. One (1) banner sign shall be allowed for each ground floor tenant within a commercial shopping center or project. 
4.  Permitted Locations. 
a.  A banner sign shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any public right-of-way. 
b.  A banner sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from all property lines and shall not encroach any safe sight distances or any vehicle use area, driveway or parking space. 
c.  A banner sign shall be located within a landscape strip that is immediately adjacent to the tenant and is not separated from the use by a parking space, driveway, or vehicle use area. A sign shall not be located within a parking space, driveway or vehicular use area. 
d.  A banner sign shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the principal entrance. 
5.  Content. Banner signs shall display only copy related to the tenant, including name, logo, operating hours, address, etc. 
6.  Materials, Installation and Appearance. Banner signs shall be made of durable material and shall be fastened securely to the pole on which mounted and to the ground. Signs shall be maintained in an upright and orderly manner with a neat and clean appearance. Signs shall not be faded, discolored, tattered or provide other evidence of lack of care. 
7.  Time Limit for Display and Removal. 
a.  Maximum display period. The business may display a banner sign for not more than four (4) consecutive weeks per display period. 
b.  Annual display limits. The business may display a banner sign for not more than three (3) times per year for a maximum of twelve (12) weeks per year. 
c.  Removal. The business must remove a banner sign immediately upon expiration of period of display. 
d.  Minimum elapsed display requirement. A period of at least four (4) weeks shall occur between the time periods when a banner sign is allowed to be installed. 
8.  Special Use Permit Approval Required. A special use permit, as provided in Chapter 5, Article 5 shall be approved prior to installation of temporary pole banners. The special use permit shall indicate each four-week period the a sign shall be displayed, installation and removal dates, location of banners, and size of banners. 
9.  Prohibited Banners Signs. Banner signs shall not be attached to trees or vegetation, strung between trees or vegetation, or installed in a manner other than provided herein. 
C.  Model Home Center Signs. The standards listed below shall apply to all signs for model home centers. 
1.  Identification Signs for Model Centers. Identification signs shall be allowed only in association with the sale of platted lots or other approved large-scale residential development. One (1) model center sign shall be permitted for each approved model center. 
2.  Size. Identification signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in length and seventy-two (72) inches in width. The sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
3.  Content. The contents of the identification sign are limited to the project or model center name, telephone number, builder, architect, agent, hours of operation, and a directional arrow. 
4.  Design. Signs shall be compatible with the buildings on site and shall be painted in colors that are compatible with the development and the community. 
5.  Location. Signs must be located within the tract, pod, or subdivision that is for sale. 
6.  Landscaping. All model center signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign to ensure that the structure blends in with the site and the character of the overall landscape plan. The area of landscaping shall not be less that the area of the sign face. 
7.  Duration. Model home center signs may be displayed for a maximum of thirty-six (36) months or until all homes within the project receive a certificate of occupancy, whichever shall occur first. 
D.  Model Home Signs. The following standards shall apply to model home signs. 
1.  Size. Model home signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
2.  Number. One (1) model home sign shall be permitted for each approved model home within an approved model center. 
3.  Content. The model home sign shall contain only model name, builder, agent, telephone number, hours of operation, and number of bedrooms and bath. 
4.  Location. Model home signs shall be permitted within the front yard area only. Lots backing up to major thoroughfares may install rear-yard signage in addition to permitted front yard signs. Plans for rear-yard signage shall include a landscape plan and shall be submitted to the Department for review. Backyard placement will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
5.  Duration. Model homes with model signs may be displayed for a maximum of thirty-six (36) months or until the unit becomes permanently occupied, whichever shall occur first. 
6.  Flags. One (1) flag shall be allowed per model home. The flag shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and eight (8) square feet in area. Banners, streamers, or other such attention grabbing devices shall not be allowed anywhere within a model center or model home lot. 
7.  Parking Signs. Each model home may include one parking sign, not to exceed three (3) square feet in size and a maximum height of four (4) feet. 
E.  Permanent Equestrian Event Signs. 
1.  Master Sign Plan Required. Permanent event equestrian signs shall be included within an overall Master Sign Plan as provided in this chapter. 
2.  Permitted Locations. Each equestrian event sign shall comply with the location listed below. 
a.  Each sign shall be located within the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District. 
b.  Each event sign shall be located along a collector or arterial road. 
c.  Each sign shall be located in accordance with an approved Master Sign Plan. 
d.  Each sign shall be located on property that complies with each of the following: 
i.  The property possesses permanent equestrian event facilities such as arenas, rings, polo fields, and similar facilities where the events occur; 
ii.  The property and its associated equestrian event facilities host events viewed by paying spectators; 
iii.  The property and its associated event facilities are the site of events that are allowed as a permitted use or as a Special Use or Conditional Use by the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District. 
3.  Standards for Signs. Each sign shall comply with the standards listed below. 
a.  Protection of safe sight triangles and non-vehicular circulation. Each sign shall not be located within a safe sight triangle or in such location as to obscure or block equestrian, pedestrian, or other non-vehicular circulation system. 
b.  Maximum size and dimensions. Unless otherwise provided herein, the signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and ten (10) feet in width. 
c.  Number. The maximum number of signs shall be established in the approved Master Sign Plan. The maximum number of signs shall not exceed one (1) sign per street frontage. 
d.  Use of public property prohibited. Use of public property or public right-of-way as a sign location is prohibited. 
F.  Seasonal Equestrian Event Flags. A Special Use Permit for a seasonal equestrian event may allow the installation of flag poles and flags consistent with the standards listed below. 
1.  Height and location. The height and location of flag poles shall comply with the Section 7.14.17. If required, a building permit shall be obtained prior to installation of permitted flag poles. 
2.  Minimum separation. The flag poles shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet apart when located within twenty feet of the perimeter of the affected property. 
a.  Maximum size. The size of flags shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.14.17. 
b.  Effect of special use permit. The number, location and size of signs shall be established in the Special Use Permit authorizing the seasonal equestrian event. 
G.  Day of Event Informational and Directional A Frame Signs. Day of event informational and directional A frame signs shall comply with the standards listed below. 
1.  Authorization for Placement. Day of event signs shall be permitted only in conjunction with a special use permit approved for a seasonal equestrian use or for temporary cultural, sporting, entertainment, religious or similar events with an anticipated significant traffic impact. The application for inclusion of such signs within a Special Use Permit shall include the following information: 
a.  Proposed sign dimensions; 
b.  Proposed colors; 
c.  Proposed text and graphics; and 
d.  Proposed location for all signs. 
2.  Approved Permit Requirements. If included within an approved special use permit, the permit shall include approved appearance, dimensions, colors, text and graphics for day of event signs. 
a.  Permitted locations. Permitted location for day of event signs shall be established by the special use permit. Day of event signs may be located outside of the Equestrian Preserve Area. 
b.  Prohibited locations. Day of event signs shall not be located within safe sight distances or other locations interfering with vehicular pedestrian and bicycle circulation. 
c.  Information to be Conveyed. Day of event signs shall provide the following information: 
i.  Name or type of event; 
ii.  The word "Today" or day of the week; 
iii.  Starting time of event in hours and minutes; 
iv.  Directional arrow; and 
v.  Logo for the event. 
d.  Maximum size. A sign shall not exceed two (2) feet by three (3) feet. Each sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. 
e.  Placement and removal. Signs may be placed not more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the day of the event, and shall be removed not later than 10:00 a.m. following the day of the event. Day of event signs may remain if related events are scheduled on consecutive days. 
H.  Temporary Banners in the Medical Commercial Planned Development District. 
1.  Standards. Temporary banners may be installed consistent with the standards listed below. 
a.  Permitted zoning district. The banner is located within a Medical Commercial Planned Development (MCPD) or Medical Arts Planned Development (MAD) Zoning District. 
b.  Permitted location. A temporary banner shall be located only along the parapet of a structure. 
c.  Length of display. A banner shall be displayed for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
d.  Number allowed. One (1) banner per MCPD district is allowed. 
e.  Minimum setback. Banners must be setback at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 
f.  Maximum size. Banner size shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, with a maximum height of ten (10) feet and a maximum length of forty (40) feet. 
g.  Prohibited banners. Ground-mounted banners are prohibited. 
h.  Permitted message and content. 
i.  Banners contain only messages of a community-serving nature, including events of a public, civic, athletic or community nature. 
ii.  Commercial messages are prohibited, including products or services for sale or otherwise available at a cost or fee. 
2.  Special Use Permit Required. A temporary banner shall require approval of a special use permit prior to installation. Notwithstanding the requirements of Article 5, Chapter 5 regarding special permit uses, a permit for a temporary banner may be issued for a period of twelve (12) months. 
I.  Temporary Utility Pole Banners. Temporary utility pole banners may be installed within public rights-of-way and shall be consistent with the standards listed below. 
1.  Permitted locations. The banners can be located within any public or private right-of-way, subject to approval of the owner if banners are located within private rights of-way. 
2.  Permitted zoning districts. The banners shall be located on utility poles within public or private rights-of-way within any zoning district. 
3.  Maximum Size. Maximum banner size shall not exceed three feet by five feet. 
4.  Maximum Area. Maximum sign area shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet. 
5.  Special Use Permit Approval Required. A special use permit, as provided in Chapter 5, Article 5 shall be approved prior to installation of temporary banners. The special use permit shall indicate the maximum number of banners, location of banners, size of banners, and installation and removal dates. 
6.  Banner Brackets. Unless otherwise provided as part of the approved special use permit, the applicant for banner approval shall supply all installation brackets. 
7.  Pole Owner Consent. Prior to installation of a pole banner or banners, an applicant must provide the consent of the utility pole owner for the installation. 
8.  Content. A temporary banner may include the information listed below. 
a.  The name of the event or events scheduled to occur. 
b.  The days when the event or events are to occur. 
c.  The location of the event or events. 
d.  The time of the event or events. 
e.  The telephone number and electronic contact for further event information. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.14. - Temporary political signs. 
A.  Temporary Political Signs on Private Residential Property. Temporary political signs are permitted in all residential zoning districts, subject to the standards listed below: 
1.  Size and attachments. Sign area shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
a.  Number of attachments permitted. Not more than one (1) attachment may be placed upon a residential political sign. 
b.  Maximum attachment size. Sign attachment shall not exceed six (6) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size. 
2.  Number. One (1) sign per candidate or issue may be placed on a residential lot. 
3.  Placement. Signs may only be placed upon an individual platted lot and are not permitted within median strips, swales, on the rear of the property, or at any location within any required safe-sight triangle. Signs shall be set back at least four (4) feet from the property line. 
B.  Temporary Political Signs on Nonresidential Property. Temporary political signs are permitted in all commercial and industrial zoning districts as set forth below: 
1.  Size. Sign area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
2.  Number. One (1) sign per candidate or issue shall be permitted for each property. 
3.  Duration. Signs shall be permitted no more than two (2) weeks prior to an election or vote. Signs shall be removed by the candidate within forty-eight (48) hours of the close of the election. Signs remaining beyond the time period may be removed by the Village of Wellington. 
C.  Temporary Political Signs on Designated Public Property. Temporary political signs are permitted on designated public property as provided below: 
1.  Placement. Temporary signs shall be allowed on public property only in the designated areas identified below. Signs on public property may be located only within these areas. Signs installed outside these areas will be removed by the Village. Temporary political signs shall be placed within public rights-of-way within or adjacent to swale areas in areas designated and roped off by the Village, in the following locations: 
a.  Forest Hill Boulevard: on the north entrances to the community on both sides of the road, and including the northwest corner of the intersection of Forest Hill Boulevard and the Florida Turnpike; 
b.  Forest Hill Boulevard: at Fairlane Farms on the north and south side of Forest Hill Boulevard. 
c.  Big Blue Trace: at the north entrance to the community on both sides of the road; 
d.  Binks Forest Drive: at the north entrance to the community on both sides of the road; 
e.  Lake Worth Road: at the intersection of C-8 Canal on both sides of the road. 
2.  Hazards. Temporary signs shall not be placed or constructed so as to create a safety or traffic hazard or to be erected closer than four (4) feet to the edge of a roadway. 
3.  Size. Sign area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
4.  Duration. Signs shall be permitted no more than two (2) weeks prior to an election or vote. Signs shall be removed by the candidate within forty-eight (48) hours of the close of the election. Signs remaining beyond the time period may be removed by the Village of Wellington. If the Village Manager or their designee determines that weather or emergent conditions occur or are projected to occur, which may result in the signs becoming a hazard to property or life, the Village Manager or their designee may order the removal of the signs from the designated right-of-way areas. 
The Village shall attempt to give notice to the campaigns responsible for the signs, advising them to remove and secure the signs. In the event there is insufficient time to allow for removal of the signs by the campaigns or the campaigns have not removed such signs within the time frame given to them by the Village, the Village Manager or their designee may order Village employees, agents, or subcontractors to remove the signs. The Village does not have any responsibility to maintain any signs removed from the right-of-way in a good or secure condition and may dispose of such signs. 
Any sign that is located in a non-designated area or is located in a designated area within the public right-of-way beyond the durational limits imposed by this section, shall be considered abandoned and may be removed and destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
After the Village Manager or their designee makes a determination that the emergent conditions have concluded, the Village will endeavor to notify the campaigns and advise them as to the time period when signs will be permitted to be reinstalled within the designated locations. 
5.  Materials. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials such as metal, wood, plastic, or heavy poster board. Signs shall be installed with appropriate freestanding, ground-mounted supports. 
6.  Number. Two (2) or more signs bearing the same message or supporting the same candidate or issue shall not be erected at the same location. 
D.  Free Speech, Residential Zoning Districts. Free speech signs may be installed in any residential zoning district, subject to the limits listed below: 
1.  Size. Sign area shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
a.  Number of attachments permitted. Not more than one (1) attachment may be placed upon a residential free speech sign. 
b.  Maximum attachment size. Sign attachment shall not exceed six (6) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size. 
2.  Number. One (1) sign per issue may be placed on a residential lot. 
3.  Placement. Signs may only be placed upon an individual platted lot and are not permitted within swales, median strips, on the rear of the property, or at any location within a required safe-sight triangle, or to negatively impact the aesthetics of the community. Signs shall be set back at least four (4) feet from the property line. 
E.  Free Speech, Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Free-speech signs may be installed in lieu of any sign permitted within a nonresidential zoning district. Any permanent sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this Article may, at the option of the applicant or sign owner, contain a non-commercial message. The non-commercial message may occupy the entire sign face or a portion thereof. The sign face may be changed to contain noncommercial messages as frequently as desired, provided that the sign conforms to the regulations of this Article. If a change of copy pursuant to this subsection is desired, no permit is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.15. - Residential and nonresidential real estate sales signs. 
A.  Exception. With respect to the sale of nonresidential property, the provisions of this section shall apply only to properties for sale, and shall not apply to properties for rent or for lease. Display of contact information for nonresidential properties for sale or lease shall be limited to permanent entry feature, monument, multiple tenant or internal directional signs as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Location. Real estate sales signs may be located along all frontages with public rights-of-way as indicated herein. 
C.  Number. One (1) real estate sales sign shall be allowed for each one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of public right-of-way frontage or portion thereof. 
D.  Maximum Size. Real estate sales signs shall not exceed the maximum sizes listed below. 
1.  Residential. Residential: Three (3) square feet. 
2.  Nonresidential. Nonresidential: Thirty-two (32) square feet. 
E.  Minimum Setbacks. Real estate signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all property lines for vacant property, and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from all property lines for improved properties. 
F.  No Setback. If five (5) feet of setback is not available, a real estate sales sign may be attached to or placed within a building wall, door, or window. 
G.  Solid Walls. If a solid wall is located along one or more property lines, a sign may be attached to such wall. 
H.  Removal. Real estate sales signs shall be removed as provided below. 
1.  Sale. Within seven (7) days after a deed for sale has been recorded for a residential or nonresidential property. 
2.  Rental or Lease. Within seven (7) days after a contract is signed for rental or lease of the residential property. 
I.  Sign Attachments. Permitted sign attachments are listed below: 
1.  Number permitted. Not more than one (1) attachment may be placed upon a residential real estate sign. 
2.  Maximum size. Sign attachment shall not exceed six (6) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size. Distribution boxes shall not be permitted as sign attachments. 
J.  Open House Signs. Not more than one (1) open house sign, in addition to a standard real estate sale sign, may be posted on a lot or property available for inspection by the public. Signs shall be placed on private property. Open house signs shall comply with the standards listed below: 
1.  Maximum Size. Signs shall not exceed a maximum size of four (4) square feet, and four (4) feet in height. 
2.  Permitted Posting Times and Days. 
a.  Signs shall be posted only on weekends, Wednesdays, or national holidays. 
b.  Signs shall be posted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
3.  Availability for inspection. Signs shall be posted only when the property is available for inspection. 
4.  Intersection installation. One (1) sign may be posted at any one intersection, provided such sign is not placed in a median, will not create a safety hazard, and is not located closer than four (4) feet to the edge of a right-of-way. 
K.  Temporary Leasing Sign. Multifamily residential developments may display one (1) temporary leasing sign for six (6) months from the issuance of the first building's Certificate of Occupancy (CO) subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Size. Temporary leasing signs shall comply with the size limitations listed below: 
a.  Signs shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height. 
b.  Overall size of signs, including landscaping, shall not be larger than four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. 
c.  Logos utilized in temporary leasing signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
d.  Copy area of temporary leasing signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size and shall have landscaping below the copy. 
2.  Color. The color of the temporary leasing sign must be neutral in color and compatible with the surrounding area and structures. 
3.  Location. 
a.  Temporary leasing signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any property line; and 
b.  Within fifty (50) feet of the principal access point. 
4.  Landscaping. All temporary leasing signs shall be landscaped around the base of the signs to ensure that the structure blends with the site and character of the overall landscape plan. 
5.  Lighting. 
a.  Lighting of a temporary leasing sign may be provided by base lighting, the general lighting of the sign area, or by shielded spotlights. 
b.  Lighting shall be subdued, non-glaring, and shall not spill over onto residential lots. 
6.  Original Condition. Upon removal of the sign, the site shall be returned to its original condition or better. 
7.  Permits. A special-use permit shall be obtained by application made on the appropriate form, accompanied by a fee, and approved by the Planning and Zoning Division. A building permit will also be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.16. - Equestrian and agricultural signs. 
A.  Location. Equestrian or agricultural signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. Freestanding signs shall be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from an entrance. 
B.  Entry Feature Signs. Equestrian and agricultural signs may be integrated into fences, walls, or entry features as provided in Section 7.14.10.B. 
C.  Number. Two (2) entry signs or one (1) freestanding sign per entrance. 
D.  Size. 
1.  Entry feature signs. Maximum sign area shall be thirty-two (32) square feet for commercial activities, and sixteen (16) square feet for private farms. Maximum sign height shall be eight (8) feet, and maximum length shall be ten (10) feet. 
2.  Freestanding Signs. Maximum sign area shall be thirty-two (32) feet. Maximum sign height is six (6) feet and maximum length shall be ten (10) feet. 
E.  Logos. Signs may incorporate farm, corporate, or equestrian logos into the overall design of a sign. 
F.  Colors. Signs may incorporate farm, corporate, or equestrian colors into the overall design of a sign. 
G.  Content. Signs shall be limited to the stable or farm name and type of equestrian or agricultural activity. 
H.  Location. Equestrian and agricultural signs shall be permitted only within those zoning districts where such activities are permitted by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.17. - Flags. 
A.  Height. Freestanding flagpoles shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height when associated with a residential use and shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height when associated with a nonresidential use. A flagpole suspended from or mounted on a building shall not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of the structure to which attached. 
B.  Number. Not more than three (3) flags and flagpoles shall be located at any parcel. 
C.  Size. The height of a flag attached to a flagpole shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the height of the pole, and the length shall not exceed twice the allowable height. A flag attached to a structure shall not exceed five (5) feet by ten (10) feet. 
D.  Setback. Flagpoles not more than twenty (20) feet in height shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line. Flagpoles more than twenty (20) feet in height shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line, and shall provide an additional five (5) feet of setback for each additional increment of height of five (5) feet or less. 
E.  Existing Flags and Flagpoles. Previously permitted flags or flag poles which do not comply with the provisions of this Section shall be considered nonconforming uses or structures subject to Sections 1.6-1.9 of the LDR. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.18. - Maximum freestanding sign height. 
A.  Maximum Height Established. Notwithstanding any other provision of these Land Development Regulations, the maximum height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. 
B.  Exception to Maximum Height. 
1.  Flag Pole Height. The maximum flag pole height of twenty feet (20) established in this chapter is exempt from the limitations of this section. 
2.  Approved Signs within the LS/MU Land Use Overlay. The maximum height of a freestanding sign as provided in this section shall not apply to signs allowed a greater height by the provisions of Section 7.14.19, regarding signs for projections within the LS/MU land use overlay. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 7.14.19. - Signs for projects within the LS/MU Land Use Overlay. 
    The requirements listed below shall apply to signs within the LS/MU Land Use Overlay on the Future Land Use Map. The requirements in the other sections of Chapter 14 "Sign Regulation" for the types of signs not specifically listed in this section will also apply to signs within the LS/MU Land Use Overlay. In case of a conflict between the requirements of other sections of Chapter 14 "Sign Regulation" and the requirements of this section, the provisions of this section shall govern to the extent of the conflict. 
A.  Regional Shopping Center Wall Signs. This section shall apply to wall signs for the tenants and anchor stores within a Regional Shopping Center. 
1.  Wall Signs: 
a.  Department Stores: Each department store will be allowed wall signs which shall not exceed three (3) percent of the total exterior building façade for that store with anyone sign not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet in total sign area. 
b.  Mall Identification and Logo Signs: 
i.  A Regional Shopping Center will be allowed up to six (6) wall signs on the mall structure identifying the name of the center including the project logo and identifying specific areas within the center (e.g. the food court). 
ii.  The size of the identification and logo signs shall not exceed three (3) percent of the area of the total mall building façade with any one sign not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
c.  Mall Tenants with External Entrances: 
i.  Each mall tenant with a separate external entrance will be entitled to one wall sign per building façade. 
ii.  These signs will be included in the total signs allowed for mall identification and logo signs as regulated above. 
B.  Multiple Use Planned Developments (MUPDs) Wall Signs. This section shall apply to wall signs in MUPDs adjacent to a Regional Shopping Center in an LS/MU Land Use Overlay district. 
1.  Tenant Wall Signs: 
a.  Maximum Square Feet: Five percent (5%) of the total square footage of the building elevations shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet per sign. 
b.  Maximum Sign Size: National/Regional Tenants signs shall not exceed sixty (60) inches in height. Other tenants shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height. 
c.  Maximum Length: Seventy percent (70%) of bay/store width for tenants with façades over forty (40) feet in length and eighty percent (80%) for tenants with façades less than forty (40) feet in length. 
d.  Maximum Lines of Copy: Two (2) lines of copy for any single sign. 
e.  Sign Mounting: 
i.  Equipment: All mechanical or electrical equipment shall be concealed. 
ii.  Projection: Wall signs shall not project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the surface to which they are attached. 
iii.  Building façade: Wall signs shall be mounted parallel to the building façade. 
iv.  Extensions: Wall signs shall not extend above or below the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted. Wall signs shall not be erected, constructed, or maintained upon or above the roofline of any building. This shall not preclude the placement of a wall sign against a mansard of a building providing the sign face is horizontally parallel to the building wall and does extend neither above the highest point nor below the lowest point of the mansard to which it is affixed. 
v.  Other wall signs: An awning, canopy, or mansard may be used for the placement of the allowable square footage for wall signs. 
f.  Number of Wall Signs: One wall sign shall be permitted for each principal storefront façade of an individual bay or store or freestanding commercial building. When a commercial building faces multiple road frontages, one wall sign may be permitted for each wall facing a road frontage with a maximum of three (3) wall signs total. 
i.  One (1) additional wall sign, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the maximum square footage allowed for the principal wall sign shall be permitted if the store is located on the end of the shopping center structure or if the store is located on an outparcel and the rear wall faces other stores in the MUPD. 
ii.  Wall signage facing a residential zoning district within the same LS/MU shall comply with the requirements of this section in the same manner as all other wall signs. 
g.  Rear Wall Signs: Signs located on a rear or side wall facing a road frontage are allowed. The size of these signs will be limited to seventy-five percent (75%) of the size of the wall sign on the front façade. For those rear walls that are not facing a road, a nameplate or owner identification signs on or near the rear door is permitted. 
2.  Window Signs: 
a.  Permanent Window Signs: Painted or die-cut letters affixed to the window near or on the entry door and illuminated signage permanently or semi-permanently affixed to the window. All permanent window signs shall be professionally lettered and fabricated. Internally illuminated, box type signs are prohibited. 
i.  Sign Area: Shall not exceed the lesser of ten (10) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the window area in which such sign is placed. 
ii.  Letter Size: A maximum of two (2) lines of copy shall be permitted on any window. First row letters shall not exceed nine (9) inches in height. Second row letters shall not exceed three (3) inches in height. 
iii.  Content: May include but are not limited to the tenant name, hours of operation, and products or services offered within the establishment displaying such advertisement. 
iv.  Logo: Permitted if designed as an integral part of the advertising. Logos and other non-copy types of advertisement shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total window area. 
v.  Illuminated Signs: Illuminated signage, including neon signs, may be placed or displayed in the window area. The total of all illuminated signage shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
vi.  Number: One (1) window sign shall be permitted for each display window. Any sign located within three (3) feet behind the window shall be considered a window sign. 
b.  Temporary Window Signs: Signs promoting public and civic events and special sales not exceeding twelve (12) square feet may be located in a window. Temporary signs shall not be included within the overall sign area permitted for windows. 
3.  Under-Canopy Signs: 
a.  Sign Area: Shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
b.  Mounting: Signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight (8) feet above the surface of the walkway. Signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the façade of the adjacent storefront. 
c.  Number: One (1) sign shall be permitted for each storefront. 
d.  Content: Only tenant information, such as store name, product or service, and logo, may be displayed. 
e.  Master Sign Plan: The location of all under-canopy signs shall be shown on the Master Sign Plan. 
4.  Menu Signs for Restaurants: 
a.  Location: Within ten (10) feet of the restaurant front door or entry. 
b.  Mounting: Shall be mounted on an exterior wall or within a window. 
c.  Enclosure: May be enclosed within a display cabinet or frame. 
d.  Number/Size: One (1) sign per restaurant not to exceed three (3) square feet. 
C.  Directional, Median, Project Identification and Monument Signs. The requirements for directional, median, project identification and monument type signs for projects within the LS/MU Land Use Overlay on the Future Land Use Map shall be consistent with the approved Master Sign Plan. The requirements not specifically listed in the projects approved Master Sign Plans hall comply with the other sections of Chapter 14 "Sign Regulation" and as follows: 
1.  All directional, median, project identification and monument type signage shall be consistent in color, materials, architectural style and include the Regional Shopping Center project logo. Signage internal to the PUD's shall not be required to include the Regional Shopping Center project logo. All exiting nonconforming signs shall be compatible with the other exiting approved signs if reconstructed or changed. 
2.  Major amendments to the approved Master Sign Plan including additional directional, median, project identification and monument type sign shall be reviewed by the Architectural Review Board for consistence with the sign standards contained in the approved Master Sign Plan of the project. 
3.  Minor amendments to the approved Master Sign Plan including relocation of directional, median, project identification and monument type sign shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC). 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-10-2012) 
Sec. 7.14.20. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article may be enforced by the Village of Wellington pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, or by the Village through the prosecution of violations pursuant to the authority granted by Section 1-12, Code of Ordinances. Additionally, the Village may take any other appropriate action, including administrative action and requests for temporary and permanent injunctions to enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1(Att. 1), 11-24-2009) 
CHAPTER 15. - MAINTENANCE AND USE DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 7.15.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    This section is established to ensure that adequate ownership and maintenance measures will be provided in residential and other developments to protect and perpetually maintain all Common Areas or other required areas (including improvements located upon or within the Common Areas) required pursuant to this Code or other applicable Village ordinances or regulations. This section is also established to ensure the continued availability and utility of the Common Areas for the residents or occupants of the development and to prevent such facilities or the need for such facilities from becoming an unnecessary burden or nuisance to the Village or surrounding property. Nothing in this section shall be construed as creating any obligation upon the Village to maintain such Common Areas or their improvements or to otherwise ensure their availability and condition. 
Sec. 7.15.2. - Applicability. 
    This section shall apply to all developments subject to review by the Development Review Committee as delineated elsewhere in this Code. Developments for which waivers of platting are administratively obtained shall also comply with the requirements of this section. 
Sec. 7.15.3. - Exception. 
    Generally, the maintenance and use documents requirement shall not apply to lands or improvements to be owned and maintained under a condominium or cooperative. The developer of any lands to be owned and maintained under a condominium or cooperative shall establish and regulate those in accordance with the requirements set forth by the State of Florida. If the condominium or cooperative is located within a Planned Unit Development, though, additional Village document requirements may apply. 
Sec. 7.15.4. - General Requirements. 
    A developer shall submit documents establishing maintenance and use of the Common Areas of a proposed development and other required areas at the point in the development process set forth in Article 8 Section 8.20 of this Code or as required as a condition of approval by any decision making or administrative body of the Village. All documents shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney's office prior to recording in the public records. The recording of the documents and all associated fees shall be the responsibility of the developer. All documents shall be recorded as approved by the Village Attorney's office, and copies of the recorded documents shall be submitted to the Village when requested. 
Sec. 7.15.5. - Documents Establishing Maintenance and Use. 
    The type of document required to establish use rights and responsibility for maintenance of the Common Areas of a development depends upon the nature of the development. 
A.  Developments including a subdivision of five (5) or more lots. A Property Owners' Association shall be required. Developer shall submit a Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, Articles of Incorporation, and By-Laws. If there are to be party walls within the development, the Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions shall include a Declaration of Party Wall. This requirement applies to both residential and non-residential developments. 
B.  Subdivisions of a maximum of four (4) lots. A Property Owners' Association may or may not be required depending upon the individual subdivision. The determination shall be made by the Village Attorney's Office. If a Property Owners' Association is required, then the submittal requirement shall be as listed above. If a Property Owners' Association is not required, then the Developer shall submit a Unity of Control. If there are to be party walls within the development, a Declaration of Party Wall shall be included in the submission. 
C.  Rental Projects. A Unity of Title shall be submitted for a development that will be owned and maintained by a landlord for the benefit of lessees residing on or occupying leaseholds on a Lot or Parcel. 
Sec. 7.15.6. - Content Requirement for Documents. 
    The following shall be the minimal content requirements for documents. Provisions which do not conflict with any Village requirements may also be included. 
A.  Property Owner's Association Documents. 
1.  Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions. 
a.  Legal description. For master associations: All property included within the Master Plan for a development (no matter how many phases in which it shall be developed) shall be subjected to the terms of the Declaration at the time the first plat of the development is recorded. Property shall not be withdrawn from the terms of the Declaration unless it is also withdrawn from the Master Plan. 
For sub-associations: All property included within a plat in which a sub-association is named in a dedication/reservation shall be subjected to the terms of the Declaration for that sub-association at the time the plat is recorded. 
b.  Definition. There shall be a section in the Declaration in which, minimally, the following terms (or similar terms) are defined: Association, Common Areas, Member, Properties, Declarant/Developer, Unit/Lot/Parcel. 
The definition of Association shall include the name of the property owners' association responsible for maintaining the Common Areas of the development. The association named here must be the same association that accepts the dedications/reservations on any plat of the development. The Association shall be a Florida corporation not for profit. 
The definition of Common Areas shall include the phrase "any area dedicated to or reserved for the Association on any recorded plat or replat of the Properties". 
The definition of Member shall reflect the requirement that all persons or entities holding title to any portion of the Properties shall be voting members of the Association. In the case of a master association, this may be accomplished either by direct membership by all owners or by the owners' sub-association membership with the sub-association(s) being the voting member(s) of the master association. The definition must specifically allow direct membership for any owner who is not a member of a represented sub-association. 
The definition of Properties shall include all the property subject to the terms of the Declaration including any added by amendment to the Declaration. 
The definition of Declarant/Developer shall include successors and assigns. 
The definition of Unit/Lot/Parcel shall identify the division of property by which membership in the Association is defined and shall be consistent with the terms used to define Member in the Declaration. 
c.  Association structure and responsibilities. There shall be provisions for the following: 
i.  All persons or entities owning any portion of the development shall automatically become members of the Association. 
ii.  All members of the Association shall be entitled to vote on Association matters. 
iii.  The Association shall have the authority to assess all members for Association expenses including, but not limited to, the cost of maintaining the Common Areas. 
iv.  All members of the Association, except any governmental entity which may own property in the development, shall be subject to assessments by the Association. The developer shall either pay assessments or fund the deficit in the Association's operating budget until he has turned over control of the Association. After he has turned over control of the Association, he shall pay assessments for any lot(s) he may still own. 
v.  The Association shall have the authority to place a lien on a member's property for any unpaid assessment. 
vi.  The developer may control the Association while development is ongoing. He must, however, establish in the Declaration a definite time by which he will turn over control of the Association to the owners. 
vii.  The Declaration shall provide that the Association shall be responsible for the maintenance of the Common Areas. Maintenance responsibility may be delegated to a sub-association or to an individual lot owner (in the case of certain limited use areas), but the delegating association shall be responsible in the event the sub-association or the lot owner fails to maintain any portion of the Common Area or other required areas. 
d.  Common areas. The common areas shall be defined to include an area dedicated to or reserved for the Association an any recorded plat of the Properties. The developer shall state at what point he will deed the Common Areas to the Association. 
e.  Easements. The following easements shall be granted (or confirmed if already established by recorded plat or grant of easement): 
i.  Ingress/egress easements for members, their guests, and licensees. 
ii.  Utility easements for installation, maintenance, and repair by any utility company, including cable, servicing the development. 
iii.  Drainage easements. 
iv.  Maintenance easements for maintenance of the Common Areas. If the Association will need access to an owner's property to fulfill its maintenance obligation, the easement should be granted here. 
v.  Encroachment easements for accidental encroachment onto the Common Area. 
vi.  Common Area easement for use by all members of the Association and their guests. 
vii.  Developer's easement to allow developer access as needed to complete construction of development. 
viii.  Public Service for police protection, fire protection, emergency services, postal service, and meter reading. 
ix.  Zero-lot line easement, if applicable. A three-foot easement contiguous to the zero-lot line boundary shall be established for the purpose of incidental encroachment, access and maintenance. 
All easements, with the exception of the developer's easement, shall be perpetual. 
f.  Architectural control. Any provisions included in the Declaration regarding architectural control should be consistent with Village regulations. It should be noted in the Declaration that nothing in the Declaration should be interpreted as an exemption from compliance with Village regulations. 
g.  General provisions. There shall be provision for the following: 
i.  Duration. The Declaration shall run with the land for a minimum of twenty (20) years with provision for automatic renewal. 
ii.  Enforcement. The Association, the individual members, and the developer shall all have the ability to enforce the terms of the Declaration. 
iii.  Amendment. The method by which the Declaration may be amended shall be established. If the developer is given a separate right for amending the Declaration, his right shall not survive the turnover of control. No amendment that withdraws property from the terms of the Declaration shall be recorded unless approved in writing by the Village Attorney's office. No amendment inconsistent with the requirements of this section shall be recorded unless approved in writing by the Village Attorney's office. Nothing contained herein shall create an obligation on the part of the Village Attorney's office to approve any amendment. 
iv.  Dissolution. Any owner may petition the Circuit Court for the appointment of a Receiver to manage the affairs of the Association in the event of dissolution of the Association. 
h.  Articles of Incorporation. 
i.  All terms shall be consistent with the terms of the Declaration and By-Laws. 
ii.  The Property Owners' Association shall be a Florida corporation not for profit with, minimally, the authority to maintain Common Areas or other required areas, assess members for operating costs, place liens on members' property for failure to pay assessments, and enter into agreements with governmental entities. 
i.  By-Laws. All terms shall be consistent with the terms of the Declaration and Articles of Incorporation. 
j.  Declaration of Party Wall. A Declaration of Party Wall shall be recorded whenever there are shared walls in a development. The Declaration may be a part of a Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions or it may be recorded as a separate instrument. It should address the following: 
i.  Repair of the wall is a joint obligation and expense unless damage is caused by the negligence of one (1) party; in that case the cost of repair is the obligation of that party alone. 
ii.  Repair or replacement of the wall shall be to its original construction. 
iii.  Each party shall have the right to file a lien for the cost of repairs. 
iv.  The mortgagee shall have the same rights as the mortgagor. 
v.  Structural changes in the wall are prohibited. 
vi.  If there is a common roof, the same provisions shall apply. 
vii.  If access and/or parking are to be shared, there should be an easement granted to accommodate that. 
viii.  This shall be a covenant running with the land. 
k.  Unity of Control. A Unity of Control shall be recorded against a subdivision of a maximum of four (4) lots if the Village Attorney's Office has exempted the subdivision from the requirements for a Property Owner's Association. The Unity of Control shall contain the following: 
i.  Legal description of the property subject to the terms of the Unity of Control. This shall include all property included in the master plan for the development. 
ii.  Creation of perpetual cross-access, parking, drainage, and utility easements for the benefit of all owners of the development. 
iii.  Maintenance responsibilities for all common areas of the development and method by which maintenance costs shall be shared. 
iv.  Establishment of these provisions as covenants running with the land. 
l.  Unity of Title. The owner of a rental project shall record against his property a Unity of Title. The Unity of Title, which shall be a covenant running with the land, shall provide that the property shall be considered one (1) plot and parcel and that no portion of the property may be conveyed to another owner. The Village Attorney's office, after consulting with the Zoning and Land Development Divisions, may agree to release the Unity of Title provided that covenants establishing maintenance and use are recorded in its place. The cost of recording the Unity of Title and/or a release shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
Article 8 - SUBDIVISION, PLATTING, AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.1.1. - Authority. 
A.  Protection of the public. Sec. 125.01, Fla. Stat., vested counties with the power to establish, coordinate and enforce business regulations, building, housing, and related technical codes and regulations as are necessary for the protection of the public and to perform other acts not inconsistent with laws which are in the common interest of the people of the Village and to exercise all powers and privileges not specifically prohibited by law. 
B.  Roads. Secs. 125.01, 336.02 and 336.08, Fla. Stat., provide that counties have the power and authority to establish new roads and locate and change the same. 
C.  Plats. Chapter 163 and Special Acts, Chapter 69-1425, Laws of Florida, authorize the Village Council to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations governing the filing of plats and development of subdivisions, in order to aid in the coordination of land development. 
D.  Physical improvements needed. It is in the public interest to ensure that adequate and necessary physical improvements are properly installed whenever land is developed. 
E.  Minimum standards. It is in the public interest to establish procedures and minimum standards for the subdivision, development and improvement of land within the Village. 
Sec. 8.1.2. - Applicability. 
    The regulations set forth in this article shall be applicable to all subdivision of land in the Village, Florida, or as hereafter established. 
Sec. 8.1.3. - Purpose and intent. 
    The specific provisions of this article shall be applied and interpreted in a manner consistent with the Village's purpose and intent to: 
A.  Procedures and standards. Establish procedures and standards for the subdivision of real estate. 
B.  Legal status. Ensure proper legal description, identification, monumentation and recording of subdivisions; 
C.  Land development. Aid in the coordination of land development in accordance with orderly physical patterns. 
D.  Comprehensive plan. Implement the Comprehensive Plan with respect to installation of on-site improvements for new development, which improvements are necessary to meet or maintain the levels of service required under the Concurrency Management System of the Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Access. Ensure provision of safe, convenient legal and physical access to and circulation among lots for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
F.  Adequate public facilities. Ensure provision of adequate utilities to support development of each lot. 
G.  Stormwater management. Regulate the subdivision and associated development of lands subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and provide for adequate stormwater management to minimize adverse impacts of development on water resources while ensuring acceptable levels of protection from inundation for residents and improvements. 
H.  Recreation areas. Ensure provision of public and private parks and recreation areas to accommodate the additional population of new subdivisions in accordance with the objectives of the Recreation Open Space Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
I.  Haphazard subdivision. Ensure that the citizens and taxpayers of the Village will not have to bear the costs resulting from haphazard subdivision of land or failure by the developer to provide adequate and necessary physical improvements of lasting quality. 
J.  Infrastructure. Assure the purchaser of land in a subdivision that necessary infrastructure improvements have been provided in accordance with Village standards for design and construction, and that associated rights and obligations have been established for the use and maintenance of said improvements. 
CHAPTER 2. - INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 8.2.1. - Minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the requirements of this article shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. 
Sec. 8.2.2. - Relationship to other agency requirements. 
    The requirements of this article are intended to complement and expand upon rules, regulations, and permit requirements of other state, regional, and local agencies applicable to the design, construction, and/or operation of facilities for access and circulation of vehicles and pedestrians, construction of streets and related facilities, power and communication services, wastewater and water services, and stormwater management and flood protection in the Village. Compliance with the requirements of this article shall not relieve the developer, his successors or assigns from the necessity to comply with all requirements and obtain all permits required by the regulations of such other agencies. 
Sec. 8.2.3. - Conflicting requirements. 
    In the event of conflict between a specific requirement of this article and that of another agency's rule, compliance with this article shall be interpreted by the Village Engineer to avoid the conflict where such avoidance is not inconsistent with the general purposes and intent of this article and is affirmatively demonstrated as necessary to meet the purposes and intent of the conflicting rule. However, if the difference between said requirements is solely a matter of degree, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail and no conflict will be considered to exist. 
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8.3.1. - Platting requirement. 
    Any developer planning to subdivide land shall record a Final Plat in accordance with the requirements of this article unless such requirement is specifically waived by the Village Engineer in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 8.9.2. 
Sec. 8.3.2. - Required improvements installation requirement. 
    The adequacy of necessary public or private facilities and services for traffic and pedestrian access and circulation, solid waste, wastewater disposal, potable water supply, stormwater management, fire-rescue, parks and recreation and similar facilities and services, and potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses and facilities shall be considered in the review of all development proposals. No Final Plat or certified survey shall be recorded until all required improvements set forth in Sec. 8.21, except those specifically waived pursuant to Sec. 8.9.3, are either completed in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 8.17 or are guaranteed to be completed by the developer in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 8.14.1. 
Sec. 8.3.3. - Standards and responsibility for required improvements. 
    All required improvements shall be designed pursuant to the standards and specifications as prescribed in this article and the applicable Village or County Standards, or as otherwise required by the Village Engineer, in accordance with acceptable standards of engineering principles. All such improvements shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer in conformance with approved construction plans as referenced by the applicable Land Development Permit. 
Sec. 8.3.4. - Conformity with land use, density, and concurrency regulations. 
    Prior to consideration of any subdivision for approval under the terms of this article, the land proposed to be subdivided shall: 
A.  Land area. Be of sufficient land area to comply with the density and consistency requirements and provisions of the Administration and Land Use Elements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Zoning. Be in the proper zoning district and have the necessary zoning approvals required for the intended use. 
C.  Concurrency. Have received a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, Conditional Concurrency Reservation, non-expired Concurrency Exemption or Concurrency Exemption Extension, pursuant to Art. 11. 
Sec. 8.3.5. - Site suitability. 
    Subdivision of land unsuitable for the proposed type or extent of development shall not be approved unless adequate methods of correction or mitigation are formulated and approved in accordance with the provisions of this article. The Village Engineer may determine that land is unsuitable for subdivision due to unstable or poorly drained soils, frequent inundation, existence of environmentally sensitive or protected areas, inadequate legal or physical access to the proposed subdivision, or conditions or features deemed to be harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of future residents or the public. 
CHAPTER 4. - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE 

Sec. 8.4.1. - General application. 
    No person shall create a subdivision or develop any lot within a subdivision in the Village except in conformity with this article. No Final Plat or certified survey of any subdivision shall be recorded unless such subdivision meets all applicable provisions of this article, the provisions of other applicable Village ordinances, and the applicable laws of the State of Florida. Provided, however, that the subdivision of contiguous lands under single ownership where none of the resulting lots are less than forty (40) acres shall not be subject to compliance with the provisions of this article, unless such compliance is required as a specific condition of a development order for a conditional use or special use approved pursuant to Article 5. 
Sec. 8.4.2. - Building permits and other approvals. 
A.  Building permits. Except as provided in Sec. 8.4.2.B, no building permit shall be issued for any structure on any lot created by subdivision of land in violation of this article unless and until such lot is shown on a plat of record or certified survey, as applicable, recorded in the manner prescribed in this article. 
B.  Temporary structures. Temporary structures and permanent structures having a temporary use may receive a building permit prior to recordation of the Final Plat for the property only when the use and location have been approved by the Development Review Committee and shown on the approved Final Subdivision Plan. 
CHAPTER 5. - PREVIOUSLY APPROVED OR PLATTED SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 8.5.1. - Active subdivision development. 
    All active subdivision developments and all modifications to previously platted subdivisions shall be subject to the requirements of this article in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1.5. 
A.  Subdivision developments which are committed developments or deemed vested. Any development which constitutes a committed development under the Comprehensive Plan and the concurrency exemption ordinance, Ordinance No. 89-35, or which has otherwise been deemed vested under Florida law, is hereby deemed an active subdivision plan or preliminary plat, as applicable. 
B.  Modifications to an active subdivision plan or preliminary plat. Modifications to an active subdivision plan or preliminary plat shall subject the development to the requirements of this article when: 
1.  The modification of an active subdivision plan for a planned development cannot be approved by the Development Review Committee in accordance with the authority granted to it under Sec. 5.6; or 
2.  The modification of an active subdivision plan or preliminary plat constitutes more than a minor deviation such that, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, the construction plans for the required improvements require a new submittal and review. 
C.  Abandonment of active subdivision plan or preliminary plat. When the developer fails to seek subsequent approvals and permits within the time frames required by this article, such failure shall be evidence that the active subdivision plan or preliminary plat has been abandoned and all approvals granted for the subdivision plan, construction plans, or preliminary plat, as applicable, shall be deemed void. 
D.  Authority of the Development Review Committee. The Development Review Committee shall have the authority to review any previously approved subdivision development which does not meet the strict requirements of this article and to declare the master plan, final land use plan, preliminary or final plat (and accompanying construction plans), special exception subdivision approval, or site plan, as applicable, to be an active approval when the Committee finds that such declaration would be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this article and in the best interest of the general public. Such review shall be made upon application by either the developer or the Village Engineer, which application shall be on a form prescribed by the Committee. 
E.  Fees waived for applications by the Village Engineer. Any fee required for an application made pursuant to this section is hereby waived for all applications made by the Village Engineer. 
Sec. 8.5.2. - Non-conforming subdivisions. 
    The official records of Palm Beach County contain plats recorded prior to February 5, 1973. Such plats show areas within the Village which have been platted as subdivisions, but which have either been partially improved or developed or remain unimproved or undeveloped. These areas, if developed or improved further as platted, would not conform to the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan for such areas. 
A.  Authority of the Board to vacate non-conforming plats. The Village Council shall have the power, on its own motion, to order the vacation and reversion to acreage of all or any part of a subdivision within the Village, including the vacation and abandonment of streets or other parcels of land dedicated for public purposes and the vacating of streets and other parcels of land reserved for the use of the owners, including lands maintained by a property owners association, when: 
1.  The subdivision plat was recorded as provided by law prior to February 5, 1973; and 
2.  Within the subdivision plat or part thereof proposed to be reverted to acreage, not more than ten (10) percent of the total number of platted lots have been sold to individual owners by the original subdivider or his successor in title. 
Sec. 8.5.3. - Authority of owners to develop non-conforming subdivisions which are subject to vacation by the Board. 
    The owner or owners of a subdivision subject to vacation and reversion to acreage by motion of the Village Council may either abandon the subdivision or portion thereof in accordance with the procedures of the Board, or may improve undeveloped or partially improved streets and drainage facilities at their cost and expense, provided such improvements shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 8.5.4. - Public hearing required. 
    Prior to ordering such a vacation and reversion to acreage, the Village Council shall hold a public hearing relative to the proposed vacation and reversion to acreage, with prior notice thereof being given by publishing in a newspaper of local circulation the date of and the subject matter of the hearing at least twice within the two-week period preceding the date of such public hearing. At such public hearing, the vacation and reversion to acreage of subdivided land must be shown to either conform to the Comprehensive Plan or reduce the nonconformity with the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 8.5.5. - Legal access to be maintained. 
    No owner of any parcel of land in a subdivision vacated and returned to acreage or abandoned by the owners shall be deprived by the reversion to acreage or abandonment of any part of the subdivision of reasonable access to such parcel nor to reasonable access therefrom to existing facilities to which such parcel has theretofore had access. Such access remaining or provided after such vacation and reversion or abandonment may not necessarily be the same as theretofore existing, but shall be reasonably equivalent thereto. 
Sec. 8.5.6. - Improvement of existing partially developed non-conforming subdivisions not subject to vacation and reversion to acreage by motion of the Board. 
    The improvement of non-conforming subdivisions not subject to vacation and reversion to acreage by motion of the Village Council shall comply with the requirements of this article and the following: 
A.  Streets. The existing right-of-way for a local street shall be considered sufficient provided it is at least fifty (50) feet wide and the improvements conform to the fifty (50) foot typical section or sixty (60) feet wide and the improvements conform to the sixty (60) foot typical section for local street construction as contained in the applicable Village or County standards. If the existing right-of-way is less than fifty (50) feet wide, additional right-of-way shall be provided to make a total width of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
B.  Positive drainage. Positive drainage shall be established or its existence proven, meeting all requirements for connection to a point of legal positive outfall. Easements for proper drainage shall be provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the drainage facilities, but in no case shall said easement width be less than twelve (12) feet. Where canals or ditches are permitted, the easement width shall be adequate to accommodate the full width of drainage facilities plus twenty (20) feet on one (1) side to permit access by equipment for maintenance purposes. 
CHAPTER 6. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 8.6.1. - General. 
    Any planned development which is to be subdivided shall comply with the requirements of this article after approval of a Final Subdivision Plan by the Development Review Committee pursuant to Sec. 5.6. For the purpose of this article, "Planned Development" shall mean any development within a Planned Development district as defined by this Code and regulated pursuant to Sec. 6.8. 
Sec. 8.6.2. - Subdivision of commercial and industrial building sites. 
    A building site which constitutes all or a portion of a pod designated for commercial or industrial use on the preliminary development plan of a planned development, and for which the detailed development configuration and building permit issuance are subject to prior approval by the DRC of a final site plan, may be exempted by the Village Engineer from the subdivision recordation requirement of Sec. 8.4.2.A, and may be subdivided by fee title conveyance of individual internal lots. Such exemption may be granted by the Village Engineer provided that: 
A.  Legal access. Legal access to each interior lot is provided by a common parking lot in full compliance with all requirements of Sec. 8.22.1.B.3. 
B.  Layout, location and construction. The layout, location, and construction limits of structures within the building site are regulated by required separation distances between structures rather than by setbacks from interior lot lines. 
C.  Interior lots. Individual interior lots are not subject to requirements for minimum area or dimensions under the property development regulations of Sec. 6.8 applicable to the building site. 
D.  Developer's intent to subdivide. A statement of the developer's intent to subdivide the property pursuant to the platting exemption of this Sec. 8.6.2 is included on the approved final site plan for the building site, in which case said site plan shall constitute the approved final subdivision plan for purposes of compliance with this Article. 
E.  Common recorded unity of control. All lands within the perimeter of the building site are subject to a common recorded unity of control or other such maintenance and use covenants for access, parking, stormwater management, and other required common areas or facilities, as approved by the Village Attorney pursuant to Sec. 7.15. 
F.  Boundary plat. The building site is delineated on a single boundary plat of record depicting all existing drainage and utility easements of record and all required limited access easements, water management tracts, and common area tracts, and including appropriate dedications or reservations for same. 
CHAPTER 7. - ALTERNATE DESIGNS FOR RURAL SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 8.7.1. - Applicability. 
    This section provides for a means of establishing a rural subdivision, as defined by this Code, in harmony with the character of surrounding development while meeting the general purpose and intent of this article. Due to the rural nature of proposed development, standard requirements for certain required improvements may be deemed inappropriate and alternative standards for such improvements may be approved under this section. 
Sec. 8.7.2. - Application requirements. 
    Upon submission of the subdivision plan, and an application for a rural subdivision designation, the Development Review Committee may approve the application for election to comply with this section. A rural subdivision shall meet the platting requirement of this article. 
Sec. 8.7.3. - Exceptions to requirements. 
    All requirements of this article shall apply except that the following required improvement design options shall be allowed under this section. 
A.  Access and circulation systems. Local streets may be developed without a wearing surface but shall otherwise conform to the standards specified by this article. All other streets of higher classification, as defined in this article, shall be constructed to meet or exceed County standards. Streets constructed without a wearing surface shall be privately maintained and shall not be considered for dedication or acceptance as public streets until paved, reconstructed and tested, as necessary, to meet Village or County Standards. Costs of maintenance and further development of the local streets in a rural subdivision shall be borne solely by the owners of the property within the subdivision. Sidewalks and bike paths shall not be required when local streets are constructed without a wearing surface. The developer and any subsequent owner/seller shall fully disclose to the purchaser the method of payment of costs of maintenance and improvements of local streets developed without a wearing surface. The developer shall adequately warrant, by recorded covenant, that the County will not be liable for cost of maintenance or further development of local streets constructed without a wearing surface. The method and form of said disclosures and covenants shall be subject to approval by the Village Attorney, prior to recordation of a final plat for such subdivision. 
B.  Wastewater system. Rural subdivisions within the Rural Service Area may utilize an individual system in accordance with Sec. 8.25. 
C.  Potable water system. Rural subdivisions within the Rural Service Area may utilize an individual system in accordance with Sec. 8.26. 
D.  Utilities installation. Utilities may be installed above ground in rural subdivisions. 
CHAPTER 8. - PHASED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 8.8.1. - Phasing plan. 
    The property encompassed by a Final Subdivision Plan may be developed in two (2) or more increments pursuant to the terms of this section and applicable phasing provisions of Sec. 5.9.4.C. A Final Subdivision Plan showing the proposed phasing plan must be approved by the Development Review Committee prior to submission of the first plat. Construction plans and preliminary plats shall coincide with their respective phases as shown on the Final Subdivision Plan. Construction plans or a preliminary plat for a partial phase shall not be accepted. 
Sec. 8.8.2. - Improvements. 
    The improvements of each phase shall be capable of operating independently of any unconstructed phase with respect to drainage, access, utilities, and other required improvements, except as provided herein. A dependent phase may be platted only if the foundation phase plat has been recorded and required improvements have been completed or are under construction pursuant to a land development permit and are secured pursuant to a guarantee posted for completion of required improvements. A dependent phase shall not be acknowledged as completed until the improvements in the foundation phase are acknowledged as completed; provided, however, that such acknowledgment of completion may occur simultaneously and provided that the Village Engineer may permit the posting of surety to guarantee the installation at a later time of those required improvements which are not deemed necessary to provide drainage, access, or utilities to such dependent phases. 
Sec. 8.8.3. - Certificate of Concurrency Reservation approval. 
    The phasing plan and all phased construction shall conform to any phasing plan approved under the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. 
Sec. 8.8.4. - Phasing controls. 
    The phasing plan and all phased construction shall be completed in accordance with any phasing controls and time frames required by this Code which are applicable to the development. 
Sec. 8.8.5. - Time limitation. 
    When the Final Subdivision Plan is approved for development in phases requiring more than one (1) final plat, the duration of said approval shall be as specified by and subject to those provisions of Sec. 5.8 applicable to the development or phase thereof. 
Sec. 8.8.6. - Sequence of phases. 
    When the Final Subdivision Plan is to be constructed in phases, the following sequence must be adhered to: 
A.  Recreation areas. All required recreation areas and facilities to serve the entire development shall be platted or otherwise provided pursuant to the procedures and Chapter 38 of the Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Gross density. The gross density of an individual plat shall not exceed the maximum density permitted for the entire development unless the total of all previously recorded plats of record and the plat under review produces an average density less than or equal to the approved maximum density for the entire development. 
C.  Water management tracts. Where all or any portion of a water management tract is required to serve a proposed phase of development, and has not been previously recorded and constructed, said water management tract and its associated lake maintenance easement(s) shall be included and constructed in their entirety as part of the plat and required improvements for that phase. 
CHAPTER 9. - EXCEPTIONS TO GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8.9.1. - Authority. 
    The Village Engineer is hereby empowered to make certain exceptions to the platting requirement of Sec. 8.3.1 and required improvements installation requirement of Sec. 8.3.2 in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this section. 
Sec. 8.9.2. - Plat waiver with certified survey. 
A.  Application for plat waiver. In order to determine whether platting may be waived, the developer shall submit a preliminary subdivision plan in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 8.11 together with a statement demonstrating that the subdivision meets at least one (1) of the following conditions. 
1.  The division is to create no more than three (3) contiguous lots and all of the following circumstances apply: 
a.  The land concerned is isolated or removed in its relationship to platted lands; 
b.  Dedications or reservations are not required for the installation or maintenance of the required improvements; and 
c.  The improvements and dedications existing on the land are substantially in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
2.  The division is of a contiguous land area not exceeding eighty (80) acres into lots of at least ten (10) acres each and which area meets all of the following additional conditions: 
a.  The area to be subdivided has existing legal access via a street of local or higher classification, accepted for maintenance by a local governmental agency, a special district, or a legally incorporated property owners association; 
b.  Legal access to the proposed lots exists or will be established and dedicated to and be maintained by a property owners association or a special district; and 
c.  Legal positive outfall exists and the appurtenant drainage easements are dedicated to, maintained and accepted by either by a property owners' association or water control district. 
3.  The division consists of a change in lot lines for the purpose of combining lots or portions thereof, shown on a record plat, into no more than three (3) contiguous lots where each of the resulting lots meets the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code or reduces the degree of non-conformity to the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code, as applicable, and the establishment of streets or installation of improvements either would not be required pursuant to this article or would be required and their installation would be guaranteed by the developer pursuant to the provisions of this article. Provided, however, that any application hereunder for lands shown on a record plat recorded after February 3, 1973, shall be limited to those changes necessary to correct errors in the record plat or to make a lot line adjustment to accommodate an isolated instance of error in construction of a dwelling unit or other building. In such cases, the improvements shall be in compliance with the standards in effect at the time of recording the plat or with any approved variance to such standards. 
4.  The lot or lots were created as part of an antiquated subdivision and the Village Engineer finds that the subdivision substantially complies with the intent, purposes and requirements of this article. In making such determination, the Village Engineer shall consider the following factors and any other information he deems appropriate: 
a.  The total area of land encompassed by the antiquated subdivision; 
b.  The number of lots created within the antiquated subdivision; 
c.  The prior and subsequent subdivision of the area encompassed by the antiquated subdivision and whether such subdivision was platted or otherwise surveyed and placed of record; 
d.  The need for dedications or reservations to ensure installation and continued maintenance of the required improvements; 
e.  The extent of deviation from the requirements of this article; 
f.  The extent of ownership fragmentation, including the number of lots sold and the number of lots developed; 
g.  The degree of compliance with other Village land development regulations, including but not limited to the Comprehensive Plan and this Code; 
h.  The number of lots to be created; and 
i.  The extent of development in the surrounding area. 
5.  The combination or recombination of lots is required in order for the new lot or lots to meet the density requirements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Decision by Village Engineer. In determining if platting may be waived, the Village Engineer shall distribute each application to, and consider recommendations received from the following agencies regarding conformance with requirements of their respective regulations and program responsibilities: 
1.  The Directors of the Land Development and Traffic Divisions, and Survey Section of the Engineering Department; 
2.  The Directors of the Planning, Zoning, and Building Divisions; 
3.  The Director of Environmental Resources Management; 
4.  The County Health Director; 
5.  The Director of Water Utilities; 
6.  The Chief of Fire-Rescue; 
7.  The Director of Parks and Recreation; 
8.  The Village Attorney; and 
9.  The Director of Property and Real Estate Management. 
C.  Effect of approval. The approved certified survey shall constitute the approved Final Subdivision Plan for the subdivision when such subdivision is not encompassed by a Final Subdivision Plan approved pursuant to Sec. 5.6. The granting of a plat waiver in no manner reduces or waives the requirements of Secs. 8.13 through 8.17 governing construction plan approval, land development permit issuance, and installation of the required improvements. Failure by the applicant to submit all documents required for the recordation of the affidavit of waiver within six (6) months of approval by the Village Engineer shall void said approval. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 2-27-2007) 
Sec. 8.9.3. - Exceptions to installation of improvements requirement. 
    If, after review of the preliminary subdivision plan, the Village Engineer determines that certain improvements already existing on the proposed subdivision site are adequate to meet the intent of the required improvements requirement of this article, the installation of those required improvements may be waived. 
A.  Application for required improvement installation waiver. The developer shall submit a Preliminary Subdivision Plan in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 8.11 together with a statement demonstrating that the applicable improvement(s) and associated dedications existing on the land and serving the proposed lot(s) are substantially in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
B.  Effect of approval. The granting of a required improvement(s) installation waiver in no manner reduces or waives the requirement of this article to file a plat and to comply with applicable provisions of Secs. 8.13 through 8.17 with regard to all required improvements not specifically waived. 
Sec. 8.9.4. - Contents of applications. 
    Applications made pursuant to this article shall be submitted in a form established by the Village Engineer, prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual, and made available to the public. Contents of said applications shall include the submittal requirements for preliminary subdivision plans contained in Sec. 8.11. 
CHAPTER 10. - ADMINISTRATION OF ARTICLE 

Sec. 8.10.1. - Powers and duties of the Village Engineer. 
    The Village Engineer shall be deemed the administrative officer for the purpose of coordinating, enforcing and administering provisions of this article. The responsibilities of the Village Engineer may be delegated in whole or in part. The Village Engineer shall adopt policies and procedures for administering and enforcing the provisions of this article including, but not limited to the setting of fees pursuant to the policies of the Board and establishment of submittal requirements and criteria for review of final subdivision plans by the Development Review Committee. 
Sec. 8.10.2. - Exceptions to General Requirements. 
    The Village Engineer shall review and act on applications for exceptions to this article pursuant to Sec. 8.9. Such authority shall include the power to: 
A.  Waiver. Waive compliance with the procedures of Secs. 8.13 through 8.17 when the Village Engineer finds that compliance with such procedures is unnecessary because: 
1.  The proposed subdivision has been granted both a plat waiver and a waiver for all required improvements for the property; or 
2.  The proposed subdivision has been granted both a plat waiver and a waiver for some of the required improvements and installation of the remaining improvements will be assured by one of the following methods: 
a.  contribution of cash; or 
b.  construction of the required improvements will occur at the time of building construction and the installation of such improvements can be monitored as part of the building permit process or other Village permitting process. Such improvements include, but are not limited to, drainage improvements requiring lot grading only, and installation of well and/or septic tank; or 
c.  a combination of (1) and (2) above. 
B.  Review. Review any and all restrictive covenants applicable to a subdivision under review for a plat waiver; 
C.  Additional information. Require additional information or reviews deemed necessary for its consideration. Such information may include, but is not limited to, written and oral statements with respect to the nature, condition and maintenance responsibility of the streets, stormwater management facilities, or other required improvements, and reviews by other Village and State agencies, and any information necessary to assure that the proposal would conform to the Comprehensive Plan or reduce the degree of non-conformity to the Comprehensive Plan; and 
D.  Upon determining the facts of each application, determine whether: 
1.  The proposal would be in harmony and compatible with present and future development of the area as contemplated under the Comprehensive Plan, and 
2.  The proposal makes adequate provisions for public requirements, including safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, access, stormwater management, utilities, water supply and wastewater disposal. 
CHAPTER 11. - PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN 

Sec. 8.11.1. - Purpose of preliminary subdivision plan. 
    The purpose of the preliminary subdivision plan is to provide adequate and necessary descriptive information regarding proposed subdivision layout and improvements for review of applications made under Sec. 8.9 for plat waivers and for required improvement(s) installation waivers. 
Sec. 8.11.2. - Professional services required. 
    The developer shall retain the services of an engineer or surveyor to prepare the preliminary subdivision plan. The subdivision plan shall be coordinated with the major utility suppliers involved with providing services. Where septic tanks are proposed, a satisfactory subdivision analysis for septic tanks from the PBCPHU shall be required. 
Sec. 8.11.3. - Contents of application. 
    The developer shall submit a written statement and drawing in the form established by the Village Engineer, prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual, and made available to the public. 
CHAPTER 12. - FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN 

Sec. 8.12.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Final Subdivision Plan is to provide a multi-agency review at a level of detail adequate to identify and resolve basic errors, omissions, and conflicts in the proposed subdivision layout with respect to applicable agency concerns, code requirements, and surrounding land uses, prior to the preparation of the detailed preliminary plat(s) and associated construction plans for required improvements. 
Sec. 8.12.2. - Applicability. 
    Except as provided in Sec. 8.9.2, the developer of every proposed subdivision shall be required to obtain approval of a Final Subdivision Plan from the Development Review Committee, pursuant to Sec. 5.6, prior to submittal of a preliminary plat and construction plans for Technical Compliance approval pursuant to Sec. 8.13. 
Sec. 8.12.3. - Procedure. 
A.  Application. Application for Final Subdivision Plan approval shall be made in accordance with Sec. 5.6. 
B.  Threshold Review requirement. In order to be eligible to submit an application for Final Subdivision Plan review, the development shall have a currently valid certificate of threshold review, issued in accordance with and when required pursuant to Sec. 5.1.4. A copy of the currently valid certificate shall be attached to and made part of the application. 
C.  Contents of application. The application shall be submitted in a form established by the Village Engineer, prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual, and made available to the public. Contents of said application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
1.  A unified drawing describing existing site conditions, proposed streets, proposed lot layout, and other applicable development features in pictorial, note, or tabular form as appropriate; 
2.  An internal traffic circulation analysis prepared by a professional engineer, adequate for determining the required classification of streets, the number of lanes, the requirement for traffic lights and other traffic control devices, and the capacity of the street system proposed or affected by the development, as well as the phasing of improvements; 
3.  A preliminary stormwater management plan outlining the conceptual tertiary and secondary stormwater management facilities proposed for proper development of the subdivision, and prepared by a registered professional authorized through licensure by the state of Florida to perform such conceptual level of design for said stormwater management system; and 
4.  A statement that all applicable utility providers have agreed to serve the subdivision, except that where septic tank systems are proposed, a satisfactory subdivision analysis for septic tanks from the PBCPHU shall also be submitted. 
D.  Resubmittals. Final Subdivision Plan resubmittals required to address corrections or revisions requested by the Development Review Committee or for any modification by the developer shall be made in accordance with the applicable requirements of Sec. 5.6.4. 
Sec. 8.12.4. - Development Review Committee action. 
    The Development Review Committee shall inform the developer that the plan and data as submitted do or do not meet the applicable provisions of this article in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to Sec. 5.6.4. 
Sec. 8.12.5. - Duration of Final Subdivision Plan approval. 
    The duration of Final Subdivision Plan approval shall be as specified by and subject to those provisions of Sec. 5.8 applicable to the development. 
CHAPTER 13. - TECHNICAL COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 8.13.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of Technical Compliance is to provide a multi-agency review of the proposed subdivision plat and all applicable required improvement construction plans for conformance with technical and legal requirements of this article, other applicable provisions of this Code, the Village Standards, and the approved Final Subdivision Plan (including any special conditions of approval) prior to application by the developer for issuance of a Land Development Permit and submittal of the Final Plat for recordation. 
Sec. 8.13.2. - Application. 
    Prior to the expiration of the Final Subdivision Plan approval and prior to commencing construction of required improvements, the developer shall have prepared and shall submit to the Village Engineer an application for Technical Compliance review, which shall be accompanied by the required fee and the required number, as established by the Village Engineer, of the following documents and information, as applicable to the subdivision or approved phase thereof. Within three (3) days of receipt of an initial application submittal for Technical Compliance, the Village Engineer shall review the submittal for completeness and shall send written notification to the applicant if the submittal is determined to be incomplete. Failure by the applicant to complete the application submittal within sixty (60) days of the date of said notification shall be considered an abandonment of the application and any subsequent submittal shall require a new Technical Compliance application. 
A.  Preliminary plat. The developer shall submit the preliminary plat meeting the requirements of Sec. 8.20.1. 
B.  Certified survey. The developer of a subdivision for which the requirement to plat has been waived pursuant to Sec. 8.9.2. shall submit the applicable certified survey meeting the requirements of Sec. 8.19. 
C.  Construction plans and supplemental engineering reports. Except for those required improvements which have been specifically waived pursuant to Sec. 8.9.3, construction plans and supporting design information for all the required improvements shall be submitted for each subdivision. Construction plans and required engineering reports shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 8.16. 
D.  Certified opinion of cost. The developer's engineer shall prepare and submit a certified opinion of cost, which shall include the cost of installing all required improvements required pursuant to Sec. 8.21.1. In the alternative, the Village Engineer may, at his sole discretion, accept the contract price received by the developer for the construction of the required improvements. 
Sec. 8.13.3. - Review of the Technical Compliance submittal. 
A.  Agency comments. Within five (5) days of receipt of a complete application, the Village Engineer shall forward copies of appropriate submittal documents to the following agencies for written comments regarding conformance with requirements of their respective regulations and program responsibilities: 
1.  Director, Land Development Division of DEPW: construction plans and preliminary plat; 
2.  Director, Traffic Division of DEPW: construction plans and preliminary plat; 
3.  Director, Survey Section of DEPW: preliminary plat; 
4.  Director, Zoning Division of PZ&B: preliminary plat; 
5.  Director, Planning Division of P&B: preliminary plat; 
6.  Director, Parks and Recreation Department: preliminary plat; 
7.  Director, Roadway Production Division of DEPW: construction plans and preliminary plat for Thoroughfare Plan streets; 
8.  Director, Environmental Resources Management: preliminary plat; 
9.  Florida Department of Transportation: preliminary plat for lands abutting State roads; 
10.  Local water control district: preliminary plat for lands abutting water control district facilities, easements, or rights-of-way; 
11.  Village Attorney: preliminary plat; and 
12.  Director of Property and Real Estate Management: preliminary plat. Said agencies shall be given twenty (20) days to forward comments to the Village Engineer. Within five (5) days of the end of this twenty-day period, the Village Engineer shall forward all comments to the developer in writing, with a copy to the developer's engineer. 
B.  Submittal fails to meet requirements. When the Village Engineer determines that the Technical Compliance application submittal does not meet the provisions of this article, the written statement shall reference the specific section or standard with which the submittal does not comply. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the comments letter, the developer shall cause all corrections or revisions referenced in the comments letter to be made, and shall resubmit the required documents and information. Failure to resubmit within the required time shall be deemed an abandonment of the application and any subsequent submittal shall require a new Technical Compliance application. 
C.  Submittal meets requirements. When the Village Engineer determines that the Technical Compliance application submittal meets the provisions of this article, the submittal shall be deemed to technically comply with the provisions of the article and a written statement of Technical Compliance shall be issued. 
Sec. 8.13.4. - Technical Compliance approval. 
    The statement of Technical Compliance shall be in writing and furnished to the developer and the developer's engineer. The statement shall contain the following conditions and information: 
A.  Name. The name of the documents reviewed; 
B.  Surety. The amount of surety for the construction of required improvements, established in accordance with Sec. 8.14.1.F; 
C.  Recording fees. The amount of recording fees due for recordation of the final plat or certified survey, which fees are payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County; 
D.  Land development permit application. A requirement to submit with the Land Development Permit application a copy of all applicable property owners' association documents; and 
E.  Submittal of supplementary documentation. Requirements for submittal of supplementary documentation deemed necessary by the Village Engineer, such as deeds, easements, covenants and other recorded instruments creating rights or obligations for access, drainage, or utility services, which rights or obligations could not be established through dedications or reservations on the plat. 
Sec. 8.13.5. - Expiration of Technical Compliance. 
    The statement of Technical Compliance shall expire six (6) months after its date of issuance. Failure to make a Land Development Permit application submittal prior to the expiration of the statement of Technical Compliance shall void the Technical Compliance approval and any subsequent submittal shall require a new Technical Compliance application. 
Sec. 8.13.6. - Effect of changes to Final Subdivision Plan. 
    Any change to a Final Subdivision Plan, however approved, which would either increase or decrease the number of units in, or would, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, cause a substantial change or revision to any preliminary plat or associated construction plans under review or approved for Technical Compliance shall void any approvals issued for same pursuant to this article and shall require a new submittal and fee for such plat and construction plans. Such determination shall be in writing and forwarded within ten (10) days to the Developer's Engineer, with a copy to the Planning & Zoning Director. 
CHAPTER 14. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 

Sec. 8.14.1. - Land Development Permit Application submittal. 
    A Land Development Permit shall be required prior to commencement of construction of any required improvement. The effective date of the Land Development Permit shall be the date the Village Engineer signs it. The Land Development Permit shall expire not more than twenty-one (21) months from the effective date, unless extended pursuant to Sec. 8.17.2. Except when the installation of all required improvements has been waived pursuant to Sec. 8.9.3, the Final Plat or certified survey, as applicable, shall not be recorded until the developer has either installed the improvements or has guaranteed the installation of the improvements pursuant to the requirements of Sec. 8.14.1.F, below. As the final step in the review procedures to obtain development approval under this article, the developer shall have prepared and shall submit, prior to expiration of the Technical Compliance, an application for Land Development Permit. The application for Land Development Permit shall be accompanied by the required fee and the required number, as determined by the Village Engineer, of the following documents applicable to the subdivision or approved phase thereof: 
A.  Final plat. Developments which are platting shall submit the Final Plat complying with Sec. 8.20.2, and a check for the plat recordation, payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County, in the required amount. 
B.  Certified survey. Developments for which the requirement to plat has been waived pursuant to this article shall submit a check payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County for the recordation of the survey. When construction plans are not required, the certified survey may be recorded without further review, provided, however, that the Village Engineer shall review any documents submitted in compliance with Sec. 8.14.1.C. 
C.  Maintenance and use documents and other documents. A copy of the maintenance and use covenants and any other documents required by the Village Engineer as a condition of Technical Compliance shall be submitted. The maintenance and use covenants shall indicate the maintenance responsibility for all common areas and improvements within the subdivision, and shall comply with all applicable requirements as specified in Sec. 7.15. 
D.  Construction plans and supplemental engineering informatio n. Construction plans shall conform with the plans which received Technical Compliance or, if modified, shall be accompanied by a written statement from the Developer's engineer which details, explains, and justifies the modifications. Construction plans shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 8.16 and, prior to issuance of a Land Development Permit, shall have received all applicable approvals of requisite governmental agencies. 
E.  Developer's Acknowledgement of Responsibility for Construction of Required Improvements. The application shall indicate whether the required improvements are to be constructed prior to recordation or after recordation of the plat or survey. When the required improvements are to be constructed after recordation, the Developer shall submit a statement acknowledging responsibility for completion of said required improvements. The statement shall be in the form contained in the latest version of the Land Development Forms Manual and shall be executed by all owners shown on the applicable final plat. The statement shall be accompanied by a guarantee for completion of required improvements, pursuant to Sec. 8.21.1. Said guarantee shall meet the applicable requirements of Sec. 8.14.1.F. 
F.  Guaranties. All guaranties required pursuant to Sec. 8.21.1 shall be in one (1) of the forms prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual or in an alternate form approved by the Village Attorney. The initial guaranty shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the construction cost of the required improvements. The guaranty shall be in one (1) of the following types. 
1.  Cash bond. Completion of the required improvements may be secured by cash deposited by the developer with the Village or in an account subject to the control of the Village in accordance with an agreement on such deposit or account. The developer shall be entitled to receive any interest earned on such deposit or account. 
2.  Letter of credit. Completion of the required improvements may be secured by a clean irrevocable letter of credit issued to the Village in accordance with the Village Letter of Credit Policy. The expiration date of the letter of credit shall be at least three (3) months after the completion date for construction of required improvements pursuant to the initial Land Development Permit or any subsequent extension thereto. 
3.  Performance or surety bond. Completion of the required improvements may be secured by a performance or surety bond obtained from a company acceptable to the Village in accordance with the Village policy on performance bonds. It shall guarantee that all work will be completed in full accordance with the approved Land Development Permit. 
4.  Escrow deposit. Completion of the required improvements may be secured by an executed escrow agreement, between the Developer, a bank approved by the Village, and the Village as the third party beneficiary. The escrow agreement shall require that release of the funds, or any part thereof, shall be subject to Village approval. 
Sec. 8.14.2. - Action by the Village Engineer. 
    The Village Engineer shall examine the submittal for completeness in compliance with this article. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete submittal, the Village Engineer shall review the submittal for conformity with this article and shall advise the developer of his findings in writing, with a copy to the developer's engineer. 
A.  Submittal fails to meet ordinance. When deficiencies exist, the Village Engineer shall reference in writing the specific section or standard with which the Land Development Permit submittal does not comply. The developer shall correct such deficiencies within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written report. Failure to respond within the given time shall deem the submittal abandoned and any subsequent submittal shall require a new application and submittal for a Land Development Permit. 
B.  Submittal meets ordinance. When the submittal meets the provisions of this article, the Village Engineer shall sign the Land Development Permit and, if applicable, shall sign and seal the final plat and submit said approved plat to the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recordation. 
CHAPTER 15. - SUBSTITUTION OF DEVELOPERS 

Sec. 8.15.1. - Voluntary substitution of developers. 
    When there is a voluntary substitution of developers after the Land Development Permit has been issued but before the Village has acknowledged completion of the required improvements, it shall be the responsibility of both developers to transfer the rights and responsibilities from the original developer to the succeeding developer. The original and succeeding developers shall make a joint application to the Village Engineer for a transfer of the original developer's Land Development Permit. If the original developer posted a guaranty with the Village for completion of required improvements, the succeeding developer must post a substitute guaranty in the current amount of the original developer's guaranty and in a form acceptable to the Village. The application for transfer shall include the executed acknowledgment of responsibility for completion of required improvements pursuant to Sec. 8.14.1.E. 
Sec. 8.15.2. - Involuntary substitution of developers. 
    When a developer becomes the succeeding developer through foreclosure or some similar action and it is not possible to obtain the original developer's signature on a joint application for transfer of the Land Development Permit, the succeeding developer must comply with all provisions of Sec. 8.15.1, except that, in lieu of said original developer's signature, the succeeding developer shall submit a current certification of title, foreclosure judgment, or other proof of ownership of the lands encompassed by the plat referred to in the Land Development Permit. 
CHAPTER 16. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND SUPPLEMENTAL ENGINEERING INFORMATION 

Sec. 8.16.1. - Duties of developer's engineer. 
    When the development is to be engineered by more than one firm, the developer shall appoint a single engineering firm or engineer to coordinate submission of the construction plans and construction of the required improvements. 
Sec. 8.16.2. - Submittal requirements. 
    Construction plans and supplemental engineering information shall be submitted under separate cover for each of the categories of improvements listed in this section. Plan sets shall be submitted in the number required by the Village Engineer, as prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. 
A.  Submittals for required improvements. The following construction plans shall be submitted for the required improvements set forth in Sec. 8.21, when applicable: Construction plans shall be signed and sealed by the preparing engineer. 
1.  Paving, grading and drainage; 
2.  Bridges; 
3.  Water and sewer systems: 
a.  for technical compliance submittal: the proposed plans submitted for Public Health Unit approval; 
b.  for land development permit submittal: construction plans stamped with Public Health Unit approval. 
B.  Submittals for other improvements. Construction plans shall be submitted for the following additional improvements which the developer may elect to construct: 
1.  Landscaping, guardhouse, gates or other structures within streets; 
2.  Landscaping or structures in lake maintenance easements: See Sec. 8.18.1. 
Sec. 8.16.3. - Completeness of construction plans. 
    All construction plan submittals shall be so complete as to be suitable for contracting and construction purposes. Design data, calculations and analyses shall be submitted to address important features affecting design and construction and shall include, but not be limited to, those for design high water, drainage facilities of all kinds, subsurface soil data, alternate pavement and subgrade types, and any proposed deviation from Village standard design requirements. 
Sec. 8.16.4. - Format and content of construction plans for required improvements. 
    All construction plan submittals for the installation of required improvements shall consist of and contain, but shall not be limited to: 
A.  Cover sheet. A cover sheet showing the applicable plat name, sheet index, category of improvements, and, vicinity sketch. 
B.  Sections. Typical sections. 
C.  Construction details. Construction details showing compliance with Village standards, or with any alternate design approved by the Village Engineer pursuant to Sec. 8.18.3. 
D.  Special profile sheets . Special profile sheets as required to show special or unique situations. 
E.  Bench mark. Bench mark, based on NGVD (1929). 
F.  Notes. Notes regarding special conditions and specifications applicable to the construction, addressing: 
1.  required compliance with construction requirements of this article and the applicable Village or County standards; 
2.  required compliance with State standards applicable to the work; 
3.  minimum standards for materials; 
4.  test requirements for compaction or stabilization of subgrade, base, and backfill; 
5.  required installation of underground utilities and storm drainage located within the streets prior to construction of subgrade for street pavement; 
6.  special construction or earthwork requirements for site work in areas of impervious or unstable soils, or to cope with unsuitable soil conditions. 
G.  Parking areas. Depiction of all parking areas required to be constructed by Sec. 8.22, clearly identifying and delineating each clustered lot and each parking area serving more than one (1) clustered lot when such lots do not abut a street. 
Sec. 8.16.5. - Final stormwater management plan. 
    The Technical Compliance application shall include the final stormwater management plan, based upon and consistent with the preliminary stormwater management plan, in separate report form detailing the design of all secondary and tertiary stormwater management facilities, including, as a minimum, the following design data and information: 
A.  Basin maps. Pre-development and post-development drainage basin maps showing site topography, drainage basins, catchment areas, and stormwater inflow/outflow locations for the site; 
B.  Site characteristics. Pre-development and post-development site characteristics affecting runoff such as ground cover, soil profile, wet season mean high water table elevations and recurring high water elevations in receiving watercourses or water bodies; 
C.  Catchment aera. Individual catchment area characteristics used for design, including area, times-of-concentration, runoff factors, and quantitative breakdown of pervious/impervious areas; 
D.  Design. A statement of applicable design and/or performance assumptions and criteria for each part of the system providing drainage, treatment, or discharge control; 
E.  Positive outfall. Evidence of existing access to legal positive outfall(s); 
F.  Calculations. Complete hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for design of storm sewers, retention/detention area, and discharge structures; 
G.  Use of standard methods. Identification of standard methods and/or proprietary models used for hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, noting that methods or models other than those of the Department of Transportation, South Florida Water Management District, SCS, the rational method, the SBUH method, the Puls method or common modifications of such methods, may require additional documentation; 
H.  Agency requirements. A listing of specific Village, County or South Florida Water Management District requirements used as the design basis for street drainage, lot grading, finished floor elevations, floodplain storage compensation, retention/detention volumes, and discharge limits; and 
I.  Requirements for construction and maintenance. Requirements for construction and maintenance of any temporary or phased stormwater management facilities necessary to ensure proper stormwater control and treatment during site development. 
Sec. 8.16.6. - Soils report. 
    The Technical Compliance application shall include a soils report describing soil profiles of the work site to such depth and extent necessary to determine special design or construction needs. In lieu of Sec. 8.16.6.D and E, the Developer may submit as part of the report a certified statement from an engineer that he has investigated the subsurface conditions of the site and has determined that such conditions are suitable for the work as shown on the construction plans. The soils report shall include: 
A.  Map. A map, drawn to stated scale, showing boring, penetrometer, and/or test pit locations. 
B.  Test results. Results of each boring or other soil test, keyed to the map. 
C.  Soil profiles. Soil profiles with horizons described according to the USDA, ASTM, or Unified standard soils classified system. 
D.  Muck, etc. Location and extent of muck, hardpan, marl, or other deleterious materials which may require special consideration in design or construction. 
E.  Groundwater conditions. A description of groundwater conditions which may require special consideration in design or construction. 
CHAPTER 17. - CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 8.17.1. - Developer's duty. 
    Upon issuance of the Land Development Permit, the developer shall coordinate the construction with the Village Engineer. 
Sec. 8.17.2. - Time of completion of required improvements. 
A.  Time completion. The time of completion of all required improvements shall not exceed twenty-one (21) months from the date of issuance of the Land Development Permit unless an extension is granted pursuant to this section. 
B.  Time extension. A one-year time extension may be granted by the Village Engineer after review of the written application for extension of the developer. The developer should submit the application for extension, including but not limited to a statement of justification and proof that an acceptable guarantee will remain in place for the duration of the extension, not less than two (2) months prior to expiration of the Land Development Permit. Applications submitted after expiration of the Land Development Permit shall not be accepted. The Village Engineer shall review and advise the developer in writing of his decision within one (1) month of receipt of the application. 
Sec. 8.17.3. - Completion prior to recordation. 
    When the developer elects to complete required improvements prior to recording of the final plat or certified survey, the following procedures shall apply, as applicable. 
A.  Final plat. Upon approval of the final plat and acknowledgment of completion of the required improvements pursuant to Sec. 8.17.7, the plat shall be submitted to the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recordation. 
B.  Recording of final plat. When the Village Engineer finds that the certified survey and completion of the required improvements are in compliance with all requirements of this article, he shall cause the certified survey to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court. 
Sec. 8.17.4. - Completion after recordation. 
    When the developer elects to guarantee the construction of the required improvements in order to complete same after recordation, the Village Engineer may approve reductions of the amount of the guaranty and release the guaranty in accordance with the requirements and procedures prescribed in this subsection. All requests for reduction shall be by application to the Village Engineer. A complete application shall include, at a minimum, a certified cost estimate from the developer's engineer for both the completed and the remaining required improvements. The Village Engineer shall have the right to reduce the amount of any requested reduction based on his review of the application and required improvements. The Village Engineer shall also have the right to refuse to approve any requested reduction so long as the developer fails to be in compliance with any of the terms and conditions of this article, the plat, or the plans and specifications for the required improvements. The Village Engineer shall give written notification to the developer and the guarantee principal of his decision on the application within one (1) month of the application being deemed complete. Any approval under this section shall be conditioned upon the guarantee principal providing, within one (1) month of receipt of the Village Engineer's written notification, written confirmation of the reduction in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney. 
A.  Frequency of reductions in amount of guarantee. Reductions in the amount of the guaranty may be approved by the Village Engineer in accordance with the following schedule. 
1.  Cash deposits and escrow agreements. The deposit or account may be reduced as installations progress at stages of construction established by the Village Engineer, but not more frequently than monthly. 
2.  Letters of credit and performance or surety bonds. Quarterly during the process of construction and upon request by the developer, the Village Engineer may reduce the dollar amount of the guaranty. 
B.  Amount of reductions in guaranties. The Village Engineer shall not reduce the amount of any guaranty below twenty (20) percent of the original cost estimate amount. In addition to this limitation, no reduction in the dollar amount of the guaranty shall be made unless sufficient funds will remain to complete the remaining required improvements and the cost of required improvements installed equals or exceeds the amount of the request. To ensure that sufficient funds remain for completion of the remaining required improvements, the Village Engineer shall release not more than ninety (90) percent of the dollar amount of required improvements certified as completed during the period for which a reduction is requested. 
C.  Release of guaranty. The guaranty shall only be released upon acknowledgment of completion of the required improvements pursuant to Sec. 8.17.7. Two (2) weeks prior to the release of the guaranty, the Village Engineer shall notify the appropriate District Commissioner of intent to release. 
Sec. 8.17.5. - Village use of funds; failure of developer to complete. 
    The Village Engineer, as the authorized agent of the Board, shall have the right to any funds available under the guaranty to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements in the event of default by the developer or failure of the developer to complete such improvements within the time required by Sec. 8.17.2. The Village Engineer shall send the developer a courtesy written notice of the Village's intent to expend any drawn funds or demand performance, as applicable. Such notice shall be sent at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to said expenditure or demand, and shall be mailed to the last known address of the developer or his authorized agent according to the Land Development Permit records on file with the Village Engineer. 
Sec. 8.17.6. - Administration of construction. 
A.  Construction standards. Construction standards shall be those prescribed in the current Village Standards. 
B.  Inspections, reports, and stop work orders. The Village Engineer shall be notified in advance of the date of commencement of construction pursuant to the Land Development Permit, and of such points during the progress of construction for which joint review by the Village Engineer and developer's engineer are required. 
1.  Construction shall be performed under the surveillance of, and shall at all times be subject to, review by the Village Engineer; however, this in no way shall relieve the developer of the responsibility for ensuring close field coordination and final compliance with the approved plans, specifications and the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  The developer shall require progress reports of the construction of the required improvements from the developer's engineer. The developer's engineer may also be required to submit construction progress reports directly to and at points of progress prescribed by the Village Engineer. The developer's engineer shall coordinate joint reviews of the construction with the Village Engineer at points specified by the Village Engineer. 
3.  The Village Engineer shall have the right to enter upon the property for the purpose of reviewing the construction of required improvement during the progress of such construction. The Village Engineer shall have the authority to stop the work upon failure of the developer or his engineer to coordinate the construction of the required improvements as required by this subsection. 
C.  Measurements and tests. During construction, the developer's engineer shall make or cause to be made such measurements, field tests, and laboratory tests necessary to certify that the work and materials conform with the approved development plans and the provisions of this article. The Village Engineer may require, at his discretion, specific types and locations of tests and measurements which he deems necessary to demonstrate conformance with approved plans and specifications. 
D.  Engineer's certificate of completion. The required improvements shall not be considered complete until a certificate of completion, certifying to construction in conformance with the approved plans, and the final project records have been submitted to, reviewed, and approved by the Village Engineer. The certificate shall be signed and sealed by the developer's engineer and shall be in a form established by the Village Engineer, as prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. Said certificate shall make specific reference to, and be accompanied by copies of measurements, tests and reports made on the work and materials during the progress of construction, along with a Record Drawing copy of each of the construction plans on a high quality, time-stable, reproducible mylar, showing the original design in comparison to the actual finished work with all material deviations noted thereon. 
Sec. 8.17.7. - Acknowledgment of completion and maintenance of required improvements. 
A.  Developer's Warranty on workmanship and material. The developer shall execute and submit a warranty guaranteeing the required improvements against defect in workmanship and material for a period of one (1) year after acknowledgment of completion pursuant to this Section. Said warranty shall be submitted to the Village Engineer along with the completion certificate and project records. The warranty shall be in a form approved by the Village Attorney and prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. 
B.  Acknowledgment of completion by Village Engineer; release of guaranty. Upon submittal of the documents and records required by Secs. 8.17.6.D and 8.17.7.A, and recorded copies of the approved Maintenance and Use Covenants, the Village Engineer shall determine the completeness of the required improvements in accordance with the provisions of this article and the Land Development Permit. When the Village Engineer determines that the required documentation is acceptable and the required improvements have been installed as required by this article he shall acknowledge completion of the required improvements and, when a guaranty has been posted, release the guaranty in accordance with the following. 
1.  If the final plat has been recorded. When the applicable plat has already been recorded, the Village Engineer shall issue a written statement to the Developer acknowledging completion of required improvements and releasing the guaranty. 
2.  If the final plat has not been recorded. When the final plat has not been recorded, at the time of acknowledgment of completion the Village Engineer shall review said final plat for conformance with current certification and approval requirements. Upon determining that the final plat meets said requirements, the Village Engineer shall approve the plat and submit it to the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recordation. 
3.  Effect of release. Issuance of the statement acknowledging completion and, when applicable, releasing the guaranty shall relieve the developer of his obligations for construction of required improvements but shall not relieve the developer of his obligations under the warranty for required improvements required under Sec. 8.17.7.A. 
C.  Acceptance of dedications and maintenance of improvements. The acceptance by the Board of any dedication to the Board of public space, parks, rights-of-way, easements or the like on a plat shall not in itself constitute an acceptance by the Village of any responsibility to construct or maintain improvements within the dedicated area. Acceptance of dedications and maintenance responsibility for improvements within areas dedicated to the Board shall be made as follows. 
1.  Acceptance of dedications. The recordation of a final plat, subsequent to the Village Engineer's approval of said final plat for recordation, shall constitute acceptance by the Board of any and all dedications to the Board as stated and shown on the plat. 
2.  Acceptance of dedications of real property. For those dedications to the Board of real property, including rights-of-way, parks, and other tracts, an executed deed transferring title to such lands, plus such documentation of title and absence of encumbrances as required pursuant to Village policy for acceptance of deeds, shall be submitted to the Village Engineer at the time of submittal of the applicable Final Plat for recordation. Said deed(s) shall be on a form approved by the Village Attorney, and shall be recorded by the Village subsequent to recordation of the applicable Final Plat. 
3.  Acceptance of improvements for Village maintenance. At such time as the Village Engineer has issued a statement acknowledging completion of the required improvements and the applicable plat has been recorded, the Village Manager or the Village Engineer, on behalf of the Village, shall accept maintenance responsibility for the required improvements to streets and to such other areas dedicated to the Board in accordance with the dedications shown on said record plat, and shall issue a written statement confirming acceptance of said maintenance responsibility. 
D.  Village completion of required improvements in recorded subdivisions. The Village may complete the required improvements, under the guaranty provided by the developer, when the corresponding plat has been recorded and the developer fails to complete the required improvements as required by this article. In such case, the Village Engineer shall call upon the guaranty to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements. Notice of said call shall be deemed upon posting via certified mail. Upon the completion of such action, the Village Engineer shall report to the Board and the Board may accept by resolution the dedication and maintenance responsibility as indicated on the plat. In such cases, the remaining guaranties posted by the developer shall be retained for a period of one (1) year after completion in lieu of the agreement. Any defects occurring during this period shall be repaired using funds remaining in the guaranty. 
E.  Developer's failure to complete improvements in unrecorded subdivisions. Where a developer has elected to install the required improvements prior to recordation of the plat and fails to complete such improvements within the time limits prescribed in Sec. 8.17.2, all previous approvals applicable to the proposed subdivision shall be deemed void. 
CHAPTER 18. - SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8.18.1. - Construction and landscaping in lake maintenance easements and water management tracts. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to allow for the construction or placement of structures and plants adjacent to, or over, water bodies within water management tracts, while taking measures to ensure that such structures or plants shall not interfere with the proper functioning of the stormwater management system nor be otherwise detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, or convenience of the public or of persons responsible for or affected by a water body within a water management tract. 
B.  Prohibition. The placement or construction of trees, shrubs, or structures within any water management tract established for purposes of wet detention/retention in an open water body, or easement or berm adjacent thereto established for purposes of access for maintenance of the water body or water management tract or structures and facilities therein is hereby prohibited, except in strict conformance with the provisions of this subsection. 
C.  Application requirements for bulkheads, docks, or piers. Persons desiring to construct bulkheads, docks, or piers over or along a water body contained within a water management tract shall apply to the Director of ERM in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sec. 7.6. 
D.  Application requirements for structures or plantings in lake maintenance easements. Persons desiring to place trees or shrubs or construct or place structures within a lake maintenance easement shall apply to the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall ensure that adequate conditions are imposed, and appropriate documents are executed and, if appropriate, recorded to ensure compliance with the provisions of this subsection and approvals granted pursuant to this article. 
E.  Structures or plantings. The provisions herein shall be applied to approvals by the Village Engineer for the installation of structures or plantings in, on, or over lake maintenance easements. The following criteria shall apply to the installation of such structures and plantings. 
1.  No structures except those which may be easily removed shall be permitted in lake maintenance easements. Examples of impermissible structures are houses, garages, screened enclosures, concrete block walls, concrete decks, affixed permanent sheds, and pools. Examples of permissible structures are thatch sheds, wood decks, and non-concrete fences, contingent on said structures not being structurally affixed to the ground. 
2.  Trees or shrubs shall not be planted, nor structures placed, in the lake maintenance easement where the planting or placement of such would obstruct access by equipment to outfalls or water control structures. 
3.  A removal declaration in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney shall be recorded, at the expense of the property owner. 
4.  The property owners' association's consent to the specific structure(s), tree(s), or shrub(s) shall be required where a property owners' association has responsibility for lake maintenance. If any other entity has a beneficiary interest in the easement or a responsibility for lake maintenance, that entity's consent shall be required. 
5.  Trees or shrubs planted pursuant to this subsection shall be limited to those species permitted pursuant to Sec. 7.3, and shall not include any portion of the minimum site landscaping required pursuant to Sec. 7.3. 
F.  Repair, replacement, or modification. Any repair, replacement, or modification, except ordinary maintenance, to any planting or structure approved pursuant to this subsection, shall be done only after being approved as new planting or construction pursuant to this subsection. 
Sec. 8.18.2. - Dredge, fill and construction in waters of the State. 
A.  Applicability. Subdivision of lands containing or abutting existing or proposed waters of the State, including canals, lakes, streams, and wetlands, shall comply with and conform to the requirements of this subsection. 
B.  Easements or rights-of-way. Where land within a proposed subdivision abuts existing or proposed waters of the State, there shall be provided a floodway or floodplain easement or a drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse or water body and of such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Additional easement or right-of-way width may be required where necessary for maintenance, safety and convenience. Each required easement and right-of-way shall be deeded or dedicated to an appropriate public agency. Maintenance responsibility and use limitations applicable to said easements and rights-of-way, or any facilities placed therein, shall be in accordance with all applicable permit conditions and shall be stated or referenced by note on the appropriate plat(s). 
C.  Permits. Where proposed dredging or filling affects waters of the State or sovereign land, said activities shall be approved by the governing agency having jurisdiction in such matters. Prior to the construction of any seawall, bulkhead, dock or pier, a construction permit shall be obtained from the Village Building Department in addition to all required permits or expressed exemption from permitting for construction in waters of the State. 
Sec. 8.18.3. - Alternate design, construction standards, and types of materials. 
A.  Applicability. Alternate designs, construction standards, and types of materials which, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, are equal or superior to those specified may be approved in accordance with this subsection. 
B.  Contents of application. The application shall be submitted in a form established by the Village Engineer, prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual, and made available to the public. Said application shall be accompanied by written data, calculations and analyses, and drawings which are necessary to show, by accepted engineering principles, that the proposed alternates are equal or superior to those specified, or are necessary due to environmental considerations. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of such application, the Village Engineer shall either approve or deny the application and shall advise the Developer's Engineer and the Developer in writing of the decision. 
C.  Environmental considerations. In the interest of the preservation of existing trees and other natural features at the developer's request, or as required by other regulations, the Village Engineer may vary the design and construction requirements upon presentation by the developer of substantial evidence that environmental conditions will be enhanced, that proper performance of the approved stormwater management system will not be impaired, and that safety, stability, and design life of structural improvements will not be compromised. 
[Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Sec. 8.18.1.5.5] 
CHAPTER 19. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFIED SURVEY 

Sec. 8.19.1. - General. 
    The Village Engineer shall adopt and amend, from time to time, the criteria for the certified survey. At a minimum, the certified survey shall meet the requirements for surveys established by the Minimum Technical Standards set forth by the Florida Board of Professional Land Surveyors in Chapter 21HH-6.003, F.A.C., pursuant to Sec. 472.027, Fla. Stat. 
Sec. 8.19.2. - Alternatives. 
    The Village Engineer shall reserve the right to require a certified sketch and legal description in lieu of a certified survey. The certified sketch and legal description shall meet the requirements for certified sketches and descriptions set forth by Chapter 21HH-6.006, F.A.C., pursuant to Sec. 472.027, Fla. Stat. and the appropriate Village Description Checklist pursuant to policies and procedures established by the Village Engineer and made available to the public. 
Sec. 8.19.3. - Recordation. 
    The certified survey or sketch and legal description shall not require approval of the Board prior to recordation. 
CHAPTER 20. - REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 8.20.1. - Preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall meet the requirements of the Final Plat, except that it shall be submitted without the required signatures and seals. It may also be submitted without maintenance and use covenants, condominium documents, deeds, or other legal documents not related to the survey or engineering design of the project. 
Sec. 8.20.2. - Final plat. 
    The plat shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 177, Fla. Stat., as amended, and shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
A.  Material. The plat shall be drawn or printed on twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch linen, chronoflex, mylar or other approved material. 
B.  Preparation. The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Florida and is to be clearly and legibly drawn with black permanent drawing ink or veritype process to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or as otherwise determined by the Village Engineer. 
C.  Name of subdivision. The plat shall have a name acceptable to the Village. When the plat is a new subdivision, the name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to the name of any existing subdivision. When the plat is an addition to or replat of a recorded subdivision, it shall carry the same name as the existing subdivision followed by a suitable phase designation or similar modifier, when applicable. 
D.  Title. The plat shall have a title printed on each sheet in bold legible letters containing: 
1.  The name of the subdivision, printed above and in letters larger than the balance of the title; 
2.  The name of the Village, County and State; 
3.  The section, township and range as applicable or if in a land grant, so stated; 
4.  When the plat is a replat, amendment or addition to an existing plat of record, the words "section", "unit", "replat", "amendment", etc.; and 
5.  When the plat encompasses lands in a planned unit development, the abbreviation "PUD". Likewise, all other planned developments shall contain the appropriate abbreviation for such designation within the title. 
E.  Description. There shall be lettered or printed upon the plat a full and detailed description of the land embraced in the plat. The description shall show the section, township and range in which the lands are situated or if a land grant, so stated, and must be so complete that from it without reference to the map the starting point can be determined and the boundaries run. 
F.  Index. If more than one (1) sheet is required for the map, the plat shall contain an index map on the first page, showing the entire subdivision and indexing the area shown on each succeeding map sheet. Each map sheet shall contain an index delineating that portion of the subdivision shown on that sheet in relation to the entire subdivision. When more than one (1) sheet must be used to accurately portray the lands subdivided, each sheet must show the particular number of that sheet and the total number of sheets included, as well as clearly labeled match lines between map segments. 
G.  Survey data. The plat shall show the length of all arcs together with central angles, radii, and points of curvature. Sufficient survey data shall be shown to positively describe the boundary of each lot, block, right-of-way, street, easement, and all other areas shown on the plat and all areas shall be within the boundary of the plat as shown in the description. The plat shall also include the following items in the manner described below. 
1.  The scale, both stated and graphically illustrated, shall be shown on each sheet. 
2.  A prominent north arrow shall be drawn on every sheet included showing any portion of the lands subdivided. The bearing or azimuth reference shall be clearly stated on the face of the plat in the notes or legend. 
3.  The point of beginning shall be boldly shown together with the letters "P.O.B." in bold letters. 
4.  All intersecting street lines shall be joined to form required safe sight corners pursuant to the Village standards, and all dimensions shall be shown. 
5.  All adjoining property shall be identified by a subdivision name, plat book and page or, if unplatted, the land shall be so designated. 
6.  Permanent reference monuments shall be shown in the manner prescribed by Chapter 177, Fla. Stat., as amended. All information pertaining to the location of "P.R.M.s" shall be indicated in note form on the plat. Permanent Control Points and Permanent Reference Monuments shall be designed and set as prescribed by Chapter 177, Fla. Stat., as amended, and Sec. 8.29.6. 
7.  There shall be reserved on each sheet of the plat a three (3) inch by five (5) inch space in the upper right hand corner to be used by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording information and each sheet shall reserve three (3) inches on the left margin and a half (1/2) inch margin on all remaining sides. 
8.  The map shall mathematically close within 0.01 feet and shall be accurately tied to all Village or County township, range and section lines occurring within the subdivision by distance and bearing. 
9.  The initial point in the description shall be accurately tied to the nearest quarter section corner or section corner or government corner. Each government corner being used shall be identified. If the subdivision being platted is a re-subdivision of a previously recorded subdivision, then a tie to a Permanent Reference Monument from the parent plat is sufficient. If the subdivision is a re-subdivision of a part of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties to controlling lines appearing on the parent plat must be provided to permit an overlay. The position and orientation of the plat shall conform to the Florida State Plan Coordinate System in the manner established by the Village Engineer and prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. 
10.  The cover sheet or first page of the plat shall show a vicinity sketch, showing the subdivision's location in reference to other areas of the Village. 
11.  A complete legend of abbreviations shall be shown. 
12.  All lettering on the plat shall be at a minimum 0.10 of an inch in height. 
13.  The plat boundary and all parcels shown on subdivision plats intended to be conveyed in fee title shall be delineated by solid lines. 
14.  Lines intersecting curves shall be noted as radial or non-radial as the case may be. 
15.  A note addressing any abandoned underlying lands or easements, including record information, shall be shown. 
16.  Tabulation of Survey Data: 
a.  The use of tangent tables is not permitted. However, at the discretion of the Village Engineer on a case by case basis, the use of a tangent table to reflect corner clip (safe sight) chords may be permitted if deemed necessary to meet requirements of neatness and clarity of the plat. Scale factors shall not be considered. Such tables, when permitted, must appear on the map sheet to which they refer and tangents shall be numbered consecutively through the entire presentation. 
The possible exception noted above shall be limited to use on plats and shall not be carried into any other survey documents submitted for approval to the Village Engineer. 
b.  Curve data may be tabulated subject to the following conditions or exceptions. 
i.  External boundary or centerline curve data may not be tabulated. 
ii.  Where data is tabulated, a minimum of the arc length and the curve designation number or letter will be shown on site. 
iii.  Curve tables reflecting the tabulated data will appear on the map sheet on which the curves appear. 
H.  Lot and block identification. Each lot and block shall be numbered or lettered. All lots shall be numbered or lettered by progressive numbers or letters individually throughout the subdivision or progressively numbered or lettered in each block. Blocks in each incremental plat shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout a subdivision. 
I.  Street names. The plat shall show the name of each street as shown on the Final Subdivision Plan and conforming with Sec. 8.22.1.T. 
J.  Not included parcels. Not included or excepted parcels must be marked "not a part of this plat". Where a not included parcel is completely surrounded by areas included within the plat, sufficient easements or rights of way to provide necessary access, utilities, and drainage to the not included parcel shall be provided. No parcel of land shall be reserved by the owner unless the same is sufficient in size and area to be of some particular use or service. The intended use of all reserved areas shall be shown on the plat in note form on the cover sheet. 
K.  Streets and easements. All street, right-of-way, and easement widths and dimensions shall be shown on the plat. Easements are to be tied at both ends at intersecting boundary, lot, or right-of-way lines. The plat shall show the name, location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting or contiguous to the boundary of the plat, accurately tied to the boundary of the plat by bearings and distances. 
L.  Maintenance and use documents. Maintenance and use covenants, as required by Sec. 7.15, shall be submitted with the Final Plat and approved by the Village Attorney prior to recordation of the Final Plat. All areas of the plat that are not to be sold as individual lots and all easement shall be dedicated or reserved in accordance with the terms of the maintenance and use covenants, and their purposes shall be clearly stated on the plat. 
M.  Streets. All streets and their related facilities which are designed to serve more than one lot or dwelling unit shall be dedicated to the Board for public use, unless otherwise required or permitted by this paragraph or elsewhere in this article. Any street which is to be reserved as a private street shall be identified as a tract for private street purposes. Such street tracts shall be reserved in accordance with Sec. 8.20.2.O.1. Private streets may only be permitted when such streets are subject to a recorded declaration of covenants subjecting the streets to the jurisdiction and control of all lot owners deriving access from such streets, their successors and assigns. When parking areas are required to be constructed by Sec. 8.22, they shall be reserved to and shall be the perpetual maintenance responsibility of a property owners' association, which association shall have jurisdiction over the parking area and the clustered lots. Such parking areas shall be clearly identified and reserved as tracts for parking and access purposes. 
N.  Restriction on obstruction of easements. The plat shall contain a statement that no buildings or any kind of construction or trees or shrubs shall be placed on any easement without prior written consent of all easement beneficiaries and all applicable Village approvals or permits as required for such encroachment. 
O.  Certification and approvals. The plat shall contain on the face or first page the following certifications and approvals, acknowledged as required by law, all being in the form set forth below. 
1.  Dedication and reservation. All areas dedicated for public use shall be dedicated by the owner of the land at the time the plat is recorded. Such public areas include, but are not limited to: civic sites, parks, rights-of-way for streets or alleys, however the same may be designated; easements for utilities; rights-of-way and easements for drainage purposes; and any other area, however designated. All areas reserved for use by the residents of the subdivision shall be reserved by the owner of the land at the time the plat is recorded. All dedications and reservations shall be perpetual and shall contain: 
a.  The name of the recipient or beneficiary of the dedication or reservation (including successors and assigns); 
b.  The purpose of the dedicated or reserved area; and 
c.  The name of the entity responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the dedicated or reserved area (including successors and assigns). In the event Village is not the recipient or beneficiary of the dedication or reservation, the statement of maintenance responsibility shall include the phrase "without recourse to the Village." 
If so required, certain dedications or reservations shall grant the Village the right but not the obligation to maintain. The dedications and reservations shall be executed by all owners having a record interest in the property being platted. The acceptance on the plat of the dedications or reservations shall be required of any entity to whom a dedication or reservation is made, except the Village. Dedications to the Village shall be accepted according to Sec. 8.17.7.C. All dedications, reservations, and acceptances shall be executed in the same manner in which deeds are required to be executed according to Florida Statutes. 
Although the term "dedication" is meant to imply a public use while the term "reservation" is meant to imply a private use, the terms may inadvertently be used interchangeably. Inadvertent misuse shall not invalidate any Village requirement or plat dedication or reservation. 
2.  Mortgagee's consent and approval. All mortgages along with the mortgagee's consent and approval of the dedication shall be required on all plats where mortgages encumber the land to be platted. The signature(s) of the mortgagee or mortgagees, as the case may be, must be witnessed and the execution must be acknowledged in the same manner as mortgages are required to be witnessed and acknowledged. The form for the mortgagee's consent shall be as prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. 
3.  Certification of surveyor. The Final Plat shall contain the signature, registration number and official seal of the surveyor, certifying that the plat is a true and correct representation of the land surveyed under his responsible direction and supervision and that the survey data compiled and shown on the plat complies with all of the requirements of Chapter 177, Fla. Stat., as amended, and this article. The certification shall also state that permanent reference monuments ("P.R.M.s") have been set in compliance with Chapter 177, Fla. Stat., as amended, and this article. When the permanent control points ("P.C.P.s") are to be installed after recordation, the certification shall also state that the "P.C.P.s" will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor under the guarantees posted for required improvements within the plat. When required improvements have been completed prior to the recording of a plat, the certification shall state that "P.C.P.s" have been set in compliance with the laws of the State of Florida and ordinances of the Village. The form for the surveyor's certificate shall be as prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual or other appropriate documents. 
4.  Village approval. Signing and sealing of the final plat by the Village Engineer shall constitute Village approval of the plat for recordation. The plat shall contain the approval and signature block for the Village Engineer in the form prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. Upon approval of the plat, the Village Engineer shall present the plat to the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording. 
5.  Certification of title. The title sheet of the plat shall contain a title certification. The title certification must be an opinion of an attorney-at-law licensed in Florida, or the certification of an abstractor or a title insurance company licensed in Florida, and shall state that: 
a.  The lands as described and shown on the plat are in the name, and apparent record title is held by the person, persons or organizations executing the dedication; 
b.  All taxes have been paid on said lands as required by Chapter 197.192, Fla. Stat., as amended; 
c.  All mortgages on the land are shown and indicated by their official record book and page number; and 
d.  There are no encumbrances of record on said lands that would prohibit the creation of the proposed subdivision. 
The form for the title certification shall be as prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. 
6.  Preparing Surveyor. The name and address of the natural person who prepared the plat shall be shown on the plat as required by Sec. 695.24, Fla. Stat., as amended, in the form prescribed in the Land Development Forms Manual. 
Sec. 8.20.3. - Special requirements for mobile home, recreational vehicle, and manufactured housing subdivisions. 
    Areas to be subdivided for the purpose of a mobile home, recreational vehicle or manufactured housing development shall also comply with this subsection. Except as to the lots indicated for other purposes, the dedications and reservations on the plat of a mobile home subdivision shall include the following additional provisions or wording equal thereto: "Said owner(s) hereby reserve(s) the lots shown on the plat exclusively for [mobile home, recreational vehicle, or manufactured housing], parking and uses incidental thereto, and, except as to these lots, mobile home or trailer parking is prohibited elsewhere." Areas indicated as parks or playgrounds are to be reserved for the use of the owners of the lots shown on the plat. 
CHAPTER 21. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 8.21.1. - Minimum required improvements for all subdivisions. 
    Except when waived pursuant to Sec. 8.9.3, the improvements set out herein shall be the minimum required improvements for all subdivisions in order to provide the physical improvements necessary to implement certain performance standards, objectives and policies of the Capital Improvements Element and other elements of the Comprehensive Plan. These required improvements shall be installed prior to recordation of the corresponding plat or certified survey unless the developer furnishes a guaranty assuring their installation in accordance with the provisions of this article. Except as provided in this section, the cost of all required improvements shall be guaranteed. 
A.  Access and circulation systems. All streets and required sidewalks, and, when required under Sec. 8.22, parking areas shall be constructed by the developer in accordance with the design and construction requirements of Sec. 8.22. The guarantee for these requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  The cost of installing all street improvements shall be guaranteed. 
2.  The cost of installing parking areas need not be guaranteed since the plat establishes legal access and such areas are required to be installed prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
3.  The cost of installing all sidewalks and paths pursuant to the approved pedestrian circulation system shall be guaranteed, except that the required guarantee may be waived by the Village Engineer for portions of local streets abutting residential lots when the paving, grading and drainage plans contain a note, acceptable to the Village Engineer, stating that such sidewalks or paths will be constructed concurrent with construction of the dwelling unit for such abutting lot. Installation of sidewalks and paths in streets abutting open space, common areas, recreation areas, water management tracts, and other areas which will not have a dwelling unit constructed thereon shall be guaranteed. 
B.  Land preparation. The developer shall grade and fill the land pursuant to Sec. 8.23. 
C.  Stormwater management system. The developer shall install the secondary and tertiary stormwater systems for the development in accordance with Sec. 8.24. On lots intended for building construction, the final grading of each lot, consistent with Sec. 8.24 or the applicable approved grading plan, shall be done in conjunction with and pursuant to the building permit for said construction. 
D.  Wastewater system. The developer shall install the required wastewater collection and/or disposal system for the development in accordance with Sec. 8.25. 
E.  Potable water system. The developer shall install the required potable water distribution system for the development in accordance with Sec. 8.26. 
F.  Utilities. The developer shall satisfy the requirements for underground installation of utility services and for utility site location, when applicable, of Sec. 8.27. 
G.  Fire-rescue services. The developer shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 8.28. The cost of installing the required hydrants may be included in the cost for the central water system. 
H.  Subdivision design and survey requirements. The developer shall install all required permanent control points in accordance with Sec. 8.29.6. When the permanent control points are to be installed after plat recordation, the cost of installing permanent control points shall be guaranteed. 
Sec. 8.21.2. - General design requirements. 
    The design of the required improvements shall be in accordance with acceptable engineering principles. The design and construction of required improvements shall, at a minimum, be in accordance with current, applicable Village or County standards, including those contained in this article. Should the developer elect to provide improvements of a type or design proposed to equal or exceed the minimum requirements, standards for design and construction of such improvements shall be evaluated for adequacy on an individual basis. All such alternatives shall be submitted for approval by the Village Engineer in accordance with Sec. 8.18.3. 
Sec. 8.21.3. - Parks and recreation. 
    The developer shall satisfy all applicable requirements for provision of parks, recreation areas, and recreational facilities to serve residents of a proposed subdivision in accordance with Sec. 17.1. The means of complying with said requirements shall be fully addressed on the Final Subdivision Plan. 
CHAPTER 22. - ACCESS AND CIRCULATION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8.22.1. - Vehicular circulation systems. 
A.  Required improvement to be constructed by developer. All streets, required alleys, and related facilities required to serve the proposed development shall be constructed by the developer. Construction shall consist of, but not be limited to, grading, base preparation, surface course, and drainage. All streets, whether intended for dedication to the Village Council or reservation for private use and maintenance, shall be constructed to the minimum standards established by this article and the Village standards. Additionally, the developer shall construct any parking tracts which provide access to any clustered lots that do not have direct, primary access from a local street or residential access street. Construction of such parking tracts shall be completed prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for any dwelling unit located on a clustered lot served by such parking tract. Construction of the parking tract may be done in conjunction with building construction on the lot the tract is to serve provided, however, that such construction shall be noted on the approved paving, grading and drainage plans in a form acceptable to the Village Engineer. When the parking tract is to be completed in conjunction with building construction, the developer shall execute a certificate of compliance on a form approved by the Building Director prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit or building served by such parking tract. Said certificate of compliance shall state that the parking tract was completed in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 7.2. 
B.  Minimum legal access requirement. There is hereby established a hierarchy of legal access as shown on Chart 8.22-1. Except as provided below, each lot shall abut a street of suitable classification to provide said lot with legal access consistent with the standards set forth in Chart 8.22-2. 
1.  When legal access to a lot is permitted by this Code to be by a common parking area which serves more than one (1) lot, it shall be dimensioned and depicted on the construction plans and reserved on the plat as a "parking tract". Said tract shall be reserved for parking and access purposes to the property owners association having jurisdiction over the parking area and the abutting lots. 
2.  A common driveway may, with prior approval by the Village Engineer, be utilized for legal access to a group of not more than four (4) abutting lots situated adjacent to a curve on a residential access street where said lots would otherwise have no reasonable means of obtaining direct access to or required frontage on the adjacent residential access street. Said driveway shall be delineated and reserved on the applicable plat for purposes of perpetual access to the lots served. 
3.  A common parking lot may be utilized for legal access to individual lots created by subdivision of a shopping center or similar building site developed solely for commercial or industrial uses where all lots within the boundary of such subdivision are served by said access and are subject to recorded shared access, maintenance, and use covenants approved by the Village Attorney pursuant to Sec. 7.15. Where such access is utilized, direct lot access on any street adjacent to the boundary of the subdivision shall be prohibited except at common access points approved for the subdivision as a whole. 
C.  General design considerations. The proposed street layout shall be integrated with the Village's or County's traffic circulation network, and shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Streets shall be classified and designed in accordance with the Traffic Circulation Element of the Comprehensive Plan, Chart 8.22-2, and the Village standards. Consideration shall be given to: 
1.  The need for continuity of existing and planned streets; 
2.  Barriers imposed by topographical conditions and their effect on public convenience or safety; 
3.  The proposed use of the land to be served by such streets; 
4.  The need for continuation of existing local streets in adjoining areas not subdivided; 
5.  The proper projection of non-plan collector and plan collector streets; 
6.  The feasibility of extending the proposed street system to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to promote reasonable development of adjacent lands and to provide continuity of street systems; and 
7.  Discouraging through traffic in the design of local and residential access streets. 
D.  Double frontage lots. Where a lot has two (2) frontage lines, legal access to the lot shall be restricted as follows. 
1.  Residential lots. Where a lot abuts both a street of non-plan collector or higher classification and a local street, access to said lot shall be by the local street. The lot line(s) abutting any street of higher classification than a local street shall be buffered in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 8.29.2. 
2.  Non-residential lots. Where a lot abuts streets of local or higher classification, access to the lot shall be by the street of lower classification, unless otherwise permitted by this Code; provided, however, that access shall not be permitted on a local residential or residential access street as prescribed on Chart 8.22-2. 
E.  Construction in muck or clay areas. Construction in muck or clay areas shall be done in accordance with the Village Standards. 
F.  Street intersections and street jogs. The centerline intersections of local or residential access streets with non-plan or plan collector streets shall be spaced a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet, as measured along the centerline of the collector street. Intersections which warrant traffic signalization shall be spaced a minimum distance of thirteen hundred twenty (1,320) feet, centerline to centerline. Connection of local streets to arterial streets may be permitted by the Village Engineer only where other access is unavailable. Local street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet are prohibited. 
G.  Through and local traffic. Through traffic shall be directed along non-plan collector streets within the subdivision. Local streets shall be laid out to accommodate local or neighborhood traffic and to discourage their use by through traffic. 
H.  Railroads in or abutting subdivisions. When a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way may be required at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land. 
I.  Alleys. Alleys may be allowed in subdivisions when they are necessary, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, for the safe and convenient movement of traffic and pedestrians. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the following: 
1.  Residential areas. Alleys shall be paved ten-feet wide in a minimum twelve-foot right-of-way, with appropriate radii for the intended use. 
2.  Commercial and Industrial areas. Alleys shall be paved eighteen (18) feet wide in a minimum twenty-foot right-of-way, with appropriate radii for the intended use. 
J.  Bridges and culverts. Bridges or culverts shall be provided as necessary to facilitate the proposed vehicle and pedestrian system. The bridge or culvert requirement is subject to approval by the agency having jurisdiction over the facility being crossed. Bridges shall be designed in general accord with the current Department of Transportation practices and shall include planning for utility installation. They shall be reinforced concrete, unless other low maintenance materials are approved by the Village Engineer. Bridges shall have a clear roadway width between curbs two (2) feet in excess of the pavement width in each direction, and shall have sidewalks four (4) feet wide on each side. All bridge structures shall be designed for H-20-S-16-44 loading, incorporating adequate corrosion protection for all metal work and erosion protection for associated shorelines and embankments. 
K.  Street markers. Street markers shall be provided at each intersection in the type, size and location required by the current Village Standards. Street name signs shall carry the street name shown on the plat of record and shall be in compliance with the current Village standards. 
L.  Traffic control devices. The developer shall install traffic control devices and, where warranted, traffic signals on roads within and interfacing with the subdivision. A traffic impact analysis meeting the approval of the Village Engineer shall be used to assist in establishing the need for such signals. 
1.  Pavement markings and/or lane delineators. Pavement markings and/or lane delineators meeting the requirements of the Village or Palm Beach County, as appropriate, shall be installed on all arterial and collector streets. Pavement markings and/or delineators may be required on other streets such as project entrances, as determined by the Village Engineer. 
2.  Design. The design of traffic control devices shall be in accordance with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices and applicable Village and Palm Beach County Standards. 
M.  Pavement widths. Pavement widths for streets shall be in accordance with Chart 8.22-2. 
N.  Dead-end streets. All dead end streets within the Village shall be designed and constructed to end in a cul-de-sac. The Village Engineer may approve an alternate turn around through the DRC process. Cul-de-sacs or other approved means of termini must be designated and constructed to meet the standards of both the Village of Wellington Land Development Regulations and the Palm Beach County Fire Code. Dead-end streets shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length except where natural geographic barriers exist necessitating a greater length. 
O.  Materials and construction. Pavement construction shall consist of, at a minimum, a subgrade, base and wearing surface. All materials and construction shall be in accordance with the current Village standards. 
P.  Shoulders. All unpaved shoulders shall be constructed and grassed in accordance with the Village standards. Grassing, with seed and mulch or with solid sod, as required, shall be completed prior to acknowledgement of completion of the required improvements by the Village Engineer. No time extensions to any contract for the construction of required improvement will be granted on the basis of incomplete shoulder treatment. 
Q.  Street grades. The longitudinal grade of street pavement shall be parallel to the design invert slope of the adjacent roadside drainage swale or gutter. Minimum longitudinal and transverse grades shall be in accordance with Village standards. Street grades shall be shown on the construction plans by indicating the direction and percent of slope. The horizontal distance along the centerline between, and pavement elevation at all points of vertical intersection shall also be shown. 
R.  Non-conforming streets. Streets which do not meet the design and constructions standards of this article and the Village Standards shall not be permitted except where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street or reconstruction of the street in accordance with current standards is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided abuts an existing partial street, the other part of the street may be required to be dedicated and constructed within such tract. A proposed subdivision that includes an existing street which does not conform to the minimum street width requirements of these regulations shall provide for the dedication of additional land for such street along either one (1) or both sides of said street so that the minimum cross-section dimension requirements of these regulations can be met. The Village shall not accept non-conforming streets for ownership or maintenance through the procedures established by this article. 
S.  Limited access easements. Limited access easements shall be required along all non-plan collector streets and all major streets in order to control access to such streets from abutting property. Easements for controlling access to local and residential access streets may be required by the Village Engineer in order to ensure continued control of access to such streets from abutting property. All limited access easements shall be conveyed or dedicated to the Village. 
T.  Street names. Proposed streets which are in alignment with existing named streets should bear the name of the existing street. All street names shall have a suffix and in no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, should the name of the proposed street duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. All proposed street names shall be submitted to the Director of Community Services for approval prior to submittal of the Final Subdivision Plan application. 
U.  Alignment, tangent, deflection, radii. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) streets shall be prohibited. The point of curvature of any local street or residential access street shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet to any intersection, measured along the centerline from the extension of the intersecting street lines. Reverse curves shall be prohibited. Reversals in alignment shall be connected by a straight tangent segment at least fifty (50) feet in length. All intersections shall be designed to provide at least the minimum stopping and turning sight distances, in accordance with criteria prescribed in the most recent edition of the FDOT Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. When the centerline of a local street deflects by more than ten (10) degrees, it shall be curved with a radius adequate to assure safe sight distance and driver comfort. Street pavement return radii shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
V.  Street lighting. If street lighting is installed it shall be maintained by a property owners' association and said association should not be created exclusively for the purpose of maintaining street lighting. Unless street lighting installation conforms to the standards of the requisite utility company, street lights shall be placed outside of rights of way, road tracts, or any other areas designated for road purposes. Streets lighting shall be wired for underground service except where aerial service is permitted pursuant to Sec. 8.7.3 or Sec. 8.27.3. 
W.  Median strips. Median strips which are part of a public street may not be utilized for any purpose other than by the Village or public utility. However a developer or property owner may install landscaping in a median strip or within shoulders in accordance with Sec. 7.3.9 and permitting requirements as established by the Village Engineer pursuant to Palm Beach County Ord. 76-2, as amended, or other applicable codes or requirements. Median strips shall not be developed solely for the purpose of creating decorative entrances to subdivisions served by public streets. 
X.  Subdivision entranceways. Subdivision entranceways consisting of walls, fences, gates, rock piles or other entrance features are not permitted within the median strip or other areas in a public street. Decorative entranceways must be constructed upon plots of land adjacent to a public street in compliance with applicable Village codes and placed so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. 
Y.  Guardhouses. A guardhouse, located so as not to create a traffic hazard, may be constructed in the median of an entrance to a subdivision having only private streets. The minimum setback to a guardhouse shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet, measured from the extension of the intersecting street lines, unless waived by the Village Engineer. Two (2) lanes shall be required on each side of the median in the area of the guardhouse. 
CHART 8.22-1 
CHART OF ACCESS HIERARCHY 
MAJOR STREETS: Streets which constitute the traffic circulation network as contemplated under the Comprehensive Plan. Listed from highest to lowest category:  • EXPRESSWAY  • ARTERIAL  • PLAN COLLECTOR __________MINOR STREETS: Streets which constitute the internal circulation network of a development and which are not classified as a MAJOR STREET. Listed from highest to lowest category:  • NON-PLAN COLLECTOR  • MARGINAL ACCESS  • LOCAL  • RESIDENTIAL ACCESS (private streets only)   • 40 FOOT   • 32 FOOT   • ALLEY (secondary access only)  
Chart 8.22-2 
Chart of Minor Streets 
Minimum Width 
(FT.) Maximum 
Allowable Allowed as 
Legal Access for a) Classification Street (b) Pavement (c) ADT (d) Commercial Residential Non-Plan Collector 80 24 13,100 X Marginal Access 50 24 N/A X X Local Residential (e)  Curb & Gutters 50 20 1,500 X  Swales 60 20 1,500 X Local Commercial 80 24 1,500 X X Residential Access (f)  One Sidewalk 40 20 800 X  No Sidewalk 32 20 150 X  
(a) An "x" under the commercial or residential column indicates the corresponding street classification is allowed as legal access. 
(b) Street width refers to standard right-of-way or private street tract width. 
(c) Pavement width represents two (2) travel lanes of equal width and does not include the additional width of paved shoulder where required. 
(d) Dead end streets of all classifications shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer. 
(e) Streets within a rural subdivision shall be at least sixty (60) feet wide when they are to be constructed without a wearing surface. 
(f) Use is restricted to private streets providing access to townhouse and zero lot line units within a Planned Development District. 
Sec. 8.22.2. - Pedestrian circulation system 
A.  Requirement for sidewalks. Except as provided in this section, sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets. For marginal access streets and streets with a width of less than fifty (50) feet and greater than thirty-two (32) feet, a sidewalk on one (1) side is required. No sidewalk is required in streets with a width of thirty-two (32) feet or less. Required sidewalks shall be constructed by the Developer except as provided in Sec. 8.21.1.A. 
B.  Master pedestrian circulation plan; waiver of requirement. The Development Review Committee may approve a Master Pedestrian Circulation Plan and, upon such approval, may waive, in whole or in part, the requirement for sidewalks within the street of a subdivision, or portion thereof, where it finds that the alternative pedestrian circulation system provides accessibility, convenience, continuity and safety equivalent to or greater than that which would be provided by the required sidewalks. The Master Pedestrian Circulation Plan shall be submitted by the developer for approval concurrently with, and shall be considered part of the approved Final Subdivision Plan. 
1.  Requirements for Master Pedestrian Circulation Plan. An application, the required fee, and the required number of copies of a Master Pedestrian Circulation Plan shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 5.6. for placement on the agenda of the Development Review Committee. The Master Pedestrian Circulation Plan shall be a full-sized reproducible copy of the approved Final Subdivision Plan, and shall be modified, when necessary, to show: 
a.  The location of all lots and the number and type of dwelling units on each lot; 
b.  The classification and width of each street; 
c.  The location, width, and type of each pedestrian path, including those sidewalks and bicycle paths to be constructed within the streets; and 
d.  Locations of all connections to pedestrian systems outside the development. 
2.  Distribution of approved plan. Upon approval of a Master Pedestrian Circulation Plan, a copy of the approved plan shall be forwarded to the Village Engineer, Planning & Zoning Director, Building Director, and Metropolitan Planning Organization. 
C.  Maintenance responsibility of sidewalks and paths. The control, jurisdiction and maintenance obligation of paths not located wholly within a street and of sidewalks within private streets shall be placed with a property owners association or an improvement district. Where such control and maintenance obligation is to be placed with an improvement district, the district shall expressly accept said obligation upon the plat or by a separate instrument filed in the Public Records. 
Sec. 8.22.3. - Reduction of street width. 
    When pedestrian circulation is to be accomplished solely by paths constructed outside the streets, the Development Review Committee may approve a concurrent request by the developer to reduce local street widths from those required pursuant to Sec. 8.22.1.B by no more than eight (8) feet if such reduction would neither reduce the vehicular carrying capacity and safety of the streets nor compromise the safety of pedestrians. 
Sec. 8.22.4. - Crosswalks. 
    When the block length exceeds nine hundred (900) feet, crosswalks between streets may be required where deemed essential by the Village Engineer to provide convenient pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
[Ord. No. 2004-40; September 28, 2004; Sec. 8.22.1.N] 
CHAPTER 23. - CLEARING, EARTHWORK, AND GRADING 

Sec. 8.23.1. - Minimum required improvement. 
    The Developer shall be required to clear all rights-of-way and to make all grades for streets, parking tracts, lots, and other areas proposed to be developed, compatible with on-site tertiary drainage patterns established by the approved drainage design. 
Sec. 8.23.2. - Unsuitable materials. 
    The Developer shall remove and replace unsuitable materials, as determined pursuant to Sec. 8.3.5 and 8.16.6. Replacement of unsuitable materials within streets and proposed public areas shall be satisfactory to and meet with the approval of the Village Engineer, who shall require such soil tests of the backfill and the underlying strata at the cost of the developer as may be deemed necessary to ascertain the extent of required removal, suitability of replacement material, and acceptability of the proposed method of placement. 
CHAPTER 24. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8.24.1. - Minimum required improvement. 
    The following shall be the minimum required improvement for all developments to implement the level of service under the Drainage and Capital Improvements Elements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
A.  Tertiary system. A complete, fully functional tertiary stormwater drainage system, including necessary lot grading, ditches, canals, swales, storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, headwalls, endwalls, culverts, and other appurtenances, shall be required for the positive drainage of storm water runoff in conformance with the approved drainage plans. 
B.  Secondary system. A complete and fully functional secondary stormwater system shall be required in conformance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
C.  Conveyance. A means to convey all stormwater discharge from the development site to at least one (1) point of legal positive outfall shall be provided as an integral part of the required stormwater management system, including construction of all necessary conveyance facilities and establishment of appropriate easements for operation and maintenance of said off-site facilities: 
D.  Continued conveyance. Adequate physical and legal means shall be provided to ensure the continued conveyance of all pre-development flow of surface waters into or through the development site from adjacent lands. Unless otherwise specified by ordinance, regulation, or condition of development approval, such conveyance may be accomplished by incorporating the inflow into the on-site stormwater management system or diverting the inflow to its pre-development location of outflow from the development site, including construction of all necessary conveyance facilities and establishment of appropriate easements to accommodate said inflow. 
E.  Available facilities. All facilities necessary to meet requirements for stormwater treatment, off-site discharge control, and conveyance of existing inflows applicable to that portion of the site under construction must be in place and operational at the time of commencement of construction of required improvements, and shall be maintained by the developer until such time that all required improvements are acknowledged as complete. 
Sec. 8.24.2. - General criteria. 
    Secondary and tertiary stormwater facilities for each subdivision, and for each lot, street, and other development site within the subdivision, shall be designed and constructed so as to: 
A.  Prevention. Prevent flooding and inundation to a degree consistent with levels of protection adopted by the Comprehensive Plan for buildings, streets, lots, parking areas, recreational areas, and open space; 
B.  Runoff rates. Maintain stormwater runoff rates at levels compatible with safe conveyance and/or storage capacities of drainage facilities and established legal limits applicable to receiving waters at the point of discharge; 
C.  Water quality. Mitigate degradation of water quality and contravention of applicable state water quality standards in surface and groundwaters receiving stormwater runoff; 
D.  Conveyance. Provide facilities for conveyance to legal positive outfall of all allowable discharges of stormwater runoff from each development site without causing or contributing to inundation of adjacent lands; 
E.  Continued conveyance. Provide for continued conveyance of pre-development stormwater runoff and surface waters that flow into or through the development site from adjacent lands; 
F.  Operation and Maintenance. Provide for long-term, low maintenance, low cost operation by normal operating and maintenance methods; 
G.  Maintenance of groundwater. Provide for necessary maintenance of the pre-development range of groundwater levels to prevent adverse impacts on land uses and water resources of the development site and adjacent lands; and 
H.  Stormwater reuse. Promote percolation, recharge, and reuse of stormwater. 
Sec. 8.24.3. - Hydrologic design data. 
    Unless otherwise specified by a particular design or performance standard, or approved by the Village Engineer based on justification submitted by the developer's engineer for an individual case, hydraulic and hydrologic data used in design of stormwater management facilities shall be based on: 
A.  Rainfall intensity. Rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curves for FDOT-Zone 10; 
B.  Rainfall hyetographs. Rainfall hyetographs of twenty-four-hour total rainfall as published in South Florida Water Management District Management and Storage of Surface Waters Permit Information Manual -Volume IV; 
C.  Rainfall quantity. Rainfall quantity (or intensity) vs. time distributions in accordance with those published by SFWMD or FDOT, or the SCS - Type II (South Florida Modified) distribution; 
D.  Runoff characteristics. Post-development runoff characteristics, such as slopes, available soil storage, runoff coefficients, ground cover, channelization, and overland flow routing, applicable to the development site and contributory off-site areas after complete development has occurred; 
E.  Tailwater elevation. Maximum operating tailwater elevations at the outlet of each conveyance or discharge facility, determined as the maximum hourly average receiving water surface elevation resulting from a twenty-four-hour duration rainfall with a return period equal to that of the design storm applicable to the facility, or as otherwise established by the agency having operational jurisdiction over the receiving water elevation. 
Sec. 8.24.4. - Design flood elevation determination. 
    Unless otherwise specified by a particular design or performance standard, the one hundred-year flood elevation applicable to a development site shall be determined as the highest of: 
A.  Flood elevation. The base flood elevation specified for the area of development located within zones designated A, AH, or A1-30 as delineated on the appropriate Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM); 
B.  Wind or current driven elevation. The wind or current driven wave elevation specified for the area of development located within zones designated V1-V30 as delineated on the appropriate FIRM; 
C.  Inundation elevation. The inundation elevation obtained by adding the depth of shallow flooding to the area-weighted mean pre-development elevation of the area of development located within zones designated A0 as delineated on the appropriate FIRM; 
D.  One hundred-year inundation elevation. The one hundred-year inundation elevation established by SFWMD within specific sub-areas of the C-51 Canal and C-18 Canal watersheds pursuant to Chapter 40E-41, F.A.C.; or 
E.  Maximum inundation elevation. Where not otherwise established by Chapter 40E-41, F.A.C., or by a Village drainage plan adopted pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan, the maximum inundation elevation resulting from the total on-site storage of runoff produced by the one hundred-year, three-day rainfall event assuming fully developed site conditions and no discharge of surface water from the development site. 
Sec. 8.24.5. - Tertiary stormwater system design and performance. 
    The tertiary system shall consist of all drainage features and facilities such as storm sewerage, swales, gutters, culverts, ditches, erosion protection, and site grading necessary for the immediate drainage and rapid removal of stormwater from building sites, streets, and areas of other land uses subject to damage or disruption by inundation in accordance with acceptable levels of service as established by the Comprehensive Plan. 
A.  Lot and building site drainage. In order to provide for such levels of service, tertiary drainage for lots and buildings shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
1.  The minimum finished floor elevation of the principal building(s) to be constructed on a lot or portion thereof shall be at or above the one hundred-year flood elevation applicable to the building site. 
2.  Site grading immediately adjacent to the perimeter of each building shall be sloped so as to drain away from the structure. 
3.  Each single family residential lot shall be graded to drain along or within its property lines to the street or parking area providing immediate access, unless adequate common drainage facilities in expressed drainage easements with an established maintenance entity are provided to accommodate alternative drainage grading. 
4.  Each residential lot with gross area of one-quarter acre or less shall have a finished grade not lower than the maximum water surface elevation produced by the three-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event in any detention or retention facility receiving stormwater runoff from the lot. 
5.  Each residential lot with a gross area greater than one-quarter acre shall have a finished grade as specified in Sec. 8.24.5.A.4 within twenty (20) feet of any principal building site. The remainder of the lot shall be graded at sufficient elevation to ensure that inundation does not persist for more than eight (8) hours following cessation of the three-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event, unless such area is designated for stormwater management purposes and included in an expressed easement for drainage, floodplain, or the like. 
B.  Minor street drainage. Except as provided in Sec. 8.24.5.C, minor streets shall have tertiary drainage meeting or exceeding the following minimum requirements. 
1.  The minimum edge of pavement elevation of any street segment shall be no lower than two (2) feet above the control elevation of any detention or retention facility receiving runoff from that segment. 
2.  Roadside swales shall conform to applicable Village standards and shall be designed and constructed such that: 
a.  The flowline gradient is at least 0.30 percent, but not greater than 2.5 percent unless approved erosion protection is provided; 
b.  The flowline gradient is equal to or slightly exceeds the longitudinal gradient of adjacent pavement; 
c.  The water surface elevation of swale flow resulting from peak runoff based on the three-year rainfall event shall not exceed the adjacent edge of pavement at any point along the swale run. However, at least one (1) storm sewer inlet or other acceptable discharge facility shall be provided for every six hundred (600) linear feet of swale, and no single swale run shall exceed four hundred (400) feet to an inlet; and 
d.  The soil adjacent to each inlet is protected from local scour by installation of a four-foot wide perimeter apron of sod or concrete. 
3.  Curb and gutter drainage shall conform to applicable Village standards and shall be designed and constructed such that: 
a.  The flowline gradient is at least 0.20 percent; 
b.  The water surface elevation of flow resulting from peak runoff based on the three-year rainfall event shall not exceed the adjacent centerline elevation of pavement at any point. However, at least one (1) storm sewer inlet or other acceptable discharge facility shall be provided for every six hundred (600) linear feet of pavement, and no single gutter run shall exceed four hundred (400) feet to an inlet; and 
c.  Surface flow of runoff across street intersections is prevented by provision of corner inlets and cross drains or by grading of gutters to flow away from the intersection. 
C.  Non-Plan collector street drainage. Non-Plan collector streets shall have tertiary drainage meeting all appropriate requirements for minor streets except that: 
1.  Conveyance capacity of road drainage facilities shall be based on peak runoff resulting from the five-year rainfall event; and 
2.  The water surface elevation of gutter flow resulting from peak runoff based on the five-year rainfall event shall not exceed the adjacent centerline elevation of the outermost travel lane at any point. 
D.  Parking tract and parking area drainage. Each residential parking area serving three or more dwelling units and all non-residential parking areas shall have a finished grade elevation not lower than the maximum water surface elevation produced by the three-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event in any retention, detention, or conveyance facility receiving stormwater runoff from the lot. However, where detention or retention is provided by subsurface exfiltration systems the finished grade shall be no lower than the maximum storage elevation produced by the five-year, twenty-four-hour event. 
E.  Storm sewerage. Storm sewerage shall be designed and constructed so as to meet or exceed the following requirements: 
1.  Where not otherwise specified, all storm sewer system capacity design shall, at a minimum, provide for conveyance of peak inflow from the applicable catchment, based on the three-year rainfall event, such that the hydraulic gradient elevation does not exceed the grate or cover elevation at any inlet or manhole under tailwater conditions pursuant to Sec. 8.24.3.E. 
2.  Inlet times assumed for determining required street drainage system capacity shall not exceed ten (10) minutes, unless adequate justification for use of longer times is submitted. 
3.  Storm sewer pipe shall have a nominal diameter of not less than fifteen (15) inches, or equivalent oval pipe size. 
4.  Storm sewerage shall be designed to attain design flow velocities of not less than two and one-half (2.5) feet per second in all pipe runs serving two (2) or more inlets, nor greater than ten (10) feet per second in any pipe run. 
5.  A suitable access structure such as a manhole, junction box, or inlet must be installed at each junction or change in pipe size, slope, or direction. 
6.  The maximum pipe run between access structures shall be: 
Three hundred (300) feet for fifteen (15) inches and eighteen (18) inches pipe 
Four hundred (400) feet for twenty-four (24) inches - thirty-six (36) inch pipe 
Five hundred (500) feet for forty-two (42) inches and larger pipe. 
7.  All pipe used in the storm sewer system shall be either reinforced concrete or metal, covered by and conforming to current ASTM, AASHTO, or ANSI standard specifications for materials and fabrication of barrel and joints, and shall meet current FDOT standard specifications and policies applicable to the intended use. 
8.  Concrete pipe shall have gasket joints. 
9.  When metal pipe is used beneath pavement within a street, it shall be designed to provide a joint-free installation or, where joint-free installations are not feasible, shall be jointed with a twelve-inch wide band having a mastic or neoprene gasket providing a watertight joint. Other jointing techniques meeting or exceeding these requirements may be used upon submittal to and approval by the Village Engineer. 
10.  Drainage pipe shall be fitted with headwalls, endwalls, inlets and other appropriate terminating and intermediate structures. Structure design shall meet or exceed Village standards. 
Sec. 8.24.6. - Secondary stormwater system design and performance. 
    The secondary system, including all facilities and appurtenant structures for detention, retention, discharge, and conveyance to legal positive outfall, shall be designed and constructed to provide the degree of treatment and control of all stormwater runoff discharged from a development site necessary to meet the requirements of the agency having jurisdiction over receiving waters at each point of legal positive outfall. 
A.  Additional requirements. In addition to requirements expressly stated herein: 
1.  Secondary facilities for development subject to permitting by individual or general permit from South Florida Water Management District pursuant to Chapters 40E-4, 40E-40, or 40E-41, F.A.C., shall meet all requirements for issuance of the applicable permit; and 
2.  Secondary facilities for each residential, commercial, and industrial development exempt from South Florida Water Management District permitting pursuant to Chapter 40E-4, F.A.C., except an individual residential lot containing not more than two (2) dwelling units, shall be designed and constructed on site, or otherwise be provided through authorized connection to off-site secondary facilities, so as to limit the discharge rate at the point of legal positive outfall to not more than the peak runoff rate produced by the site under pre-development conditions for both the three-year, one-hour and the twenty-five-year, seventy-two-hour rainfall events, and either: 
a.  Detain the greater of the first one (1) inch of runoff or the total runoff from the three-year, one-hour rainfall event; or 
b.  Retain the initial portion of runoff in an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of that required to be detained. 
B.  Stormwater runoff. No discharge of stormwater runoff resulting from rainfall up to and including the twenty-five-year, seventy-two-hour event shall take place from a development site except by means of one (1) or more approved discharge structures, other than those existing inflows from off-site for which separate, approved means of conveyance through the site have been provided. 
C.  Conveyance of discharge. Facilities for conveyance of discharge to each point of legal positive outfall shall be designed and constructed with adequate capacity to accommodate the combined flow from the applicable discharge structure(s) and all inflows from other contributory areas resulting from the twenty-five-year, seventy-two-hour rainfall event without overflow to adjacent lands. 
D.  Bulkhead. Except where bulkheading is approved in accordance with Sec. 7.6, each wet detention/retention facility designed for storage of stormwater runoff in an open impoundment shall have: 
1.  Side slopes no steeper than 4(H):1(V) extending to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the design control elevation; 
2.  Side slopes no steeper than 2(H):1(V) from two (2) feet below control elevation to the bottom of the facility; and 
3.  A continuous berm, at least twenty (20) feet wide with a cross-slope no steeper than 8 (H): 1 (V), graded adjacent to the shoreline. Where said berm abuts any residential lot, it shall be graded at an elevation not lower than the maximum design water surface elevation resulting from the three-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event. Along portions of the impoundment where the design water surface is less than forty (40) feet wide at control elevation a berm shall be required on only one (1) side, provided that adequate legal and physical access is established from a minor street to each separate segment of the remaining berm. 
E.  Open impoundments. Dry detention/retention facilities designed for storage in open impoundments shall have side slopes no steeper than 4(H):1(V). 
F.  Exposed side slope. All normally exposed side slopes and maintenance berms of open impoundments shall be fully grassed or otherwise protected from erosion. 
G.  Piped inlet. Each piped inlet to an open impoundment shall have a concrete or sand-cement rip-rap endwall designed and constructed with suitable foundation for installation on the slope or bed of the impoundment as applicable. However, the endwall may be eliminated on inlets to wet detention impoundments where the pipe is installed with the crown at least two (2) feet below the control elevation and with the pipe invert protruding at least two (2) feet beyond the side slope. 
H.  Stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff from pavement, roofs, and unpaved areas of compacted soil surfaces with no significant vegetative cover shall be directed over grassed, pervious soil surfaces as diffused flow prior to entering wet detention/retention facilities or dry detention facilities in order to promote infiltration, particulate deposition, nutrient removal, and interception of debris or other undesirable materials which may overload, pass through, cause nuisance conditions in, or increase maintenance needs of said facilities. 
I.  Control elevation. In order to protect against over drainage of surrounding lands, no control elevation shall be lower than the pre-development average annual mean water table elevation of the detention facility site. 
Sec. 8.24.7. - Drainage and maintenance access rights. 
A.  Secondary system. Each secondary system facility for detention or retention of stormwater runoff in an open impoundment shall be placed entirely within a water management tract dedicated or deeded to an acceptable entity responsible for operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system. 
B.  Lake maintenance easement. Except as otherwise provided pursuant to this article, there is hereby required around each water management tract established for purposes of wet detention or retention in an open impoundment a lake maintenance easement a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and graded at a slope no steeper than 8 (H):1 (V), coinciding with the required maintenance berm. The width of the easement shall be measured from the point at which the grade is not steeper than 8 (H):1 (V). Lake maintenance from an abutting local street may be permitted by the Village Engineer in accordance with good engineering practices. Access to a lake maintenance easement from at least one (1) local street shall be established as part of said easement or, when necessary, by separate expressed easement or other instrument of record. A lake maintenance easement shall be required on only one (1) side of the water body or water management tract where the water surface at control elevation does not exceed forty (40) feet in width; provided, however, that elimination of said easement does not isolate any remaining lake maintenance easement from proper access. If the water surface at the control elevation is greater than forty (40) feet wide, a lake maintenance easement shall be required on both sides. No lake maintenance easement shall be required behind bulkheads; provided, however, an easement not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided behind bulkheads where necessary to provide access to outfalls and, further, that elimination of said portion of lake maintenance easement does not result in isolating any remaining lake maintenance easement from required access. In residential subdivision, lake maintenance easements, including required access, shall be established over common areas only, and shall not encroach residential lots. 
C.  Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the drainage facilities. A minimum width of twelve (12) feet shall be provided for underground storm drainage installations. Where swales are used, the width shall be adequate to accommodate the entire design section between tops of slope. Where canals or ditches are permitted, the width shall be adequate to accommodate drainage facilities plus twenty (20) feet on one (1) side for maintenance purposes. Drainage easements shall be provided to accommodate existing drainage of surface waters from off-site contributory areas. When a subdivision is traversed by existing canals, watercourses, streams, drainage ways or channels, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and of such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for access, maintenance, and floodplain purposes. 
Sec. 8.24.8. - Certificate of compliance for lots. 
    When the finished lot grading required by Secs. 8.24.5.A. and 8.24.5.D is to be completed in conjunction with building construction, prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy the developer shall submit to the Building Director a Certificate of Compliance from a Florida registered professional surveyor, engineer, or landscape architect. Such statement shall be in a form approved by the Building Department and shall state that lot grading was done in accordance with either the approved grading plan for the subdivision or, in the absence of such plan, in accordance with the applicable requirements of Secs. 8.24.5.A. and 8.24.5.D. 
Sec. 8.24.9. - Adoption of Permit Criteria and Best Management Practices Manual for Works in Wellington. 
    Land Development projects and associated increases in the previous coverage alter the hydrologic response of local water sheds and increase stormwater runoff from developed sites. Within Wellington three Chapter 298 drainage districts operate and have water management systems that are implemented by stormwater runoff. In order to provide for proper coordination with the districts and insure that all necessary information is obtained for the proper issuance of land development permits, permits to connect, place structures in or across or make use of lands and facilities of Wellington or any of the drainage districts servicing the lands and residents of Wellington a "Permit Criteria and Best Management Practices Manual for Works in Wellington" shall be adopted or amended by Resolution of the Council and administered by the Growth Management Department and Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 6-8-2010) 
CHAPTER 25. - WASTEWATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8.25.1. - General requirement. 
    Except in rural subdivisions, a sewage collection/transmission system with appropriate service connection to each lot shall be provided for connection to a central sewer system. Such system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) requirements, applicable permits or approvals obtained from the utility responsible for the central sewer system, and the appropriate permits secured from the PBCHD. 
Sec. 8.25.2. - Package treatment plant (on-site). 
    In the absence of a central sewer system, use of a package treatment plant will be allowed only under the following circumstances: 
A.  Service area. The subdivision is located within the service area of a central sewer system and extension of service to the subdivision is in the utility's master plan. 
B.  Operation and abandonment. The package treatment plant will be operated by the utility and abandoned upon extension of the central sewer system. 
C.  Zoning approval. Zoning approval is secured as required in Article 6 of this Code. 
    The package treatment plant must be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of DER and a permits secured from the PBCPHU. 
Sec. 8.25.3. - Individual system. 
    In rural subdivisions, a septic tank system is an acceptable method of sewage disposal for each lot, when permitted by the PBCHD as per the standards prescribed in Sec. 16.1. 
CHAPTER 26. - POTABLE WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8.26.1. - General requirement. 
    Except in rural subdivisions, a potable water distribution system with appropriate service connection to each lot shall be provided for connection to a central water system. Such system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) requirements, applicable permits or approvals obtained from the utility responsible for the central water system, and the appropriate permits secured from the PBCPHU. 
Sec. 8.26.2. - Package treatment plant (on-site). 
    In the absence of a central water system, use of a package treatment plant will be allowed only under the following circumstances: 
A.  Service area. The subdivision is located within the service area of a central water system and extension of service to the subdivision is in the utility's master plan. 
B.  Operation and abandonment. The package treatment plant will be operated by the utility and abandoned upon extension of the central water system. 
C.  Zoning approval. Zoning approval is secured as required in Article 6 of this Code. 
    The package treatment plant must be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of DER and a permits secured from the PBCPHU. 
Sec. 8.26.3. - Individual system. 
    In rural subdivisions, or where otherwise allowed, an individual well system is an acceptable method of providing potable water for each lot, when permitted by the PBCPHU pursuant to the standards prescribed in Sec. 16.2. 
CHAPTER 27. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 8.27.1. - Required improvement. 
    All utilities, including power and light, telephone and telegraph, cable television, wiring to street lights, and gas shall be installed underground, unless such requirement is waived by the Village Engineer, as provided in this section. Utilities shall be constructed in easements as prescribed by this section. The developer shall make arrangements for utilities installation with each person furnishing utility service involved. 
Sec. 8.27.2. - Easements. 
    Utility easements twelve (12) feet wide shall be provided where necessary to accommodate all required utilities across lots and shall have convenient access for maintenance. Where possible easements shall be centered on lot lines. Where possible, utility easements should be provided for underground utilities across the portion(s) of the lot abutting a street or parking area. When a utility easement is to abut a street, the width may be reduced to ten (10) feet. Additional utility easements may be required by the Village when, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, such easements are necessary for continuity of utility service between subdivisions or other development and where necessary for maintenance and service. Utility easements and drainage easements shall not be combined. Where crossings occur, drainage easements shall take precedent. Easements shall be coordinated with requisite utility authorities and shall be provided as prescribed by this article for the installation of underground utilities or relocating existing facilities in conformance with the respective utility authority's rules and regulations. 
Sec. 8.27.3. - Exceptions to underground installation. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all cables, conduits, or wires forming parts of an electrical distribution or communications system, including service lines to individual properties and main distribution feeder electrical lines delivering power to local distribution systems. This section shall not apply to wires, conduits or associated and supporting structures whose exclusive function is to transmit or distribute electricity between subdivisions, generating stations, substations and transmission lines of other utility systems, or perimeter lines located adjacent to a subdivision. 
B.  Standard exception for appurtenant, on the ground facilities. Appurtenances such as transformer boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, service terminals, telephone splice closures, pedestal type telephone terminals or other similar "on the ground" facilities normally used with and as a part of the underground distribution system may be placed above ground, but shall be located so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. 
C.  Exceptions requiring approval of Village Engineer. All other proposals for above-ground installation of utilities shall be submitted to the Village Engineer at the time of the preliminary submittal. Such request shall be made in writing and noted on the construction plans. The Village Engineer shall, at the time of the preliminary review, consider the request and all pertinent information, including but not limited to the construction plans, existing installations, and other information the Village Engineer deems necessary. Any approval or denial pursuant to this subsection shall be set forth in writing, which may be by separate statement to the developer and the developer's engineer or may be part of the Village Engineer's response to the preliminary review. 
D.  Convertibility. Any new service which, by virtue of an approved waiver granted pursuant to this section, is allowed to be supplied by overhead utilities shall be connected to a service panel that is convertible for underground utility service at a future date. 
Sec. 8.27.4. - Installation in streets. 
    After the subgrade for a street has been completed, and before any material is applied, all underground work for the water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, gas mains, telephone, electrical power conduits and appurtenances and any other utility shall be installed completely through the width of the street to the sidewalk area or provisions made so that the street will not be disturbed for utility installation. All underground improvements installed for the purpose of future service connections shall be properly capped and backfilled. 
CHAPTER 28. - FIRE-RESCUE SERVICES 

Sec. 8.28.1. - Required improvement. 
    Fire hydrants shall be provided where central water systems are provided. Fire hydrants shall be provided in the manner prescribed in this section. 
Sec. 8.28.2. - Single family developments of less than five units per acre. 
    Fire hydrants shall be spaced no greater than six hundred (600) feet apart and not more than three hundred (300) feet to the center of any lot in the subdivision and shall be connected to mains no less than six (6) inches in diameter. The system shall provide capability for fire flow of at least seven hundred (700) gallons per minute in addition to a maximum day requirement at pressures of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch. The system shall have the capability of sufficient storage or emergency pumping facilities to such an extent that the minimum fire flow will be maintained for at least four (4) hours or the current recommendations of the insurance services office, whichever is greater. 
Sec. 8.28.3. - Multiple family developments of over five dwelling units per acre, commercial, institutional, industrial or other high daytime or nighttime population density developments. 
    In these areas fire hydrants shall be spaced no greater than five hundred (500) feet apart and the remotest part of any structure shall not be more than three hundred (300) feet from the hydrant and shall be connected to mains no less than six (6) inches in diameter. Fire flow shall be provided at flows not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) gallons per minute in addition to a maximum day requirement at pressures of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square inch. 
Sec. 8.28.4. - Charges for use. 
    Charges made for the use of the fire hydrant or water consumed therefrom when a fire protection authority uses the fire hydrant in the performance of its official duty shall be as regulated by the Public Service Commission. 
CHAPTER 29. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND SURVEY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8.29.1. - Required improvement. 
    The Developer shall install the required buffering and, when recording a plat, shall comply with Sec. 8.29.6. for setting of "P.R.M.s" and "P.C.P.s." 
Sec. 8.29.2. - Buffering. 
    Residential developments shall be buffered and protected from adjacent expressways, arterials and railroad rights-of-way with a five-foot limited access easement, which shall be shown and dedicated on the plat, except where access is provided by means of a marginal access road or where such expressway, arterial or railroad right-of-way abuts a golf course. 
Sec. 8.29.3. - Blocks. 
A.  General considerations. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; 
3.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  Maximum length. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet between intersecting streets. Provided, however, that greater lengths may be approved by the Village Engineer on an individual basis after considering such factors as but not limited to, lot size, the ADT, number of through streets, street layout and other engineering considerations, in accordance with acceptable engineering practices. 
Sec. 8.29.4. - Lots. 
    All lots shall have the area, frontage, width, and depth required by this Code or applicable zoning approval for the prevailing or approved use zone wherein said lots are located. 
A.  Existing structures. When a subdivision is proposed upon land with existing structures that are proposed to be retained, lots are to be designed so as not to cause said existing structures to become nonconforming. 
B.  Lots abutting major streets. When lots are platted abutting a major street or non-Plan collector street, access shall be provided by and limited to local streets or residential access streets. No access from individual lots shall be permitted directly to a major street. 
C.  Through lots. Double frontage lots or through lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Where double frontage lots are developed they shall be buffered as required by this Code. 
Sec. 8.29.5. - Minimum safe sight distance at intersections. 
    Corner lot lines at intersecting street lines shall be the long chord of a twenty-five-foot radius, except that at the intersection of two (2) Thoroughfare Plan streets the radius shall be forty (40) feet. Corner lots shall be designed to facilitate a safe intersection with respect to minimum stopping and turning sight distances in accordance with criteria prescribed in the most recent edition of the FDOT Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. A restriction shall be placed on the plat prohibiting structures or landscaping over thirty (30) inches high within any additional safe sight area required to be established over an individual lot in order to accommodate unusual conditions in the design of the lot or alignment of adjacent streets, said height being measured from the street crown elevation at the intersection. 
Sec. 8.29.6. - Survey requirements. 
A.  Permanent Reference Monuments ("P.R.M.s"). Where monuments occur within street pavement areas, they shall be installed in a typical water valve cover as prescribed in the current Village Standards. 
B.  Permanent Control Points ("P.C.P.s"). Permanent control points shall be installed as follows: 
1.  Installation prior to plat recordation. Where required improvements are constructed prior to recordation, the permanent control points shall be set prior to submission of the Final Plat and certified by the surveyor in accordance with Sec. 8.20.2.O.3. 
2.  Installation after plat recordation. Where required improvements are constructed after recordation, the permanent control points shall be set under the guarantees as required by Sec. 8.21.1.H. In such case, the surveyor's certificate shall comply with Sec. 8.20.2.O. The signing surveyor shall provide the Village Engineer with a copy of the recorded certification required by Chapter 177.091, Fla. Stat., as to his placement of the permanent control points. 
CHAPTER 30. - VARIANCES 
    A variance from the literal or strict enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance may be granted by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board in accordance with the provisions set forth in Sec. 5.7. 
CHAPTER 31. - STANDARD FORMS 

Sec. 8.31.1. - General. 
    The forms and formats contained in the Land Development Forms Manual have been approved as standard by the Village Attorney and the Village Engineer, as appropriate. All specific agreements, guaranties certifications, and other legal documents are subject to the approval of the Village Attorney. Alternate form(s) may be approved for use pursuant to this article, provided the Village Attorney has first approved such alternate form(s) in writing. 
Sec. 8.31.2. - Dedications and reservations. 
    Dedications and reservations shall be specified in accordance with the substantive requirements of Sec. 8.20.2.O, and shall be subject to approval by the Village Attorney prior to plat recordation. 
[Ord. No. 2004-11; July 13, 2004; Sec. 8.22] 
Article 9 - ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 
CHAPTER 3. - WELLFIELD PROTECTION 

Sec. 9.3.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to protect and safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors of the Village by providing criteria for regulating and prohibiting the use, handling, production and storage of certain deleterious substances which may impair present and future public potable water supply wells and wellfields. 
Sec. 9.3.2. - Definitions. 
    Terms in this section shall have the following definitions. Additional terms defined in Article 3 may not apply to this section. 
    Aquifer means a groundwater bearing geologic formation, or formations, that contain enough saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities of water. 
    Closure Permit means that permit required by activities which must cease operation pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 9.3.6. 
    Completed Application means an application which includes all materials and documents which are necessary to support the application and which has been accepted as complete by ERM. 
    Cone of Depression means an area of reduced water levels which results from the withdrawal of groundwater from a point of collective source such as a well, wellfield, de-watering site or quarry. The area, extent and depth of the depression is a function of the hydraulic properties of the aquifer, the pumpage rates and recharge rates. 
    Day means calendar day unless otherwise stated. 
    Designated Public Utility means that public utility which operates a well or wells for which the zones of influence include part or all of the property on which the nonresidential activity is located. 
    Domestic Sludge means a solid waste resulting from sewage, seepage, or food service operations, or any other such waste having similar characteristics. Domestic sludge includes sludge resulting from the treatment of domestic wastewater. 
    Domestic Wastewater means wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions, and the like; sanitary wastewater; sewage. 
    Emergency Hazardous Situation occurs whenever there is an immediate and substantial danger to human health, safety, or welfare or to the environment. 
    Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board means that Board designated by the Village Council to hear and render decisions on appeals of final administrative determinations, and to conduct hearings and render decisions as required under applicable Village or county environmental Ordinances or sections of the Land Development Regulations. 
    ERM means the Palm Beach County Department of Environmental Resources Management. 
    Exfiltration System means any gallery, perforated or "leaky" pipe or similarly designed structure which is used to dispose of untreated stormwater by allowing the routed water to percolate by subsurface discharge directly or indirectly into the groundwater. 
    Facility means main structures, accessory structures and activities which store, handle, use or produce Regulated Substances. Where contiguous facilities exist and such facilities are separate in the nature of the businesses, they shall remain separate under this section. 
    Generic substance list means those general categories of substances set forth in Appendix 9.3.1 attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
    Groundwater means water that fills all the unblocked voids of underlying material below the ground surface, which is the upper limit of saturation, or water which is held in the unsaturated zone by capillarity. 
    Laboratory means a designated area or areas used for testing, research, experimentation, quality control, or prototype construction, but not used for repair or maintenance activities (excluding laboratory equipment), the manufacturing of products for sale, or pilot plant testing. 
    Land Application means the application or disposal of effluents or sludges on, above, or into the surface of the ground through spray irrigation, land spreading, or other methods. 
    Nonresidential activity m eans any activity which occurs in any building, structure or open area which is not used primarily as a private residence or dwelling. 
    One Foot Drawdown Contour means the locus of points around a well or wellfield where the free water elevation is lowered by one (1) foot due to a specified pumping rate of the well or wellfield. 
    Operating Permit means the permit required of certain activities under Sec. 9.3.6. 
    Percolation Pond means an artificial impoundment similar to a holding pond for which the design and operation provides for fluid losses through percolation or seepage. 
    Person means any individual, public or private corporation, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer, owner, lessee, tenant or any other entity whatsoever or any combination of such jointly or severally. 
    Potable Water means water that is intended for drinking, culinary or domestic purposes, subject to compliance with County, State or Federal drinking water standards. 
    Public Utility means any privately-owned, municipally-owned, County-owned, special district-owned, or State-owned system providing water or wastewater service to the public which has at least fifteen-service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily for at least sixty (60) days of the year. 
    Regulated Substances means: 
•  Those deleterious substances or contaminants, including degradation and interaction products which, because of quality, concentration, or physical, chemical (including ignitability, corrosivity, reactiveness and toxicity), or infectious characteristics, radioactivity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, bioaccumulative effect, persistence (non-degradability) in nature, or any other characteristic, may cause significant harm to human health and environment (including surface and groundwater, plants, and animals). 
•  Those substances set forth in, but not limited to, the lists, as amended from time to time, entitled Lists of Hazardous Wastes (40 CFR Part 261, Subpart D), 40 CFR, Part 261, Appendix VIII-Hazardous Constituents, and EPA Designation Reportable Quantities and Notification Requirements for Hazardous Substances Under CERCLA (40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986); provided, however, that this section shall only apply whenever the aggregate sum of all quantities of any one (1) Regulated Substance at a given facility/building at any one (1) time exceeds five (5) gallons where said substance is a liquid, or twenty-five (25) pounds where said substance is a solid. 
The section shall also apply if no single substance exceeds the above reference limits but the aggregate sum of all Regulated Substances present at one (1) facility/building at any one (1) time exceeds one hundred (100) gallons if said substances are liquids, or five hundred (500) pounds if said substances are solids. 
Where Regulated Substances are dissolved in or mixed with other non-Regulated Substances, only the actual quantity of the Regulated Substance present shall be used to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. 
Where a Regulated Substance is a liquid, the total volume of the regulated Substance present in a solution or mixture of said substance with other substances shall be determined by volume percent composition of the Regulated Substance, provided that the solution or mixture containing the Regulated Substance does not itself have any of the characteristics described above in the definition of "Regulated Substances". 
    Retention or detention pond means any pit, pond, or excavation excluding canals of conveyance which creates a body of water by virtue of its connection to groundwater, and which is intended to receive stormwater. 
    Spill means the unpermitted release or escape of a Regulated Substance, irrespective of the quantity thresholds identified in the definition of "Regulated Substances", directly or indirectly to soil, surface waters or groundwaters. 
    Utility means a public utility, power company, or telephone company which serves the general public. 
    Well means any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is to conduct groundwater from a source bed to the surface by pumping, natural flow or other method. 
    Wellfield means an area of land which contains one (1) or more than one (1) well for obtaining water. 
    Zones of Influence means zones delineated by iso-travel time contours and the one (1) foot drawdown contour within cones of depression of wells which obtain water from the unconfined or surficial aquifer system. These zones are calculated, based on the rate of movement of groundwaters in the vicinity of wells at a specified pumping rate. 
    Zones of Influence Maps means aerial photographs at scales determined by ERM showing the location on the ground of the outer limits of Zones of Influence for present and future public potable water supply wells and wellfields permitted for one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day or more. 
Sec. 9.3.3. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this section shall be effective within the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the Village and Palm Beach County, Florida, and shall set restrictions, constraints and prohibitions to protect present and future public potable water supply wells and wellfields from degradation by contamination of deleterious substances. 
A.  Permit and license issuance. No building permit or occupational license for any nonresidential activity shall be issued by Palm Beach County or any city located within Palm Beach County that would allow development or construction in Zones One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4), that is contrary to the restrictions and provisions provided in this section. Permits or occupational licenses issued in violation of this section confirm no right or privilege on the grantee and such invalid permit or licenses will not vest rights. 
B.  Effective date. The requirements and provisions of this section shall apply immediately upon and after March 7, 1988 to all new nonresidential activities. An existing activity is one for which a building permit or occupational license had been issued by the appropriate jurisdiction prior to March 7, 1988 and which had not expired on or before March 7, 1988, or for which a completed building permit or occupational license application had been filed and accepted with the appropriate jurisdiction prior to March 7, 1988. All other activities shall be deemed "new." 
C.  Time of review. Any application for a building permit for a nonresidential development or residential development greater than twenty-five (25) units or nonresidential development subject to review by an advisory planning body and approval by the local governing authority or zoning board of appeals that includes property wholly or partially within Zone One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4), of a wellfield shall include requirements of ERM. These requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Notification by the local governing authority of the location of the property in Zone One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4) and notarized letter from applicant admitting acceptance of notification. Notification shall be prepared by ERM providing details of Zones, prohibitions, and measures required for compliance; or 
2.  Submittal of application to ERM for notification. 
D.  Certification of compliance. Any application submitted for an occupational license for any use within Zone One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4) of an incorporated or unincorporated area shall require certification by ERM that the use meets the applicable requirements of this section. It shall be the duty of each local agency to screen all applications for Zone One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4) occupational licenses. 
E.  Screening of occupational license. It shall be the duty of each local agency to screen all applications for Zone One (1), Two (2), Three (3) or Four (4) occupational licenses. 
F.  Zone One (1) activities. ERM shall provide a list to all local agencies of potentially prohibited operations in Zone One (1). 
G.  Interdepartmental coordination. Copies of building permits for residential uses containing more than twenty-five (25) units, all nonresidential projects, and all occupational licenses issued for Zone One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4) shall be submitted to ERM on a weekly basis, or upon issuance by the appropriate issuing authority. 
Sec. 9.3.4. - Exemptions. 
A.  General exemptions. A general exemption application and an operating permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 9.3.5.C shall be filed with ERM for any nonresidential activity claiming a general exemption to these regulations under Sec. 9.3.4.A.4.a, 9.3.4.A.3.b and 9.3.4.A.3.f. No new nonresidential facilities shall be permitted into Zone One (1) after March 7, 1988 if the new nonresidential facility stores, handles, produces or uses any Regulated Substance. 
1.  Application. A general exemption application shall contain a concise statement detailing the circumstances which the applicant believes would entitle him or her to a general exemption pursuant to Sec. 9.3.4.A. 
2.  Fee. A Fee shall be required as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
3.  Procedure. Within thirty (30) working days of receipt of an application for a general exemption, ERM shall inform the applicant whether such application contains sufficient information for a proper determination to be made. If the application is found to be insufficient, then ERM shall provide to the applicant a written statement by certified mail or hand delivery requesting the additional information required. The applicant shall inform ERM within ten (10) working days of the date of the written statement of intent to either furnish the information or have the application processed as originally submitted. ERM shall have ninety (90) working days from the date that the sufficiency determination was rendered or the date of receipt of additional requested information to act upon the application. 
4.  General exemption activities and criteria. 
a.  Fire, Police, Emergency Medical Services and Village or County Emergency Management Center Facilities. Existing fire, police, emergency medical services and Village or County emergency management center facilities are exempt from the Zone One (1) prohibitions set forth in Sec. 9.3.5.C.1., provided that an operating permit for such uses is obtained pursuant to Sec. 9.3.6.B.1. 
b.  Utilities in Zone One (1). Existing utilities as of July 25, 1991 shall be exempt, except for the maintenance and refueling of vehicles, from the Zone One (1) prohibitions set forth in Sec. 9.3.5.C.1., provided that an operating permit for such uses is obtained pursuant to Sec. 9.3.6.B.1. 
c.  Continuous transit. The transportation of any Regulated Substance through Zones One (1), Two (2), Three (3) or Four (4) shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided that the transporting motor vehicle is in continuous transit. The transport of such substances through existing permanent pipelines is also exempt, provided that the currently authorized use or uses are not changed, and provided that leak detection and monitoring as approved by ERM are employed. No general exemption or operating permit application is required except that an operating permit is required to establish the leak detection and monitoring requirements for said existing pipelines. Any new pipelines constructed through Zones One (1), Two (2) or Three (3) and carrying regulated substances shall be provided with secondary containment, leak detection and monitoring as approved by ERM. 
d.  Vehicular and lawn maintenance fuel and lubricant use. The use in a vehicle or lawn maintenance equipment of any Regulated Substance solely as fuel in that vehicle or equipment fuel tank or as a lubricant in that vehicle or equipment shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. No general exemption or operating permit application is required. 
e.  Application of pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticides. The application of those Regulated Substances used as pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticide in recreation, agriculture, pest control and aquatic weed control activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this section provided that: 
i.  In all Zones, the application is in strict conformity with the use requirement as set forth in the substances EPA registries and as indicated on the containers in which the substances are sold; 
ii.  In all Zones, the application is in strict conformity with the requirements as set forth in Chapter 482 and 487, Fla. Stat., and Chapters 5E-2 and 5E-9, F.A.C.; 
iii.  In all Zones, the application of any of the pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticide shall be noted in the records of the certified operator. Records shall be kept of the date and amount of these substances applied at each location and said records shall be available for inspection at reasonable times by ERM; 
iv.  In Zones One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4), the pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticide shall not be handled during application in a quantity exceeding seven hundred (700) gallons of formulation; and 
v.  All nonresidential applicators of pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticide who apply those substances in Zones One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4) shall obtain an operating permit covering all application operations using these materials under one (1) permit and shall comply with all the requirements of Sec. 9.3.5.C.2.b.i-vi. 
f.  Retail/wholesale sales activities. Retail/wholesale sales establishments in Zone One (1) that store and handle Regulated Substances for resale in their original unopened containers shall be exempt from the prohibition in Zone One (1), provided that those establishments obtain an operating permit pursuant to Sec. 9.3.5.B.1. Items in Secs. 9.3.5.C.2.b.vii and 9.3.5.C.2.b.viii, certification by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida, and a bond or letter of credit as set forth in Sec. 9.3.6.B.4. are not required for facilities in Zones One (1), Two (2) or Three (3), provided no individual container of Regulated Substances exceeds five (5) gallons, if liquid, or twenty-five (25) pounds, if solid. 
g.  Office uses. Offices uses, except for the use of Regulated Substances for the maintenance and cleaning of office buildings, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and no general exemption or operating permit shall be required. 
h.  Construction activities. The activities of constructing, repairing or maintaining any facility or improvement on lands within Zones One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4) shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided that all contractors, subcontractors, laborers, material men and their employees, when using, handling, storing or producing Regulated Substances in Zones One (1), Two (2), Three (3), or Four (4), use those applicable Best Management Practices set forth in Appendix 9.3.3., attached hereto and incorporated herein. No general exemption or operating permit applications are required. 
i.  Activities Subject to Regulation Due to Accumulation of Waste Regulated Substances. Activities in Zone Two (2) or Three (3) which are subject to permitting requirements of the section shall obtain an Operating Permit pursuant to the provisions on Secs. 9.3.5.C.2., 9.3.5.C.2., or 9.3.5.C.3. Items in Secs. 9.3.5.C.2.b.vii and 9.3.5.C.2.b.viii and a bond or letter of credit as set forth in Sec. 9.3.6.b.d are not required, provided that all waste liquid Regulated Substances are secondarily contained according to the conditions described in Sec. 9.3.5.C.2.i. and are removed from the site on a regular schedule by a contracted hauler licensed by EPA or the State of Florida to handle the waste Regulated Substances. The accumulated waste Regulated Substances shall at no time exceed fifty-five (55) gallons if liquid or two hundred twenty (220) pounds if solid, and the accumulation time shall not exceed ninety (90) days. Records of removal and disposal of all waste Regulated Substances through the licensed hauler shall be maintained and made available for Department inspection at reasonable times. In addition, all other Regulated Substances shall not exceed the threshold quantities identified in the definition of "Regulated Substances". Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall subject the facility to the full permitting provisions for the applicable zone. 
B.  Special exemptions. An affected person in Zone One (1), Zone Two (2) may petition the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board for a Special Exemption from the prohibitions and monitoring requirements set out in Secs. 9.3.5.C.1. or 9.3.5.C.2. Special exemptions for Zone One (1) are for existing nonresidential activities only. No new nonresidential activity shall be permitted in Zone One (1) after March 7, 1988 if the new nonresidential activity stores, handles, produces or uses any Regulated Substance. 
1.  Criteria. In order to obtain a special exemption, a person must demonstrate, by a preponderance of competent, substantial evidence, that: 
a.  Special or unusual circumstances and adequate technology exists to isolate the facility or activity from the potable water supply; and 
b.  In granting the special exemption, the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board may prescribe any additional appropriate conditions and safeguards which are necessary to protect the wellfield. 
C.  Procedures. The following special exemption application and review procedures shall apply to activities claiming a special exemption with adequate technology to isolate the facility or activity from the potable water supply and protect the wellfield. 
1.  Application. A special exemption application claiming special or unusual circumstances and adequate protection technology shall be filed with ERM, who shall then promptly notify the Village Attorney's office that such an application has been filed. The application shall be signed by the applicant and Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida. 
2.  Basis for application. The application shall contain a concise statement by the applicant detailing the circumstances that the applicant feels entitles the applicant to special exemption, pursuant to this section. 
3.  Fee. A Fee shall be required as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
4.  Submittal requirements. The application for special exemption shall contain but not be limited to the following elements: 
a.  Operating conditions. A description of the situation at the site requiring isolation from the wellfield, including: 
i.  A list of the Regulated Substances in use at the site; 
ii.  A site plan of the facility including all storage, piping, dispensing, shipping, etc., facilities; 
iii.  What operations at the facility involve Regulated Substances which must be isolated from the wellfields; 
iv.  The location of all operations involving Regulated Substances; 
v.  A sampling and analysis of the groundwater on the site of the activity seeking a special exemption shall be performed to determine if any Regulated Substances are already present which constitute a threat to the water supply; 
vi.  An analysis of the affected well showing whether or not such well is already contaminated by any Regulated Substances and the extent of such contamination; 
vii.  A hydrogeologic assessment of the site which shall address, as a minimum, soil characteristics and ground water levels, directional flow, and quality. 
b.  Technical components. A technical proposal to achieve the required isolation including: 
i.  Components to be used and their individual functions; 
ii.  System tying the components together; 
iii.  A discussion and documentation, such as published technical articles, substantiating the performance and reliability of the components individually and the system as a whole. If the system has not been field tested, a discussion and laboratory test documentation to substantiate the proposed performance and reliability of the system; 
iv.  Details of the specific plans to install the system at the site. 
c.  Testing procedures. If the proposed system does not have a proven history of successful in-field operation, it may still be proposed using proven components. A test plan for the system as installed shall be provided to prove that the proposed system works in the field. 
d.  Backup detection. A technical proposal for backup detection of Regulated Substances that may elude the isolation system and escape to outside a perimeter to be established by ERM. Such proposal shall include emergency measures to be initiated in case of escape of Regulated Substances. 
e.  Criteria for success. Site-specific, system performance criteria shall be proposed to ascertain the success of the system. Such criteria shall include but shall not be limited to: 
i.  Performance; 
ii.  Reliability; 
iii.  Level of maintenance; 
iv.  Level of Sensitivity to Regulated Substances; 
v.  Effect of rain, flood, power failure or other natural disaster. 
f.  Precautions in event of failure. The applicant shall provide information on the on-site availability of substance removal technologies sufficient to remediate any introduction of Regulated Substances into the water table at the site. Where water is removed from on-site wells during the remedial process a plan shall be proposed for the disposal of such water. 
g.  Closure plan. A closure plan shall be provided in the event the system does not prove successful in the testing required by Sec. 9.3.4.C. 
h.  Other information. Any other reasonable information deemed necessary by Department due to site-specific circumstances. 
5.  Sufficiency review. Within thirty (30) working days of receipt of an application for special exemption, ERM shall inform the applicant whether such application contains sufficient information for a proper determination to be made. If the application is found to be insufficient, then ERM shall provide to the applicant a written statement by certified mail or hand delivery requesting the required additional information. The applicant shall inform ERM within ten (10) working days of the date of the written statement of intent to either furnish the information or have the application denied. When the application contains sufficient information for a proper determination to be made, ERM shall notify the Village Attorney's office that all documentation necessary to evaluate the special exemption has been received, and shall promptly transmit all such documentation to the Village Attorney's office. 
6.  Action on application. Any special exemption granted by the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board shall be subject to the applicable conditions which apply to Zones One (1) and Two (2) and any other reasonable and necessary special conditions imposed by the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board. 
    An operating permit shall be issued by ERM with the applicable conditions of Secs. 9.3.5.C.1. and 9.3.5.C.2. and any other reasonable and necessary special conditions imposed by the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board. Such special exemptions shall be subject to revocation or revision by ERM for violation of any condition of said special exemption by first issuing a written notice of intent to revoke or revise (certified mail return receipt requested or hand delivery). Upon revocation or revision, the activity will immediately be subject to the enforcement provisions of this section. 
Sec. 9.3.5. - Zones of Influence. 
A.  Maps. The Zones of Influence Maps, developed as described in Sec. 9.3.5.A.2., are incorporated herein and made a part of this Code. These Maps shall be on file and maintained by ERM. 
1.  Amendments. Any amendments, additions or deletions to said Maps shall be approved by the Village Council following written notice to property owners within the area covered by the amendment, addition, or deletion, and after public hearing. Written notice as provided herein shall be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing on the amendment, addition or deletion. Said maps shall be provided to any agency requesting said maps. 
2.  Basis. The Zones of Influence Maps are based upon travel time contours and one (1) foot drawdown contours. They are generated using a contaminant transport computer model that simulates pollutant movement using particles released around wells in an inverted head/velocity field. The head/velocity field is calculated by using finite difference computer modeling techniques that incorporate the effects of an extensive canal system and Year 2010 build out pumpage rates. The pumping rates were determined by first projecting population figures for the Year 2010 for each public utility service area and multiplying this by a per capita consumption rate determined by the SFWMD and by consultation with public utilities regarding wellfield expansion and development. 
3.  Review. The Zones of Influence Maps shall be reviewed at least on an annual basis. However, failure to conduct said review shall not affect the validity of the existing approved Maps. The basis for updating said Maps may include, but is not limited to, the following. 
a.  Changes in the technical knowledge concerning the applicable aquifer. 
b.  Changes in the pumping rate of wellfields. 
c.  Wellfield reconfiguration. 
d.  Designation of new wellfields. 
4.  Boundaries. The Zones of Influence indicated on the Zones of Influence Maps are as follows: 
a.  Zone One (1). The land area situated between the well(s) and the thirty-day travel time contour. 
b.  Zone Two (2). The land area situated between the thirty (30) day and the two hundred ten-day travel time contours. 
c.  Zone Three (3). The land area situated between the two hundred ten (210) day and the five hundred-day travel time contours. 
d.  Zone Four (4). The land area situated beyond the five hundred-day travel time contour and within the one-foot drawdown contour. 
5.  Interpretation of boundaries. In determining the location of properties and facilities within the zones depicted on the Zones of Influence Maps, the following rules shall apply. 
a.  Properties located wholly within one (1) Zone reflected on the applicable Zones of Influence Maps shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that Zone. 
b.  To that the extent Sec. 9.3.5.C. does not apply, properties having parts lying within more than one (1) Zone as reflected on the applicable Zones of Influence Maps shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the zone in which the part of the property is located. 
c.  Where a travel time contour which delineates the boundary between two (2) Zones of Influence passes through a facility, the entire facility shall be considered to be in the more restrictive zone. 
d.  Where the facility, or portion thereof, is overlapped by Zones of Influence of different wells or wellfields, the stricter zones shall apply. 
6.  Reference raw water analyses to be completed for each well. A reference set of raw water analyses shall be completed for each well for which a Zone of Influence Map has been established. Said analyses shall be completed within one hundred eighty-five (185) days after March 7, 1988, for existing wells. A copy of the analytical report shall be forwarded to ERM and the PBCPHU within fourteen (14) days of completion. For any new well, this set of analyses shall be completed prior to the release of the well into service by the PBCPHU and ERM. Said analyses shall address inorganic priority pollutants as listed in Appendix 9.3.4. and organic pollutants as listed in Chapter 17-550 F.A.C. and as shown in Appendix 9.3.4. The cost shall be borne by the utility. The analytical reports shall be prepared by a State of Florida certified laboratory, certified for the applicable analyses. Samples shall be taken by the State certified laboratory performing the analyses, or its authorized representative. 
B.  Protection of future wellfields. The prohibitions and restrictions set forth in this section and in regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall apply to any sites officially designated by the Village Council as future wellfields. Such prohibitions and restrictions shall become effective upon approval by the Village Council of the Zones of Influence Maps for the designated future wellfield. Prior to final action by the Village Council in designating a future wellfield or approving the Zones of Influence Maps for those wellfields, all property owners and discernable operating activities within the area affected shall receive written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to the proposed public hearing at which the action shall be considered. 
C.  Prohibitions and restrictions. 
1.  Zone one (1). 
a.  Prohibited activities. The use, handling, production, and storage of Regulated Substances associated with nonresidential activities is prohibited in Zone One (1), except as provided under the general exemptions and special exemptions provisions of this section. 
b.  Closure of existing uses. All existing nonresidential activities within Zone One (1) which store, handle, use or produce any Regulated Substances shall cease to do so within one (1) year from the date of notification under this section, except as provided in this section. The owners or operators of such activities within Zone One (1) shall be notified in writing, by certified mail, or hand delivery by May 7, 1988 of the requirement to cease the use, handling, storage, and production of Regulated Substances if the activity is claimed to be exempted under the provisions of this section. 
A closure permit application, general exemption application or a special exemption application prepared and signed by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida shall be submitted to ERM within one hundred twenty (120) days receipt of the notice to cease. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notice, the owner or operator shall file with ERM proof of retention of said engineer or geologist. 
Any nonresidential activity in Zone One (1) which is allowed to continue in accordance with the general exemption or special exemption provisions of this section shall obtain an operating permit, unless expressly not required by this section, which shall indicate the special conditions to be instituted and the dates on which such conditions shall be instituted. Such activities shall comply with all Zone Two (2) requirements unless otherwise provided herein. No expansions, modifications or alterations which would increase the storage, handling, use or production of Regulated Substances shall be permitted in Zone One (1). An owner or operator that is denied a special exemption shall be issued a closure permit as part of the denial process. Any operating permit application required herein shall be filed with the applications for general exemption or special exemption. 
2.  Zone Two (2). 
a.  Prohibited activities. All nonresidential activities within Zone Two (2) which store, handle, use or produce any Regulated Substance are prohibited, unless they qualify as a general exemption, obtain a special exemption, or receive an operating permit from ERM. 
b.  Permit conditions. An operating permit issued to any nonresidential activity within Zone Two (2) that stores, handles, uses or produces any Regulated Substance shall be subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Containment of regulated substances. Leak-proof trays under containers, floor curbing or other containment systems to provide secondary liquid containment shall be installed. The containment shall be of adequate size to handle all spills, leaks, overflows, and precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design and selection of materials shall be sufficient to preclude any Regulated Substance loss to the external environment. Containment systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented. The owner/operator may choose to provide adequate and appropriate liquid collection methods rather than sheltering only after approval of the design by ERM. These requirements shall apply to all areas of use, production, and handling, to all storage areas, to loading and off-loading areas, and to above-ground and underground storage areas. The containment devices and liquid collection systems shall be certified in the operating permit application by the Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida. 
ii.  Emergency collection devices. Vacuum suction devices, absorbent scavenger materials or other devices approved by ERM, shall be present on-site or available within two (2) hours (one hour in Zone One (1)) by contract with a clean up company approved by ERM, in sufficient magnitude so as to control and collect the total quantity of Regulated Substances present. To the degree feasible, emergency containers shall be present and of such capacity as to hold the total quantity of Regulated Substances plus absorbent material. The presence of such emergency collection devices shall be certified in the operating permit application for existing activities. Such certification for new activities shall be provided to ERM prior to the presence of Regulated Substances on the site. Certification shall be provided by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida. 
iii.  Emergency plan. An emergency plan shall be prepared and filed with the operating permit application indicating the procedures which will be followed in the event of spillage of a Regulated Substance so as to control and collect all such spilled material in such a manner as to prevent it from reaching any storm or sanitary drains or the ground. 
iv.  Inspection. A responsible person designated by the permittee who stores, handles, uses or produces the Regulated Substances shall check on every day of operation, for breakage or leakage of any container holding the Regulated Substances. Electronic sensing devices may be employed as part of the inspection process, if approved by ERM, and provided the sensing system is checked daily for malfunctions. The manner of daily inspection shall not necessarily require physical inspection of each container provided the location of the containers can be inspected to a degree which reasonably assures ERM that breakage or leakage can be detected by the inspection. Monitoring records shall be kept and made available to ERM at all reasonable times for examination. 
v.  Proper and adequate maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Procedures shall be established for quarterly, in-house inspection and maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Such procedure shall be in writing; a regular checklist and schedule of maintenance shall be established; and a log shall be kept of inspections and maintenance. Such logs and records shall be available for inspection by ERM. 
vi.  Reporting of spills. Any spill of a Regulated Substance in excess of the non-aggregate quantity thresholds identified in the definition of "Regulated Substance" shall be reported by telephone to PBCPHU and designated public utility within one (1) hour, and to ERM within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery of the spill. Clean-up shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A full written report including the steps taken to contain and clean up the spill shall be submitted to ERM within fifteen (15) days of discovery of the spill. 
vii.  Monitoring for Regulated Substances in the potable water well. Arrangements shall be made with the designated public utility to establish a semi-annual schedule of raw water analysis unless sampling results indicate contamination, in which case ERM shall require an increased sampling schedule. The analysis shall be for all substances which are listed on the operating permit. The analytical reports shall be prepared by a State of Florida certified laboratory, certified for the applicable analyses. It shall be the responsibility of the designated public utility to provide for the sampling and analyses but the cost shall be borne by the permittee or those permittees on a pro-rata basis as to the same substances listed on the permits of those permittees in Zones of Influence of the subject well. Samples shall be taken by the State certified laboratory performing the analyses, or its authorized representative. 
Semi-annual reports prepared by a State of Florida certified laboratory of the analyses for Regulated Substances shall be submitted to ERM for the purpose of determining the presence of Regulated Substances in each well for which a Zone of Influence Map has been established. 
viii.  Monitoring for Regulated Substances in groundwater monitoring wells. Groundwater monitoring well(s) shall be provided at the expense of the permittee in a manner, number and location approved by ERM. Except for existing wells found by ERM to be adequate for this provision, the required well or wells shall be installed by a State of Florida licensed water well contractor. Samples shall be taken by the State certified laboratory performing the analyses, or its authorized representative. Analytical reports prepared by a State of Florida certified laboratory of the quantity present in each monitoring well of the Regulated Substances listed in the activity's operating permit shall be filed at least semi-annually, or more frequently, as determined by ERM, based upon site conditions and operations. 
ix.  Alterations and expansion. ERM shall be notified in writing prior to the expansion, alteration or modification of an activity holding an operating permit. Such expansion, alteration, or modification may result from increased square footage of production or storage capacity, or increased quantities of Regulated Substances, or changes in types of Regulated Substances beyond those square footages, quantities, and types upon which the permit was issued. Should a facility add new Regulated Substances which individually are below the non-aggregate limits identified in the definition of "Regulated Substance", it shall notify ERM on the annual basis of the types and quantities of such substances added and the location of the use, handling, storage, and production of said substances. Any such expansion, alteration or modification shall be in strict conformity with this section. Further, except as provided herein, any existing operating permit shall be amended to reflect the introduction of any new Regulated Substances resulting from the change. However, the introduction of any new Regulated Substance shall not prevent the revocation or revision of any existing operating permit if, in the opinion of ERM, such introduction substantially or materially modifies, alters or affects the conditions upon which the existing operating permit was granted or the ability to remain qualified as a general exemption, if applicable, or to continue to satisfy any conditions that have been imposed as part of a special exemption, if applicable. ERM shall notify the permittee in writing within sixty (60) days of receipt of the permittee's notice that ERM proposes to revoke or revise the permit and stating the grounds therefore. 
x.  Reconstruction after catastrophe. Reconstruction of any portion of a structure or building in which there is any activity subject to the provisions of this regulation which is damaged by fire, vandalism, flood, explosion, collapse, wind, war or other catastrophe shall be in strict conformity with this section. 
xi.  Revocation or revision for spill. Within thirty (30) days of acquiring knowledge of any spill of a Regulated Substance, ERM shall consider revocation or revision of the permit. In consideration of whether to revoke or revise the permit, ERM may consider the intentional nature or the degree of negligence, if any, associated with the spill, the extent to which containment or cleanup is possible, the nature, number and frequency of previous spills by the permittee and the potential degree of harm to the groundwater and surrounding wells due to such spill. 
c.  Permits for existing uses. All existing non-residential activities in Zone Two (2) which use, handle, store, or produce Regulated Substances shall file an application for an operating permit or closure permit within ninety (90) days of the receipt of written notice from ERM. Said permit application shall be prepared and signed by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida, except for Closure or Transfer Permits as provided in Secs. 9.3.6.B.2. or 9.3.9. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notice, the owner or operator shall file with ERM proof of retention of said engineer or geologist. If application is made for an operating permit, such a permit shall be issued or denied within sixty (60) days of the filing of the completed application. If the application for an operating permit is denied, then the activity shall cease within one hundred eighty (180) days of the denial of the operating permit. All Regulated Substances and contaminated containers shall be disposed in a lawful and environmentally sound manner in accordance with applicable state and federal laws, and the activity and environs shall be cleaned up so as to preclude leaching of residual Regulated Substances into the environment. 
3.  Zone three (3). 
a.  Prohibited activities. All nonresidential activities within Zone Three (3) which store, handle, use or produce any Regulated Substance are prohibited, unless they qualify as a general exemption or receive an operating permit from ERM. 
b.  Permit conditions. An operating permit issued to any nonresidential activity within Zone Three (3) that stores, handles, uses or produces any Regulated Substance shall be subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Containment of regulated substances. Leak-proof trays under containers, floor curbing or other containment systems to provide secondary liquid containment shall be installed. The containment shall be of adequate size to handle all spills, leaks, overflows, and precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design and selection of materials shall be sufficient to preclude any Regulated Substance loss to the external environment. Containment systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented. The owner/operator may choose to provide adequate and appropriate liquid collection methods rather than sheltering only after approval of the design by ERM. These requirements shall apply to all areas of use, production, and handling, to all storage areas, to loading and off-loading areas, and to above-ground and underground storage areas. The containment devices and liquid collection systems shall be certified in the operating permit application by the Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida. 
ii.  Emergency plan. An emergency plan shall be prepared and filed with the operating permit application indicating the procedures which will be followed in the event of spillage of a Regulated Substance so as to control and collect all such spilled material in such a manner as to prevent it from reaching any storm or sanitary drains or the ground. 
iii.  Inspection. A responsible person designated by the permittee who stores, handles, uses or produces the Regulated Substances shall check on every day of operation, for breakage or leakage of any container holding the Regulated Substances. Electronic sensing devices may be employed as part of the inspection process, if approved by ERM, and provided the sensing system is checked daily for malfunctions. The manner of daily inspection shall not necessarily require physical inspection of each container provided the location of the containers can be inspected to a degree which reasonably assures ERM that breakage or leakage can be detected by the inspection. Monitoring records shall be kept and made available to ERM at all reasonable times for examination. 
iv.  Proper and adequate regular maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Procedures shall be established for the quarterly in-house inspection and maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Such procedure shall be in writing; a regular checklist and schedule of maintenance shall be established; and a log shall be kept of inspections and maintenance. Such logs and records shall be available for inspection by ERM. 
v.  Reporting of spills. Any spill of a Regulated Substance in excess of the non-aggregate quantity thresholds identified in the definition of "Regulated Substance" shall be reported by telephone to the Palm Beach County Health Unit and designated public utility within one (1) hour, and to ERM within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery of the spill. Clean-up shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A full written report including the steps taken to contain and clean up the spill shall be submitted to ERM within fifteen (15) days of discovery of the spill. 
vi.  Revocation or revision for spill. Within thirty (30) days of acquiring knowledge of any spill of a Regulated Substance, ERM shall consider revocation or revision of the permit to comply with some or all the conditions applicable to Zone Two (2), as set forth in Sec. 9.3.5.A., B., C. and D., in addition to the Zone Three (3) conditions of Sec. 9.3.5.A., B., C. and D. In consideration of whether to revoke or revise the permit, ERM may consider the intentional nature or the degree of negligence, if any, associated with the spill, the extent to which containment or cleanup is possible, the nature, number and frequency of previous spills by the permittee and the potential degree of harm to the groundwater and surrounding wells due to such spill. 
vii.  Permit process. Operating permits required by this section shall be applied for and processed in accordance with Sec. 9.3.5.C.2.3 by filing an application for an operating permit or closure permit within ninety (90) days of the receipt of written notice from ERM. Said permit application shall be prepared and signed by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notice, the owner or operator shall file with ERM proof of retention of said engineer or geologist. If application is made for an operating permit, such a permit shall be issued or denied within sixty (60) days of the filing of the completed application. If the application for an operating permit is denied, then the activity shall cease within one hundred eighty (180) days of the denial of the operating permit. All Regulated Substances and contaminated containers shall be disposed in a lawful and environmentally sound manner in accordance with applicable state and federal laws, and the activity and environs shall be cleaned up so as to preclude leaching of residual Regulated Substances into the environment. 
4.  Zone four (4). 
a.  Prohibited activities. All nonresidential activities within Zone Four (4) which store, handle, use or produce any Regulated Substance are prohibited, unless they qualify as a general exemption or receive an operating permit from ERM. 
b.  Permit conditions. An operating permit issued to any nonresidential activity within Zone Four (4) that stores, handles, uses or produces any Regulated Substance shall be subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Inspection. A responsible person designated by the permittee who stores, handles, uses or produces the Regulated Substances shall check on every day of operation, for breakage or leakage of any container holding the Regulated Substances. Electronic sensing devices may be employed as part of the inspection process, if approved by ERM, and provided the sensing system is checked daily for malfunctions. The manner of daily inspection shall not necessarily require physical inspection of each container provided the location of the containers can be inspected to a degree which reasonably assures ERM that breakage or leakage can be detected by the inspection. Monitoring records shall be kept and made available to ERM at all reasonable times for examination. 
ii.  Reporting of spills. Any spill of a Regulated Substance in excess of the non-aggregate quantity thresholds identified in the definition of "Regulated Substance" shall be reported by telephone to PBCPHU and the designated public utility within one (1) hour, and to ERM within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery of the spill. Clean-up shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A full written report including the steps taken to contain and clean up the spill shall be submitted to ERM within fifteen (15) days of discovery of the spill. 
iii.  Revocation or revision for spill. Within thirty (30) days of acquiring knowledge of any spill of a Regulated Substance, ERM shall consider revocation or revision of the permit to comply with some or all the conditions applicable to Zone Two (2), as set forth in Sec. 9.3.5.C.2., 9.3.5.C.2.i.-vii, in addition to those of Sec. 9.3.5.C.4.b i-ii. In consideration of whether to revoke or revise the permit, ERM may consider the intentional nature or the degree of negligence, if any, associate with the spill, the extent to which containment or cleanup is possible, the nature, number and frequency of previous spills by the permittee and the potential degree of harm to the groundwater and surrounding wells due to such spill. 
iv.  Permit process. Operating permits required by this section shall be applied for and processed by filing an application for an operating permit or closure permit within ninety (90) days of the receipt of written notice from ERM. Said permit application shall be prepared and signed by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida. However, a nonresidential activity in Zone Four (4) is not required to retain an engineer or geologist to prepare the operating permit if the revocation for spill provisions of this section do not apply. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notice, the owner or operator shall file with ERM proof of retention of said engineer or geologist. If application is made for an operating permit, such a permit shall be issued or denied within sixty (60) days of the filing of the completed application. If the application for an operating permit is denied, then the activity shall cease within one hundred eighty (180) days of the denial and an application for a closure permit shall be filed with ERM within one hundred twenty (120) days of the denial of the operating permit. All Regulated Substances and contaminated containers shall be disposed in a lawful and environmental sound manner in accordance with applicable state and federal laws, and the activity and environs shall be cleaned up so as to preclude leaching of residual Regulated Substances into the environment. 
D.  Other requirements and liabilities. A notice to cease, or a permit or exemption issued under this section shall not relieve the owner or operator of the obligation to comply with any other applicable federal, state, regional or local regulation, rule, ordinance or requirement. Nor shall said notice, permit, or exemption relieve any owner or operator of any liability for violation of such regulations, rules, ordinances or requirements. 
E.  Requirements for domestic wastewater and stormwater treatment. 
1.  Sanitary sewer mains. All new or replacement installations of sanitary sewer mains in Zone One (1) or Zone Two (2) of a public drinking water wellfield shall be constructed to force main standards. Standards for installation are shown in Appendix 9.3.5. and shall be enforced by PBCPHU through the permit process. For new wells placed in areas of existing sanitary sewers, the sewers in Zone One (1) and Two (2) must be pressure tested at each joint, grouted and sealed with proof of testing provided to the PBCPHU prior to release of the well for service. 
2.  Exfiltration systems. No new exfiltration system shall be constructed in Zone One (1) or Zone Two (2) of a public drinking water wellfield. 
3.  Retention/detention ponds. New retention or detention ponds located within wellfield zones shall comply with the criteria described in the SFWMD Management and Storage of Surface Waters Permit Information Manual IV. These criteria are enforced through the SFWMD permitting process. 
4.  Percolation ponds. New percolation ponds for domestic wastewater treatment located within wellfield zones shall comply with the requirements for separation from public drinking water wells set forth in Chapters 17-555 and 17-610, F.A.C., and enforced by DER and the PBCPHU. 
5.  Land application of domestic wastewater effluent. Land application of domestic effluent or sludge within wellfield zones shall comply with the requirements for separation from public drinking water wells as set forth in Chapters 17-555, 17-610 and 17-640, FAC and enforced by and DER and the PBCPHU. 
6.  Onsite sewage disposal systems. New onsite sewage disposal systems (septic tanks) located within wellfield zones shall comply with the requirements for maximum sewage loading and separation from public drinking water wells as set forth in Environmental Control Rule I and enforced by the PBCPHU. 
F.  Spill assessment and remediation. Upon discovery of a spill in a wellfield zone, a determination shall be made as to jurisdiction. ERM shall provide notification to the DER and PBCPHU including all available information pertinent to the spill. DER will be responsible for determination if the spill occurrence constitutes a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) regulated material as defined in Chapter 17-730, F.A.C. and Title 40 CFR Part 261. If determination is made that the spill occurrence involves a RCRA regulated material, FDER will assume the role as lead regulatory agency in assessment and remediation. ERM will assume the role as lead agency if determination reveals a non-RCRA regulated substance. 
    Upon issuance of an order by ERM, corrective action shall immediately be initiated by the responsible person. Failure to initiate corrective action shall be a violation of this section. Corrective action shall include any or all of the following: 
1.  Cessation of the discharge and initial control, containment and recovery of free-flowing, floating or standing pollutants; 
2.  Removal and disposal of contaminated soils, sediments, vegetation, containers, recovery and other contaminated materials in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local regulations; 
3.  Assessment of the horizontal and vertical extent of soil, sediment, surface water and groundwater contamination, as well as rate and direction of migration of the contaminants; 
4.  Remediation of contaminated soils, sediments, surface water and groundwater to preclude further migration of unacceptable levels of residual Regulated Substances into or through the surface water or groundwater environment. 
    ERM shall determine necessary, reasonable measures and time frames for corrective action. The corrective action shall be completed to the satisfaction of ERM. Where State or Federal regulations establish procedures or cleanup levels for corrective action for particular discharges, the corrective action shall at a minimum comply with those procedures and cleanup levels. Completion of corrective action as specified by ERM shall not relieve the responsible person or persons of liability under any other applicable Federal, State or local regulation, rule, ordinance or requirement; nor shall it relieve the responsible person or persons of liability for corrective actions for conditions which were previously unknown to ERM, or which resulted from implementation of corrective action as required. 
Sec. 9.3.6. - Wellfield Protection (Operating and Closure Permits). 
    The following provisions provide the requirements and procedures for the issuance of operating and closure permits required by this section. 
A.  General 
1.  An application which satisfies the requirements of the applicable Zone of Influence and Sec. 9.3.6.B for Operating Permits and, if applicable, Sec. 9.3.4.A. for General Exemptions and Sec. 9.3.7.C for Appeals, shall be approved and a permit issued. In addition to the failure to satisfy these requirements, ERM may deny a permit based on repeated violations of this section. 
2.  An operating permit shall remain valid provided the permittee is in compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
3.  Permittees shall be required to pay annual permit renewal fees beginning October 1, 1990. Beginning October 1, 1990, all current and future permittees are subject to an annual permit renewal fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule. Notification to ERM under Sec. 9.3.5.C.2 is due with the renewal fee. 
4.  ERM shall have the right to make inspections of facilities at reasonable times to determine compliance with this section. 
5.  All of the facilities owned and/or operated by one (1) person when these structures and activities are located on contiguous parcels of property even where there are intervening public or private roads, may be covered under one (1) permit. 
B.  Applications 
1.  Operating permit. All applications for operating permits shall, at the minimum, provide the following information. 
a.  A list of all Regulated Substances and substances on the Generic Substance List which are to be stored, handled, used or produced in the nonresidential activity being permitted including their quantities. 
b.  A detailed description of the nonresidential activities that involve the storage, handling, use or production of the Regulated Substances indicating the unit quantities in which the substances are contained or manipulated including lay out plans or drawings of the facility in which the activities will take place. 
c.  A description of the containment, the emergency collection devices, containers and emergency plan that will be employed to comply with the restrictions required for Zone Two (2) and Three (3) as set forth above. For Zone Four (4) this particular documentation will only be required if a permit revision is required pursuant to Sec. 9.3.5.4.b.iii. 
d.  A description of the daily monitoring activities that have been or will be instituted to comply with the restrictions for Zone Two (2), Three (3), and Four (4) as set forth above in Sec. 9.3.5.C.2., 9.3.5.A., B., C. and D. 
e.  A description of the maintenance that will be provided for the containment facility, monitoring system and emergency equipment required to comply with the restrictions of Zone Two (2) and Three (3) as set forth above. For Zone Four (4) this particular documentation will be required if a permit revision is required pursuant to Sec. 9.3.5. 
f.  A description of the groundwater monitoring wells that have been or will be installed, other pertinent well construction information, and the arrangements which have been made or which will be made for certified analyses for specified Regulated Substances. For Zones Three (3) and Four (4) this particular documentation will only be required for a revised operating permit as required under Secs. 9.3.5.C.3 or 9.3.12.C. 
g.  Evidence of arrangements made with the appropriate designated public utility for sampling analysis of the raw water from the potable water well. For Zones Three (3) and Four (4) this particular documentation will only be required for a revised operating permit as required under Secs. 9.3.5.C.3 or 9.3.12.C. 
h.  An agreement to indemnify and hold the Village or Palm Beach County harmless from any and all claims, liabilities, causes of action, or damages arising out of the issuance of the permit. The Village shall provide reasonable notice to the permittee of any such claims. Operating permit that is required to be revised. 
i.  The application for the operating permit shall be filed with ERM within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notification from ERM. 
2.  Closure permit. Closure permit applications shall contain the following information. 
a.  A schedule of events to complete the closure of an activity that does or did store, handle, use, or produce Regulated Substances. As a minimum, the following actions shall be addressed. 
i.  Disposition of all Regulated Substances and contaminated containers. 
ii.  Cleanup of the activity and environs to preclude leaching of unacceptable levels of residual Regulated Substances into the aquifer. 
iii.  Certification by a Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist registered or licensed in the State of Florida that disposal and cleanup have been completed in a technically acceptable manner. The requirement for certification by a Professional Engineer or Geologist may be waived if the applicant provides evidence to ERM that all of the following items are applicable. 
(a)  The entire operation is maintained inside the building(s) of the facility. 
(b)  The standard method of removing operating waste is not by septic tank, sewer mains, or floor drains. 
(c)  There is no evidence of spills permeating floors or environs. 
(d)  There are no outstanding or past notices of violation from any regulatory agency concerned with hazardous, industrial or special waste. 
(e)  There is no evidence of past contamination in the public drinking water well(s) associated with the facility in Zone One (1). 
(f)  The applicant shall provide a sworn statement that disposal and cleanup have been completed in a technically acceptable manner. 
iv.  An appointment for an inspection by ERM. 
v.  An agreement to indemnify and hold the Village or Palm Beach County harmless from any and all claims, liabilities, causes of action, or damages arising out of the issuance of the permit. The Village shall provide reasonable notice to the permittee of any such claims. 
b.  The issue of well reconfiguration shall be evaluated by ERM and the affected public utility as an alternative to a closure permit during the permit application process. Should a utility notify ERM in writing that it intends to reconfigure a wellfield and said configuration no longer subjects a facility to Zone One (1) or Zone Two (2) requirements, ERM may issue an operating permit providing conditions under which said facility may continue to operate. 
c.  The DER and the PBCPHU shall be advised in writing of each closure permit application. 
3.  Permit conditions. The permit conditions shall ensure compliance with all the prohibitions, restrictions, and requirements as set forth in this section. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, monitoring wells, periodic groundwater analysis reports, and compliance schedules. Said conditions may also include requirements in a closure permit to reduce the risk in the interim of contamination of the groundwaters, taking into account cost, likely effectiveness and degree of risk to the groundwater. 
4.  Bond required. Except as provided in Sec. 9.3.6.B.4.e, no permit herein required shall be issued unless there is filed at the time of application, except in the case of an application by a political subdivision or agency of the State, a cash bond, permit bond with a corporate surety, or letter of credit in the amount specified in Appendix 9.3.3. attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
a.  The permittee will operate its nonresidential activities and/or closure of such nonresidential activities, as applicable, in accordance with the conditions and requirements of this section and permits issued hereunder. 
b.  The permittee shall reimburse the Village or Palm Beach County in accordance with Secs. 9.3.6.B.1 for any and all expenses and costs that the Village or Palm Beach County incurs as a result of the permittee failing to comply with the conditions and requirements of this section. 
c.  Before a bond or letter of credit is accepted by ERM as being in compliance with this section, the bond or letter of credit shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney's Office. A corporate bond shall be executed by a corporation authorized to do business in the State of Florida as a Surety. A cash bond shall be deposited with ERM, who shall give receipt therefore. 
d.  The bond or letter of credit required by this section shall be kept in full force and effect for the term of the permit and for one-year after voluntary cessation of activities permitted hereunder, expiration, or revocation of the permit. 
e.  No bond or letter of credit is required for issuance of a permit for the following: 
i.  Pesticide applicators, unless the pest control facility is located in Wellfield Zone One (1), Two (2), or Three (3). 
ii.  Closure of a facility, provided that the conditions listed in Sec. 9.3.6.B for waiver of certification by an engineer or geologist are applicable. 
iii.  A facility in Zone Four (4), unless ERM has determined that a revision of the permit is appropriate under conditions described in Secs. 9.3.5.C.4.b or 9.3.12.C. 
iv.  Retail/wholesale activities which meet the conditions for this exemption set forth in Sec. 9.3.4.A.4.f. 
v.  Activities subject to regulation due to the accumulation of waste Regulated Substances, provided that they comply with the conditions for this exemption set forth in Sec. 9.3.4.A.F.i. 
5.  Clean-up and reimbursement. Any person subject to regulation under this section shall be liable with respect to Regulated Substances emanating on or from the person's property for all costs of removal or remedial action incurred by the Village or Palm Beach County and damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources, including the reasonable cost of assessing such injury, destruction or loss resulting from the release or threatened release of a Regulated Substances as defined in this section. Such removal or remedial action by the Village or Palm Beach County may include, but is not limited to, the prevention of further contamination of groundwater, monitoring, containment, and clean-up or disposal of Regulated Substances resulting from the spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting or dumping of any Regulated Substance or material which creates an emergency hazardous situation or is expected to create an emergency hazardous situation. 
Sec. 9.3.7. - Appeals. 
A.  Matters for review and time for filing. Any person may appeal to the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board for the following reasons. 
1.  To appeal ERM's permit conditions, denial of a permit, general exemption or non-disclosure of a trade secret. 
2.  To appeal an intent to revoke or revise an Operating permit and a General or special exemption. 
3.  To request a special exemption. 
B.  Time for filing. Written petitions for review shall be filed with the Clerk of the Village Attorney's Office within twenty (20) days of the date upon which the petitioner receives notice of ERM's actions with respect to Sec. 9.3.7.A.1. or intended action with respect to Sec. 9.3.7.A.2. Failure to file within such time shall constitute a waiver of the person's right of review by the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board. The filing of a petition authorized by this section shall stay all proceedings with respect to all matters that are contained in the petition until there is a final decision of the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board. 
C.  Review. The decision of the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board shall be final administrative action on behalf of ERM and the Village or Palm Beach County. Any person who is a party to the proceeding before the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board may appeal such action by filing a petition for writ of certiorari in the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit, in and for Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Sec. 9.3.8. - Petition for Compensation. 
    Parties affected by the requirements of this section may petition the Village Council for a determination of the effect of said requirements on those activities and the issue of compensation. 
A.  Filing. A petition for compensation shall be filed with ERM. 
B.  Contents of petition. A petition for compensation shall contain, as applicable, the following. 
1.  A copy of the closure permit required by this section or the required operating permit showing the change in operation. 
a.  An analysis of the need to cease, move, or change operations including a summary of alternatives investigated and estimated costs of those alternatives. 
b.  A list of all previously-issued notices of violation by ERM, Department of Environmental Regulation or the Environmental Protection Agency regarding use of Regulated Substances including a description of any corrective action taken or pending. 
c.  Detailed specification of the amount for which compensation is being requested. 
d.  ERM shall review all petitions for compensation and make recommendations to the Village Council regarding the reasonableness of any amounts requested by the petitioner, whether the requested compensation consists of amounts greater than the cost of any reasonable facility/operation modifications and whether the facility may potentially qualify for a special exemption. Based upon such recommendations, the Village Council may deny such petition. 
C.  Hearing on petition. As soon as practicable after submission of a petition for compensation, but no later than ninety (90) days, by an owner or operator of an activity, the Village Council shall hold a hearing to determine the eligibility of the activity for compensation pursuant to this section. Petitioner shall be given written notice by certified mail or hand delivery of such hearing at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. Formal Rules of Evidence shall not apply to such hearing, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Petitioner and the Village shall have the right to: 
1.  Call and examine witnesses; 
2.  Introduce exhibits; 
3.  Cross-examine witnesses on any relevant matter; 
4.  Rebut the evidence; and 
5.  Be represented by Counsel. 
D.  Review and evaluation criteria. 
1.  Cessation or move. In determining whether the petitioner is eligible for compensation for cessation or moving, the Village Council shall consider: 
a.  Whether a reasonable, cost effective alternative to cessation or moving of operations exists for complying with this section, including reconfiguring of the wellfield. Applicant, with the cooperation of ERM and the affected public utility, shall address the issue of reconfiguration; 
b.  Whether the requirements of this section were the sole reason for cessation of the operation; 
c.  Past environmental record; 
d.  Efforts to mitigate financial impact of this section and these corresponding regulations. 
2.  Change in operations. In deciding whether a petitioner is eligible for compensation for a change in operations, the Village Council shall consider: 
a.  Whether the proposed change is a reasonable, cost effective method for complying with this section; and 
b.  Whether the requirements of this section were the sole reason for the change in the operation. 
E.  Classes of impact for which compensation may be granted. 
1.  Actual reasonable relocation expenses. 
a.  The owner or operator of an affected activity may be paid the actual reasonable cost of a relocation within the Village or Palm Beach County. Such amount to include the cost of: 
i.  dismantling operation; 
ii.  actual moving; 
iii.  reassembling equipment; 
iv.  installation of equipment; 
v.  internal connection of utilities to equipment; 
vi.  minor modification of site to accommodate operation, specifically excluding structural changes to the building or paving and drainage requirements at the site; 
vii.  the additional costs which would have to be incurred to move the activity due to changed circumstances or applicable laws, ordinances or regulations; 
viii.  any losses caused by the necessity of terminating a lease, such compensation not to exceed three (3) months' rent. Landlord and tenant are required to make a bona fide effort to mitigate this loss. This compensation shall be paid to either the landlord or the tenant, to be decided by agreement between the landlord and tenant. 
b.  Documentation of costs. The eligible costs for actual reasonable relocation expenses shall be supported by two (2) itemized and sealed bids and a detailed listing of the claimed items. The amount to be paid shall not exceed the lower of the two (2) bids. In order to verify such information, ERM shall have the right to enter the activity's premises at reasonable times. Such bids and detailed listing of the cost shall be verified by ERM. 
c.  Self-moves. In the case of a self-move the owner of a relocated activity may be paid the lower of two (2) sealed and itemized bids from licensed moving companies based on a detailed listing of the cost. 
2.  Actual reasonable modification of operation expenses. The owner or operator of an affected activity may be paid the actual reasonable expense to modify the operation of the activity in order to comply with this section. Such amount to include cost of: 
a.  modification of machinery; 
b.  dismantling and moving unusable machinery; 
c.  unsalvageable inventory per Sec. 9.3.8.E.3.; 
d.  moving equipment out of a Zone One (1) on the activity's property per Sec. 9.3.8.E.1. 
3.  Actual direct losses of tangible personal property. Actual direct losses of tangible personal property are allowed when a person closes or relocates an activity. Payment may only be made after a diligent effort is made by the owner to sell the item(s) involved. 
a.  If the activity is to be re-established and an item of property to be used therewith is not moved but promptly replaced with a comparable item at the new site, reimbursement shall be either: 
i.  Replacement cost, taking into account depreciation, less the proceeds of the sale. Present value based on accepted standards in the related business community may be substituted for net proceeds of a sale where applicable, or 
ii.  Estimated cost of moving the item to the replacement site within the geographic boundaries of Palm Beach County. 
b.  If a process at the activity is being discontinued or an existing item is not to be replaced in a re-established business, payment will be either: 
i.  The difference between fair market value as evidenced by two (2) written appraisals of the item for continued use at its prior location less its net proceeds at the sale, or 
ii.  The estimated cost of moving the item to the replacement site within the geographic boundaries of Palm Beach County. If a sale is not effected because no offer is received and the item is abandoned, payment for the loss may be its fair market value for continued use at its existing location plus the costs of the attempted sale, less the equipment's salvage value. 
c.  If a sale is not effected because no offer is received and the item is abandoned, payment for the loss may be its fair market value for continued use at its existing location plus the costs of the attempted sale, less the equipment's salvage value. 
4.  In lieu of actual moving expenses. In lieu of the payments described in Secs. 9.3.8.E.1., 9.3. 8.E.2 and 9.3.8.E.3., an owner of a discontinued activity may be eligible to receive a payment equal to seventy-five (75) percent of the estimated reasonable cost of moving the activity within Palm Beach County, except that such payment shall not be more than the lower of two (2) sealed and itemized bids, provided the following requirements are met. 
a.  For the owner of an affected activity to be entitled to this payment, the Village or its designee must determine that the business cannot be relocated without a substantial loss of its existing patronage. Such determination shall be made by the Village or its designee only after consideration of all pertinent circumstances, including but not limited to the following factors. 
i.  The type of business conducted by the displaced activity. 
ii.  The nature of the clientele of the displaced activity. 
iii.  The relative importance of the present location to the displaced activity. 
iv.  The additional costs which would have to be incurred to move the activity due to changed circumstances or applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
b.  For the owner or operator of an affected activity to be entitled to his or her payment, information must be provided to support the estimated moving costs. Such proof shall consist of two (2) sealed bids from licensed moving companies based on a detailed inventory of the items which would be moved. 
5.  Exclusions on moving expenses and losses. The following expenses are considered ineligible for payment as "actual" moving expenses. 
a.  Additional expenses incurred because of moving to and living in a new location including search cost for finding a new dwelling. 
b.  Cost of moving structures, improvements or other real property in which the displaced activity reserved ownership. 
c.  Significant changes in building structure but not including minor electrical, plumbing or carpentry work. 
d.  Cost of improvement to activity made after such activity was on notice that it is affected by this section and would have to cease or alter an operation in Zone One (1). 
e.  Interest on loans to cover moving expenses. 
f.  Loss of goodwill. 
g.  Loss of business or profits or both. 
h.  Loss of trained employees. 
i.  Cost of preparing the petition for compensation. 
6.  Payment and release of obligation. The Village or Palm Beach County shall disperse eighty-five (85) percent of the compensation to be paid as determined by the Village Council in advance of any move or change of operation. The Village or Palm Beach County shall retain fifteen (15) percent of the monies authorized as compensation for economic impact of this section until such time as the affected activity has carried out the procedures outlined in its petition for compensation and provides evidence of such expenditures. Upon receipt of payment of compensation as provided in this section, the recipient shall execute a release in favor of the Village or Palm Beach County from any further obligation to the recipient with regard to the economic impact of this section on the recipient or activity. 
Sec. 9.3.9. - Transfers and Changes in Ownership. 
    In the event, there is a change of ownership, a new lease, or an assignment of a lease, a sublease or any other change in regard to the person conducting the operation regulated, ERM shall be notified and upon payment of the appropriate fee and completion of processing of an application by ERM, the Wellfield Protection operating permit shall be transferred. 
Sec. 9.3.10. - Trade Secrets. 
    ERM shall not disclose any trade secrets of the applicant or permittee that are exempted from such disclosure by Federal or State law; provided, however, the burden shall be on the applicant or permittee to demonstrate entitlement to such nondisclosure. Decisions by ERM as to such entitlement shall be subject to challenge by the applicant or permittee by filing a petition with the Environmental Ordinance Appeals Board pursuant to Appeals provisions of this section. 
Sec. 9.3.11. - Fees. 
A.  Filing fee. All applicants for a wellfield protection operating or closure permit shall pay a non-refundable filing fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule. The fee shall be provided at the time of acceptance of the permit application. 
B.  Wellfield protection operating permit fee. The fee for a wellfield operating permit including any permit obtained pursuant to the general exemptions set forth in Sec. 9.3.4.A. of this section as established by the approved Fee Schedule. The operating fee shall be used to defray the cost of administering this section. 
C.  Closure permit fee. The fee for a closure permit under this regulation shall be one-half (1/2) of the fee for the wellfield protection operating permit as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
D.  Permit transfer fee. The fee for transfer of an operating permit or closure permit shall be as established by the approved Fee Schedule and incorporated herein to defray the cost of processing the transfer. Application for Transfer of Permit is to be made within sixty (60) days of transfer of ownership of the activity. 
E.  Special exemption fee. A Fee shall be required for any person seeking a special exemption as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
F.  General exemption fee. A Fee shall be required for any person seeking a general exemption as established by the approved Fee Schedule. 
G.  Annual permit renewal fee. The fee for annually renewing the permit established by the approved Fee Schedule, shall be used to defray the cost of administering this section. Beginning October 2, 1990, all permittees shall pay an annual permit renewal fee for each permitted facility. 
H.  Late fee. A late fee as established by the approved Fee Schedule, shall be paid to ERM if the application for permit or renewal is late. 
Sec. 9.3.12. - Revocation and Revision of Permits and Exemptions. 
A.  Revocation. Any permit issued under the provisions of this section shall not become vested in the permittee. ERM may revoke any permit issued by it by first issuing a written notice of intent to revoke (certified mail return receipt requested, or hand delivery) if it finds that the permit holder: 
1.  Has failed or refused to comply with any of the provisions of this section, including but not limited to permit conditions and bond requirements of Sec. 9.3.6.B.4. herein; or 
2.  Has submitted false or inaccurate information in this application; or 
3.  Has failed to submit operational reports or other information required by this section; or 
4.  Has refused lawful inspection under Sec. 9.3.6.A.4; or 
5.  Is subject to revocation under Secs. 9.3.5.C.2, 9.3.5.C.3, 9.3.5.C.4, or 9.3.12.C. 
B.  Revision. ERM may revise any permit pursuant to Secs. 9.3.5.C.2, 9.3.5.C.3, or 9.3.5.C.4 first issuing a written notice of intent to revise (certified mail return receipt requested, or hand delivery). 
C.  Spills. In addition to the provisions of Secs. 9.3.5.C.2, 9.3.5.C.3, or 9.3.5.C.4, within thirty (30) days of acquiring knowledge of any spill of a Regulated Substance in a wellfield zone, ERM shall consider revocation or revision of the permit. Upon such consideration, ERM may issue a notice of intent to revoke or revise, which shall be subject to the appeal provisions of this section, or elect not to issue such notice. In consideration of whether to revoke or revise the permit, ERM may consider the intentional nature or degree of negligence, if any, associated with this spill, and the extent to which containment or cleanup is possible, the nature, number and frequency of previous spills by the permittee and the potential degree of harm to the groundwater and surrounding wells due to such spill. 
D.  Revocation of exemptions. For any revocation or revision by ERM of a special exemption or general exemption that requires an operating permit as provided under the terms of this section, ERM shall issue a notice of intent to revoke or revise which shall contain the intent to revoke or revise both the applicable exemption and the accompanying operating permit. 
E.  Notice. The written notice of intent to revoke or revise shall contain the following information. 
1.  The name and address of the permittee, if any, and property owner, if different. 
2.  A description of the facility which is the subject of the proposed revocation or revision. 
3.  Location of the spill, if any. 
4.  Concise explanation and specific reasons for the proposed revocation or revision. 
5.  A statement that "Failure to file a petition with the Clerk of the Board within twenty (20) days after the date upon which permittee receives written notice of the intent to revoke or revise shall render the proposed revocation or revision final and in full force and effect." 
F.  Appeals. Failure of permittee to file a petition in accordance with the appeal provisions of this section shall render the proposed revocation or revision final and in full force and effect. 
G.  Other remedies. Nothing in this section shall preclude or be deemed a condition precedent to ERM seeking a temporary or permanent injunction. 
Sec. 9.3.13. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of this section or any permit, exemption, or approval granted or authorized hereunder shall constitute a violation of this section. Violations of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both fine and imprisonment pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 125.69, Fla. Stat. Such violations may be deemed a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation is committed or continued. In addition to the sanctions contained herein, the Village may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to, administrative action and requests for temporary and permanent injunctions, to enforce the provisions of this section. It is the purpose of this section to provide additional cumulative remedies. 
Sec. 9.3.14. - Palm Beach County Pollution Recovery Trust Fund. 
    Funds collected pursuant to administrative penalties levied by the Groundwater and Natural Resources Protection Board for violations of this section shall be deposited in the Palm Beach County Pollution Recovery Trust Fund. 
Appendix 9.3.1. 
Generic Substances List 
Acid and basic cleaning solutions 
Antifreeze and coolants 
Arsenic and arsenic compounds 
Bleaches, Peroxides 
Brake and transmission fluids 
Brine solution 
Casting and Foundry chemicals 
Caulking agents 
Cleaning solvents 
Corrosion and rust prevention solutions 
Cutting fluids 
Degreasing and parts cleaning solvents 
Disinfectants 
Electroplating solutions 
Explosives 
Fertilizers 
Fire Extinguishing chemicals 
Food processing wastes 
Formaldehyde 
Fuels and additives 
Glues, adhesives and resins 
Greases 
Hazardous waste 
Hydraulic fluid 
Indicators 
Industrial and commercial janitorial supplies 
Industrial process chemicals 
Industrial sludges and still bottoms 
Inks, printing and photocopying chemicals 
Laboratory chemicals 
Liquid storage batteries 
Medical, pharmaceutical, dental, veterinary and hospital solutions 
Mercury and mercury compounds 
Metals finishing solutions 
Oils 
Paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, varnishing and cleaning compounds 
Painting solvents 
PCBs 
Pesticides and herbicides 
Plastic resins, plasticizer and catalysts 
Photo development chemicals 
Poisons 
Polishes 
Pool chemicals 
Processed dust and particulates 
Radioactive sources 
Reagents and standards 
Refrigerants 
Roofing chemicals and sealers 
Sanitizers, disinfectants, bactericides and algaecides 
Soaps, detergents and surfactants 
Solders and fluxes 
Stripping compounds 
Tanning industry chemicals 
Transformer and capacitor oils/fluids 
Waste oils and antifreeze 
Water and wastewater treatment chemicals 
Note: Substances in this table may be adjusted by ERM. 
Appendix 9.3.2. 
Operating and Closure Permit Bonds * 
Zone 1 Zone 2 Zone 3 Cash bond $20,000 $10,000 $5,000 Permit Bond With Corporate Surety $20,000 $10,000 $5,000 Letter of Credit $20,000 $10,000 $5,000  
* Note: Amounts reflected in this table are for each Operating and Closure Permit issued and may be adjusted by ERM. 
Appendix 9.3.3. 
"Best Management Practices" for the Construction Industry 
A.  The general Contractor, or if none, the property owner, shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site conditions may pose particular problems for the handling of any Regulated Substances. For instance, handling Regulated Substances in the proximity of water bodies or wetlands may be improper. 
B.  If any regulated substances are stored on the construction site during the construction process, they shall be stored in a location and manner which will minimize any possible risk of release to the environment. Any storage container of fifty-five (55) gallons, or four hundred forty (440) pounds, or more containing Regulated Substances shall have constructed below it an impervious containment system constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition that will prevent the discharge to the land, groundwaters, or surface waters, of any pollutant which may emanate from said storage container or containers. Each containment system shall be able to contain one hundred fifty (150) percent of the contents of all storage containers above the containment system. 
C.  Each contractor shall familiarize him/herself with the manufacturer's safety data sheet supplied with each material containing a Regulated Substance and shall be familiar with procedures required to contain and clean up any releases of the Regulated Substance. Any tools or equipment necessary to accomplish same shall be available in case of a release. 
D.  Upon completion of construction, all unused and waste Regulated Substances and containment systems shall be removed from the construction site by the responsible contractor and shall be disposed of in a proper manner as prescribed by law. 
Appendix 9.3.4. 
ORGANIC PRIORITY POLLUTANTS 
endrin bromobenzene 
lindane (g-BHC) bromomethane 
methoxychlor chlorobenzene 
toxaphene chloroethane 
2, 4-D p-chlorotoluene 
2, 4, 5-TP chloromethane 
bromodichloromethane dibromomethane 
dibromochloromethane dichlorodifluoromethane 
bromoform 1,1-dichloroethane 
chloroform trans-1, 3-dichloropropene 
cis-1, 2-dichloroethane 
trichloroethene 1, 2-dichloropropane 
tetrachlorethene 1, 3-dichloropropane 
carbon tetrachloride 2, 2-dichloropropane 
vinyl chloride cis-1, 3-dichloropropane 
1, 1, 1-trichloethane ethylbenzene 
1, 2-dichloroethane methylene chloride 
benzene 1, 1, 2-trichloroethane 
ethylene dibromide trichlorofluoromethane 
Appendix 9.3.4. 
p-chlorobenzene 1, 2, 3-trichloropropane 
1, 1-dichloroethene toluene 
styrene m-xylene 
m-dichlorobenzene o-xylene 
o-dichlorobenzene p-xylene 
1, 2-dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP) bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 
1, 1, 1, 2-tetrachloroethane butyl benzyl phthalate 
1, 1, 2, 2-tetrachloroethane di-n-butylphthalate 
methyl tert-butyl-ether (MTBE) diethylphthalate 
1, 1-dichloropropene dimethylphthalate 
o-chlorotoluene 2, 4-dinitrotoluene 
dioctylphthalate 
aldrin hexachlorocyclopentadiene 
chloradane isophorone 
dieldrin 2, 3, 7, 8-tetrachloridibenzo-p-dioxin 
heptachlor 1, 2, 4-trichlorobenzene 
aldicarb PCB-1016 
aldicarb sulfoxide PCB 1221 
aldicarb sulfone PCB-1232 
dalapon PCB-1242 
carbofuran PCB-1248 
oxymyl RCB-1254 
simizine PCB-1260 
atrazine 
picloram 2-chlorophenol 
dinoseb 2-methyl - 4, 6-dinitrophenol 
alachlor phenol 
metolachlor 2, 4, 6-trichlorophenol 
dicamba 
pentachlorophenol 
INORGANIC PRIORITY POLLUTANTS 
Mercury Lead Cadmium Arsenic Chromium Selenium Nickel Cyanide  
Note: Parameters reflected in this table may be adjusted by ERM. 
Appendix 9.3.5. 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SEWER PIPE FITTINGS, COATINGS AND LEAKAGE TESTING 
A.  Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings for Gravity Sewer and Force Main Application. 
1.  Ductile iron pipe shall conform to the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.52-86 unless otherwise noted on the plans. The pipe shall be Class 50 thickness for pipe six (6) in. or larger in size and Class 51 for pipe smaller than six (6) in. Glands for mechanical joints shall be of ductile iron or cast iron. 
2.  Fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10-87. Fittings twelve (12) in. and smaller shall have a 250 psi minimum working pressure. 
3.  Flanged ductile iron pipe shall be Class 53. Flanged ductile iron pipe and fittings shall have threaded flanges, unless otherwise noted on the drawings, and shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C115/A21.15-83. All flanges shall be Class 1560, ANSI B16.5. All above grades flanges shall be flat faced unless they are mating up to existing, or otherwise, specified, raised flanges. All gaskets shall be full faced 1/8" red rubber. 
4.  Joints shall conform to the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11-85. 
B.  Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe (PVC) and Fittings for Gravity and Sewer Force Main Applications: 
1.  Gasketed Joint Pipe. 
a.  Pipe four (4) in. or larger in diameter shall conform to the requirements as set forth in AWWA C900-81 with dimension ration DR 18. Provisions must be made for contraction and expansion at each joint, or with a rubber ring and an integral bell as part of each joint, or by a rubber ring sealed coupling. Clean, reworked material generated from the manufacturer's own pipe production may be used. Fittings shall be cast or ductile iron. Pipe shall have cast iron pipe equivalent outside dimensions. 
b.  Pipe smaller than four (4) in. in diameter shall conform to Commercial Standard CS 256 and ASTM D-22141. Provisions shall be made for contraction and expansion at each joint with a rubber ring, and an integral bell as part of each joint, or by a rubber ring sealed coupling. Pipe shall be made from SOR 21, 200 psi clean, virgin NSF approved Type I, Grade 1 PBC conforming to ASTM D-1784. Clean reworked material generated from the manufacturer's own pipe production may be used. Fittings for pipe smaller than four (4) inch in diameter shall be PVC. 
C.  Coatings: The lining material for ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be virgin polyethylene complying with ANSI/AWWA D1248, compounded with an inert filler and with sufficient carbon black to resist ultraviolet rays during above ground storage of the pipe and fittings. The polyethylene shall be bonded to the interior of the pipe or fitting by heat. 
D.  Leakage Tests: The test shall be of two (2) hour duration. During the test, the pipe being tested shall be maintained at a pressure of not less than one hundred fifty (150) psi. Leakage is defined as the quantity of water added to the pipe being tested during the test period. No pipe installation will be accepted if the leakage exceeds the quantities specified in AWWA C-600, Sec. 4.2. No more than five hundred (500) feet of gravity sewer main or one thousand (1,000) feet of force main shall be tested at one (1) time. 
E.  Manholes: Manholes shall be precast and coated with an inert impervious material. Manhole inlets and outlets shall be tightly sealed around the sewer pipe and coated to prevent leakage. 
Article 10 - IMPACT FEES 
REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY 
Article 11 - ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITY STANDARDS 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 11.1.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure that adequate potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, stormwater management, park, road, public school facilities, mass transit public facilities and fire-rescue are available to accommodate development concurrent with the impact of development on such public facilities, consistent with the LOS standards for those public facilities adopted in the Village's Comprehensive Plan. This objective is accomplished by (1) establishing a management and monitoring system to evaluate and coordinate the timing and provision of the necessary public facilities to service development, and (2) by establishing a regulatory program that ensures that each public facility is available to serve development concurrent with the impacts of development on public facilities. 
Sec. 11.1.2. - Authority. 
    The Village Council has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to Art. VIII, Sec. 1, Fla. Const., Sec. 125.01, et. seq., Fla. Stat., Sec. 163.3161(8), Fla. Stat., and Secs. 163.3177(10)(h) and 163.3202(2)(g), Fla. Stat. 
Sec. 11.1.3. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
A.  Development with Concurrency Exemption Certificate. All development that has received a Concurrency Exemption Certificate or Concurrency Exemption Extension Certificate, pursuant to the "Concurrency Exemption Ordinance of Palm Beach County" and the "Concurrency Exemption Extension Ordinance," 
B.  Alterations and expansion. An alteration or expansion of a development that does not create additional impact on public facilities; 
C.  Accessory buildings. The construction of accessory buildings and structures that does not create additional impact on public facilities; 
D.  Replacement. The replacement of an existing dwelling unit within one (1) year of its removal; and 
E.  Official list. The official list of additional specific permit types as established by the Planning & Zoning Director which are deemed to have no impact on public facilities. 
Sec. 11.1.4. - Unified Planning Area. 
A.  Adoption. If a Unified Planning Area is adopted and implemented by the Village Council, through resolution, such Unified Planning Area shall be considered concurrent through the date specified in the resolution, provided: 
1.  The terms of the resolution adopting and implementing the Unified Planning Area are being met in good faith; and 
2.  The impacts of the Unified Planning Area on the public facilities have been addressed. 
B.  Adequate public facility standards. Adequate public facility standards for the Unified Planning Area shall be maintained providing Secs. A.1 and A.2 have been met, regardless of the impact of subsequently approved or background traffic which may generate traffic in the Unified Planning Area, on affected roadways or other public facilities. 
CHAPTER 2. - LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) STANDARDS 
    The following LOS standards have been adopted in the Comprehensive Plan and shall apply in the review of development pursuant to the procedures and standards of this article. 

Sec. 11.2.1. - LOS for Urban Park and Recreation Facilities. 
    LOS for Urban Park and Recreation Facilities means the following for park lands and facilities. For park lands: 4.37 acres of acquired park land and 1.37 acres of developed park land for each one thousand (1,000) persons for regional park land; 1.25 acres of acquired park land and .67 acres of developed park land for each one thousand (1,000) persons for district park land; .37 acres of acquired park land and .23 acres of developed park land for each one thousand (1,000) persons for community park land; and .35 acres of acquired park land and .23 acres of developed park land for each one thousand (1,000) persons for beach park land. 
    The boundaries for the Urban Park and Recreation Facilities are the boundaries for the Urban Service Area, as identified in the Future Land Use Atlas of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan, these represent interim standards for LOS for Urban Park and Recreation Facilities, which may be modified by the Village. 
    In determining the LOS for Urban Park and Recreation Facilities, park lands and facilities in both the Urban Service Area and Rural Service Area shall be considered. 
    The following applications for development permits are exempt from the LOS for Urban Park and Recreation Facilities: (1) alterations or expansions of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling units are created; (2) construction of accessory buildings or structures that will not create additional dwelling units; (3) the replacement of an existing dwelling unit, where no additional dwelling units are created; (4) the issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable park impact assessment fees have previously been paid; and (5) all non-residential development. 
Sec. 11.2.2. - LOS for Rural Park and Recreation Facilities. 
    LOS for Rural Park and Recreation Facilities means the following for park lands and facilities. For park lands: 4.37 acres of acquired park land and 1.37 acres of developed park land for each one thousand (1,000) persons for regional park land; 1.25 acres of acquired park land and .67 acres of developed park land for each one thousand (1,000) persons for district park land; and .35 acres of acquired park land and .23 acres of developed park land for each 1,000 persons for beach park land. 
    The boundaries for the Rural Park and Recreation Facilities are the boundaries for the Rural Service Area, as identified in the Future Land Use Atlas of the Comprehensive Plan. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan, those represent interim standards for LOS for Rural Park and Recreation Facilities, which may be modified by the Village. In determining the LOS for Rural Park and Recreation Facilities, park lands and facilities in both the Rural Service Area and Urban Service Area shall be considered. 
    The following applications for development permits are exempt from the LOS for Rural Park and Recreation Facilities: (1) alterations or expansions of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling units are created; (2) construction of accessory buildings or structures that will not create additional dwelling units; (3) replacement of an existing dwelling unit, where no additional dwelling units are created; (4) issuance of a tie-down permit on a mobile home on which applicable park impact assessment fees have previously been paid; and (5) all non-residential development. 
Sec. 11.2.3. - LOS for Rural Potable Water Facilities. 
    LOS for Rural Potable Water Facilities means an on site potable water well permitted and operated in conformance with State and the Village or Palm Beach County regulations. There shall be no minimum LOS for fire flow for Rural Potable Water Facilities. The Rural Service Area for Rural Potable Water Facilities is identified in the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 11.2.4. - LOS for Road Facilities. 
    LOS for Road Facilities means the LOS for Road Facilities as set forth in Article 15, Traffic Performance Standards. 
Sec. 11.2.5. - LOS for Mass Transit Facilities. 
    LOS for Mass Transit Facilities means that development orders shall not cause Palm Beach County's total mass transit capacity to fall below that which can accommodate three (3) quarters of one (1) percent (75%) of the total County transportation trips. 
Sec. 11.2.6. - LOS for Rural Sanitary Sewer Facilities. 
    LOS for Rural Sanitary Sewer Facilities means a septic tank permitted and operated in conformance with State and County regulations as administered by the PBCPHU. 
Sec. 11.2.7. - LOS for Solid Waste Facilities. 
    LOS for Solid Waste Facilities means sufficient capital solid waste disposal facilities to dispose of 7.1 pounds of solid waste per capita per day. 
Sec. 11.2.8. - LOS for Fire-Rescue Facilities. 
    LOS for Fire-Rescue Facilities means that all properties in the Coastal Municipal Services Taxing Unit(s) shall be provided fire services that have an aggregate response time of five (5) minutes. 
Sec. 11.2.9. - LOS for Drainage Facilities. 
    LOS for Drainage Facilities means that a legal right to drain exists to convey stormwater discharged from each development site to a point of legal positive outfall. 
Sec. 11.2.10. - LOS for Public Schools. 
    LOS for Public Schools means the following for public school facilities: To ensure the capacity of schools is sufficient to support student growth at the adopted level of services for each year of the five-year planning period and through the long-term planning period for each CSA, the School Concurrency Agreement established LOS as set forth below. The actual LOS for each type of school in each CSA shall be established each year in each CSA by the first student count of the second semester. 
A.  Tiered levels of service shall be in force pursuant to the Tiered Level of Service Table in the Public School Facilities Element until August 1, 2004. Individual schools of each type may exceed the tiered LOS during the period in which tiered LOS are in effect, provided that the CSA's tiered LOS is not exceeded. However, each individual school's LOS which exceeds the tiered LOS, during the time that the tiered LOS is in effect, shall not exceed the utilization standards for that school type as shown in the Maximum Utilization Table of the Public School Facilities Element. During the time that the tiered level of service standard is in effect, the School District shall initiate necessary program and/or boundary adjustments so that the tiered LOS is not exceeded in each CSA. 
B.  After August 1, 2004, the following LOS standards shall be established for all schools of each type within each CSA and each individual school: (1) one hundred ten (110) percent of capacity (utilization) as determined by the Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH); or (2) a higher LOS up to one hundred twenty (120) percent of FISH capacity (utilization/LOS) for individual schools subject to the results of a School Capacity Study (SCS) undertaken by the Technical Advisory Group (TAG), in consultation with all local governments with jurisdiction within the CSA and the School District to determine if a particular school can operate in excess of one hundred (100) percent capacity. The SCS shall be required if a school in the first student count of the second semester reaches one hundred eight (108) percent or above FISH capacity, once the level of service above is achieved. 
C.  School concurrency shall be measured and applied on the basis of twenty-one (21) CSAs as described in the Public School Facilities Element. In determining whether capacity is available, the School District shall consider any new capacity which will be in place or under actual construction in the first three (3) years of the School District Five-Year Capital Facilities Plan. In determining whether capacity is available, the School District shall consider adjacent CSA capacity as specified in the School Concurrency Agreement. 
D.  These standards shall not apply to proposed new residential development until the commencement of the School Concurrency Program as specified in Article V, Section A of the Agreement. 
E.  The following applications for development orders are exempted from the LOS for public school facilities: 
1.  Proposed new residential development whenever and wherever the School Concurrency Program is suspended pursuant to the terms of the Agreement 
2.  In the event termination or suspension of the School Concurrency Program occurs as set forth in the School Concurrency Agreement. 
3.  Single-family lots of record, existing as such at the time this Ordinance is adopted. 
4.  Any residential development that received final approval of a site-specific development order prior to the commencement of the School Concurrency Program, as specified in Article V, Section A of the School Concurrency Agreement, is considered vested for that which was previously approved and shall not be considered as proposed new residential development for purposes of school concurrency. Any residential development which is exempt from school concurrency under the Village's concurrency regulations shall not be considered as new residential development for purposes of school concurrency. 
5.  Any new residential development that has filed a complete application prior to the commencement of the School Concurrency Program, as specified in Article V, Section A of the School Concurrency Agreement. 
6.  Any residential development which is restricted to elderly and meets the requirements under the Federal Fair Housing Act to be designated as an adults-only community. 
7.  Any amendment to any previously approved residential development which does not increase the density of the development. 
8.  Any previously approved residential development or any other previously approved development with a residential component located within any existing "Transportation Concurrency Exception Area," as defined in Section 163.3180(5), Florida Statutes. 
CHAPTER 3. - MONITORING PROGRAM 

Sec. 11.3.1. - General. 
    In order to ensure that adequate potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, park and recreation, road, mass transit, public school facilities, and fire-rescue public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development on public facilities, the Village of Wellington shall establish the following management and monitoring practices. Their purpose is to evaluate and coordinate the timing, provision, and funding of potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, park and recreation, road, mass transit, public school facilities, and fire-rescue public facilities so that (1) they are being adequately planned for and funded to maintain the LOS for public facilities and (2) to evaluate the capacity of the public facilities for use in the regulatory program to ensure (a) there are no development orders issued unless there are adequate public facilities available to serve the development concurrent with the impacts of development on the public facilities, or (b) no development orders are issued unless they are conditioned on the availability of public facilities to serve the development concurrent with the impacts of development on public facilities. 
Sec. 11.3.2. - Annual Public Facilities Update Report (AUR). 
    By March 1 of each year, the Director of Community Services shall complete and submit to the Office of Management and Budget (OFMB) an Annual Public Facilities Update Report (hereinafter "AUR"). The AUR shall (a) determine the existing conditions of all potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, park, road, mass transit, and fire-rescue public facilities, (b) determine and summarize the available capacity of these public facilities based on their LOS, and (c) forecast the capacity of existing and planned capital improvements identified in the five (5) year capital improvement schedule for each of the five (5) succeeding years. The forecasts shall be based on the most recently updated schedule of capital improvements for each public facility. The AUR shall also revise relevant population projections. Specifically, the AUR shall include: 
A.  Development exempted. A summary of development exempted pursuant to Sec. 11.1.3. 
B.  Activity. A summary of development activity. 
C.  Evaluation of public facilities. An evaluation of public facilities (potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, park and recreation, road, mass transit, and fire-rescue facilities) indicating: 
1.  the capacity available for each at the beginning of the reporting period and the end of the reporting period; 
2.  an evaluation of the LOS for each public facility; and 
3.  a forecast of the capacity for each public facility based upon the most recent updated schedule of capital improvements in the CIE. 
Sec. 11.3.3. - Recommendations on amendments to CIE and annual budget. 
    Based upon analysis of the AUR, OFMB shall propose to the Village Council each year, any necessary amendments to the CIE, and any proposed amendments to the Village's annual budget for public facilities. 
CHAPTER 4. - REVIEW FOR ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES 

Sec. 11.4.1. - General. 
    In order to ensure that adequate potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, park and recreation, road, mass transit, public school facilities, and fire-rescue public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development on each public facility, the Village of Wellington shall establish the following development review procedures to ensure there is no development order issued unless there are adequate public facilities available to serve the proposed development, or that the development order is conditioned on the availability of public facilities to serve the development concurrent with the impacts of development on the public facilities. 
A.  Preliminary development order. No application for a development permit, except for a variance shall be approved until receipt of either a Concurrency Exemption Determination, a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions, or a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or an Adequate Public Facilities Determination. 
B.  Final development order. No application for a development permit, except one (1) for a variance shall be approved without receipt of either a Concurrency Exemption, a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions. 
Sec. 11.4.2. - Procedure for review of Adequate Public Facilities Determination. 
A.  Submission of application. An application for an Adequate Public Facilities Determination shall be submitted at any time during the year, to the Planning & Zoning Director in a form established by the Planning & Zoning Director and made available to the public. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Village Council from time to time for the filing and processing of each application. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
B.  Determination of sufficiency. The Planning & Zoning Director shall initiate review of an application for an Adequate Public Facilities Determination upon receipt of the application, and within fifteen (15) working days determine whether the application is sufficient and includes data necessary to evaluate the application. 
1.  If it is determined that the application is not sufficient, written notice shall be sent to the applicant specifying the deficiencies. The Planning & Zoning Director shall take no further action on the application unless the deficiencies are remedied. If the deficiencies are not remedied within twenty (20) working days of written notification, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
2.  If the application is determined sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the application's sufficiency, and that the application is ready for review pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
C.  Determination of review. The Planning & Zoning Director shall also determine whether all Service Providers are required to review the application. If the Planning & Zoning Director determines that two (2) or less public facilities are impacted by the proposed development, the application may be eligible for a reduced project concurrency review fee. The Planning & Zoning Director, where appropriate, shall consult with the Service Providers in making such determination. 
D.  Review and recommendation of Village & County Departments and Service Providers. Within three (3) working days after the Planning & Zoning Director determines the application is sufficient, the application shall be forwarded to the Village of Wellington and County Departments and Service Providers for review. Within fifteen (15) working days of its receipt, the County Departments and Service Providers shall file a statement with the Planning & Zoning Director as to whether or not adequate public facilities are available, pursuant to the standards of Sec. F. 
E.  Decision or Planning & Zoning Director. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of a statement from all of the appropriate Village and County Departments and Service Providers regarding an application for an Adequate Public Facilities Determination, the Planning & Zoning Director shall review the statements and the application, and determine if it complies with all the public facility component standards of Sec. F. If the application complies with all of the public facility component standards in Sec. F, the Planning & Zoning Director shall issue an Adequate Public Facilities Determination. 
F.  Standards for review of application for Adequate Public Facilities Determination. The following standards shall be used in deciding whether to issue or deny an Adequate Public Facilities Determination. Before issuance of an Adequate Public Facilities Determination, the application shall fulfill the standards for each public facility component (potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, parks and recreation, roads, mass transit, and fire-rescue facilities). 
1.  Potable water facilities. The potable water component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Potable water facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities; 
b.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are under construction and bonded; 
c.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract; or 
d.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are included in the Village's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget. 
2.  Sanitary sewer facilities. The sanitary sewer component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Sanitary sewer facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities; 
b.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities am under construction and bonded; 
c.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract; or 
d.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities are included in the Village's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget. 
3.  Solid waste facilities. The solid waste component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Solid waste facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities; 
b.  The solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LDS for solid waste facilities are under construction and bonded; 
c.  The solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract; or 
d.  The solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities are included in the Village's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget. 
4.  Drainage facilities. The drainage component shall be approved if the proposed development has a legal right to convey drainage to a point of legal positive outfall. 
5.  Park and recreation facilities. The park and recreation component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Park and recreation facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities; 
b.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities are under construction and bonded; 
c.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract; or 
d.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities are included in the Village's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget. 
6.  Road facilities. The road component shall be approved if the proposed development complies with Sec. 15, Traffic Performance Standards. 
7.  Mass transit facilities. The mass transit component shall be approved if the travel demand of the proposed development does not deteriorate the LOS for mass transit facilities below the adopted LOS for mass transit facilities. 
8.  Fire-rescue facilities. The fire-rescue component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Fire-rescue facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities; 
b.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities are under construction; 
c.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract; or 
d.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities are included in the Village's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget. 
9.  Public School Facilities. Public school facilities shall be approved once the following conditions are met: 
a.  At the time of and in conjunction with the application for an adequate public facilities review in accordance with the Village of Wellington's Land Development Regulations, the applicant for a new residential development shall submit to the Village of Wellington a request for a school concurrency determination. 
i.  The Village shall review the application for completeness and require the applicant to submit the school concurrency application to the School District within ten (10) days of finding the application complete. 
ii.  The School Concurrency application shall contain the following information: location of the development; the build-out time frame of the development; and the number, type, and size of all the residential units anticipated to be occupied each calendar year. 
iii.  The School District shall review the application in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section F of the School Concurrency Agreement. 
iv.  Once the School District has reviewed the application, it shall issue a Letter of Determination of Concurrency if the impacts of the proposed development's student growth do not cause the adopted LOS to be exceeded. If the development is not in compliance, the Letter of Determination of Concurrency shall detail why the development is not in compliance and shall offer the applicant the opportunity to enter into a ninety-day negotiation period. During the ninety-day negotiation period, the applicant shall meet with the School District in an effort to mitigate the impact from the development. Mitigation shall be limited to those options which the School District recognizes and assumes the responsibility to operate and which will maintain the adopted LOS standards for the first five (5) years from receipt of the School District's Letter of Determination of Concurrency; however, the Village shall have the opportunity to review the mitigation options. If the School District and the developer agree to mitigation, the Letter of Determination of Concurrency shall be issued, conditional approval upon the agreed mitigation measures, and an agreement between the School District and the Developer. If mitigation is not agreed to, the Letter of Determination of Concurrency shall be detailed why litigation proposals were rejected and detail why the development is not in compliance. In this case, no development order shall be issued. 
v.  Letter of Determination of School Concurrency finding the development in compliance shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance unless extended by the School District. Once the Village's site-specific development order is issued, the concurrency determination shall run with the development order. 
b.  Development Order Approval. 
i.  No development order for a proposed new residential development shall be approved unless there is a valid Letter of Determination of Concurrency from the School District finding the development in compliance. 
ii.  If the Letter of Determination of Concurrency requires conditions or mitigation to be placed on the Development, the development order issued by the Village shall incorporate those conditions. 
iii.  If the Letter of Determination of Concurrency requires the development to be phased to mitigation, the conditions of approval of the development order shall implement the phasing requirements by specifying that building permits application will not be accepted if the conditions are not fulfilled. 
iv.  In no case shall a development order be issued unless provisions are made through conditions of approval or by agreement between the developer and School District to provide Performance Security when required. 
c.  Appeals. Applicants seeking relief from School District decisions shall appeal such decisions as provided for by law. 
G.  Rules of General Applicability. 
1.  Expiration. An Adequate Public Facilities Determination shall expire after six (6) months from date of issuance. 
2.  Effect. An Adequate Public Facilities Determination shall serve as a statement that based upon the present public facility capacity. adequate public facilities are available to serve the development at the time of the approval of the Adequate Public Facilities Determination. An adequate Public Facilities Determination shall not be considered a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. A subsequent application for a development permit for development that has been approved based upon an Adequate Public Facilities Determination shall be required to receive a new Adequate Public Facilities Determination, a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, or Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, whichever is appropriate. An Adequate Public Facilities Determination may be obtained for all development orders except for a plat or building permit. A plat or building permit shall not be issued until receipt of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, or Certificate of Concurrency reservation with conditions. 
3.  Assignability and transferability. An Adequate Public Facilities Determination is not assignable or transferable. 
4.  Conversion of an Adequate Public Facilities Determination to a Certificate of Concurrency. Within the six (6) month validity of the Adequate Public Facilities Determination, the applicant may request that the determination be converted to a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. The request shall require submittal of an amendment to the application and payment of the applicable fee. Once all service providers have approved the amendment, a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation will be issued. 
If an Adequate Public Facilities Determination expires the applicant may: 
5.  Renew the determination by submitting an updated application, payment of applicable fees, or 
6.  Apply for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation by submitting an application for a concurrency reservation. 
    In either case, review and approval by all the concurrency service providers shall be required. 
Sec. 11.4.3. - Procedure for review of Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. 
A.  Submission of application. An application for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall be submitted at any time during the year to the Planning & Zoning Director, in a form established by the Planning & Zoning Director and made available to the public. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Village Council from time to time for the filing and processing of each application. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
B.  Determination of sufficiency. The Planning & Zoning Director shall initiate review of an application for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation upon receipt of the application, and within fifteen (15) working days determine whether the application is sufficient and includes data necessary to evaluate the application. 
1.  If it is determined that the application is not sufficient, written notice shall be sent to the applicant specifying the deficiencies. The Planning & Zoning Director shall take no further action on the application unless the deficiencies are remedied. If the deficiencies are not remedied within twenty (20) working days of written notification, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
2.  If the application is determined sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the application's sufficiency, and that the application is ready for review pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
C.  Determination of review. The Planning & Zoning Director shall also determine whether all Service Providers are required to review the application. If the Planning & Zoning Director determines that two (2) or less public facilities are impacted by the proposed development, the application may be eligible for a small project concurrency review fee. The Planning & Zoning Director, where appropriate, shall consult with the Service Providers in making such determination. 
D.  Review and recommendation of Village Departments and Service Providers. Within three (3) working days after the Planning & Zoning Director determines the application is sufficient, the application shall be forwarded to the appropriate Village and County Departments and Service Providers for review. Within fifteen (15) working days of its receipt, the Village Departments and Service Providers shall file a statement with the Planning & Zoning Director as to whether or not adequate public facilities are reserved, pursuant to the standards of Sec. F. 
E.  Decision of Planning & Zoning Director. Within ten (10) working days after receipt of a statement from the appropriate Village and County Departments and Service Providers regarding an application for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, the Planning & Zoning Director shall review the statements and the application, and determine if it complies with all the public facility component standards of Sec. F. and the density requirements of the Comprehensive Plan. If the application complies with all of the public facility component standards in Sec. F and meets the density requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning & Zoning Director shall issue a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. If the Planning & Zoning Director determines that an application fails to meet any one (1) of the public facility component standards of Sec. F, the applicant shall be notified of such deficiency, and may either: 
1.  Enter into a Ninety-Day Negotiation Period. If during the ninety-day period, the applicant resolves the deficiencies, the application shall be reconsidered by the Planning & Zoning Director and approved or denied consistent with the standards of this Article. If the deficiencies are not resolved within ninety (90) days, the application shall be denied. 
2.  Receipt of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions. If the appropriate Service Provider can ensure there will be adequate public facilities with condition(s) on the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall be approved subject to compliance with that condition. No building permit shall be issued for development subject to a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions until all conditions have been met. 
3.  Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. 
a.  General. Request approval of a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. A Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall be approved by the Planning & Zoning Director if it is demonstrated that: 
i.  All existing available public facility capacity up to but not greater than an amount sufficient to serve the proposed development has been reserved; 
ii.  There is reasonable likelihood that the balance of the public facility capital improvements identified to provide the remaining capacity necessary to accommodate the proposed development can be provided pursuant to an Agreement; 
4.  The applicant requests consideration and approval of an Agreement concurrent with the application for a development permit for which the Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation is requested for the purpose of ensuring the Certificate complies with the adequate public facility standards for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation in Sec. F. 
5.  The Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation is conditioned on the concurrent approval of an Agreement and a development order for the application for development permit that complies with the adequate public facility standards for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation in Sec. F. 
a.  Consideration in conjunction with an Agreement. 
i.  If an Agreement, the form to be determined by the Planning & Zoning Director, is to be part of an application for a development order, then prior to the proposed development order application being considered for consistency the agreement shall be: 1) found to be in sufficient form and contain sufficient information by the Village Attorney and the Planning & Zoning Director; and, 2) accompanied by applicable fee, as set in the adopted fee schedule. 
ii.  Prior to the Village Council consideration of the Agreement in conjunction with the application for development permit for which a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation has been approved, the Planning & Zoning Director shall review that component of the Agreement related to the provision of adequate public facilities for the proposed development and determine if through prior reservation of public facility capacity and the terms of the proposed Agreement, the adequate public facility standards for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation in Sec. F. are met if the terms of the Agreement is approved by the Village Council. 
iii.  If the Planning & Zoning Director determines that the standards of Sec. F are met if the Agreement is approved, a conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall be issued, conditioned on the approval of the Agreement with the express terms related to the provision of the public facilities for the proposed development. 
iv.  Upon approval of the Agreement consistent with the terms and conditions which the Planning & Zoning Director determined would ensure compliance with the requirements of Sec. F and the development order, the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall become final. If the Agreement upon which the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation is conditionally issued is denied, then the Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall expire. 
b.  Performance surety required. 
i.  In accordance with Sec. 15.5 and Sec. 15.7, a Conditional Certification of Concurrency Reservation may be granted to ensure compliance with the Traffic Performance Standards. Performance surety may be required to be posted within six (6) months from the date the development order is approved to install improvements resulting from the impact of the project. The performance surety shall be in a form acceptable to the Department of Engineering and Public Works. 
ii.  A one-time six-month administrative time extension may be permitted in accordance with Sec. 5.9.3.B of this Code, provided the following standards are met: 
(a)  The project is located on a roadway which did not meet the Traffic Performance Standards prior to a Conditional Concurrency Reservation being issued for the project. 
(b)  The traffic approval was based solely on the posting of surety for roadway improvements. 
(c)  The project approval does not delay any other property owner from development since no capacity was available for the project, therefore, no trips had been reserved for the project. 
iii.  If an administrative time extension cannot be granted, a one-time six-month time extension may be requested from the Village Council. 
F.  Standards for review of application for Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. The following standards shall be used in the determination of whether to issue, issue with conditions, or deny a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. Before issuance of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, the application shall fulfill the standards for each public facility component (potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, parks and recreation, roads, mass transit, and fire-rescue facilities). 
1.  Potable water facilities. The potable water component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Potable water facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
b.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
c.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
d.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are included in the Village of Wellington's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; or 
e.  The potable water facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities, are committed to be provided by the applicant pursuant to a Development Agreement. 
2.  Sanitary sewer facilities. The sanitary sewer component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Sanitary sewer facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
b.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities is under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
c.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
d.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for sanitary sewer facilities are included in the Village of Wellington's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; or 
e.  The sanitary sewer facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for potable water facilities are committed to be provided by the applicant pursuant to a Development Agreement. 
3.  Solid waste facilities. The solid waste component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Solid waste facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities; 
b.  The solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities are under construction and bonded and a reservation of capacity has been provided for the facilities; 
c.  The solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract and a reservation of capacity has been provided for the facilities; or 
d.  The solid waste facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for solid waste facilities are included in the Solid Waste Authority's Annual Budget. 
4.  Drainage facilities. The drainage component shall be approved if the proposed development has a legal right to convey drainage to a point of legal positive outfall. 
5.  Park and recreation facilities. The park and recreation component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met; 
a.  Park and recreation facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been provided for the facilities; 
b.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities are under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity has been provided for the facilities; 
c.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities are the subject of a binding and executed contract, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
d.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities are included in the Village of Wellington's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider, or 
e.  The park and recreation facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for park and recreation facilities shall be provided pursuant to the terms of a Development Agreement. 
6.  Road facilities. The road component shall be approved if the proposed development complies with Sec. 15.1, Traffic performance standards, and the LOS for road facilities. In determining whether the road component meets the requirements of this subsection, the Five (5) Year Schedule of Improvements in the CIE may be considered only if the development proposed in the application is phased so that the impacts of the proposed development and the capacity provided by the road projects in the Five (5) Year Schedule of Improvements will occur concurrently. The phasing of development and transportation improvements to ensure the LOS for road facilities is met may be addressed through a Development or Road Agreement. 
7.  Mass transit facilities. The mass transit component shall be approved if the travel demand of the proposed development does not deteriorate the LOS for mass transit facilities below the adopted LOS for mass transit facilities, and a reservation of capacity has been provided from the Village of Wellington. 
8.  Fire-rescue facilities. The fire-rescue component shall be approved if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Fire-rescue facilities are in place to provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities, and a reservation of capacity is received from the service provider; 
b.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities am under construction and bonded, and a reservation of capacity is received from the appropriate service provider; 
c.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities am the subject of a binding and executed contract, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the appropriate service provider; 
d.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities are included in the Village's Capital Improvement Annual Budget or the Service Provider's annual budget, and a reservation of capacity has been received from the service provider; or 
e.  The fire-rescue facilities that will provide the proposed development sufficient services based on the LOS for fire-rescue facilities are provided pursuant to a Development Agreement. 
9.  Public School Facilities. The public school facilities component shall be approved if the school capacity of the proposed development does not deteriorate the LOS for public school facilities below the adopted LOS for public school facilities and a reservation of capacity has been provided from the school district. 
G.  Rules of General Applicability. 
1.  Effect. Receipt of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall constitute proof of adequate public facilities to serve the proposed development. A Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions shall constitute proof of adequate public facilities to serve the proposed development only when all conditions have been met. A subsequent application for a development permit for development for which a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions has been approved, shall be determined to have adequate public facilities as long as: 1) the development order for which the Certificate was approved has not expired; 2) all annual fees necessary to maintain the reservation are paid each year, and, 3) the development is not altered to increase the impact of the development on public facilities. 
2.  Expiration. A Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall expire one (1) year from the date of its issuance for all development orders, except when a building permit is the only development order required. If the only required development order is a building permit, then the application for the building permit must be made prior to the expiration date of the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. In such cases, the building permit must be issued within six (6) months, or the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall expire. 
If the next development order is for a building permit, then application for the building permit must be made prior to the expiration date of the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. In such cases. the building permit must be issued within six (6) months, or the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation will expire. 
If a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions either expires or becomes invalid, the public facility capacity reserved by the Certificate expires, and becomes additional available public facility capacity. An applicant cannot apply for a new Certificate of Concurrency Reservation until the previous Certificate of Concurrency Reservation has expired. 
If the conditions of approval for the Concurrency Reservation with conditions or Conditional Concurrency Reservation is not met within the specified time frames, then the Concurrency Reservation shall expire. If the Concurrency Reservation with conditions or Conditional Concurrency Reservation was used to secure a Development Order, then the Development Order shall also expire. 
The expiration of a development order shall result in the expiration of the Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions. 
3.  Extension. Prior to the expiration of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions, one (1) extension of the reservation of up to two (2) months may be provided by the Planning & Zoning Director if it is determined that a government delay caused the failure of the development order to be issued. In no other case may an extension of time be provided. 
4.  Effect. Receipt of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation shall constitute proof of adequate public facilities to serve the proposed development. A Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions shall constitute proof of adequate public facilities to serve the proposed development only when all conditions have been met. A subsequent application for a development permit for development for which a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions has been approved, shall be determined to have adequate public facilities as long as: 1) the development order for which the Certificate was approved has not expired; 2) all annual fees necessary to maintain the reservation are paid each year; and, 3) the development is not altered to increase the impact of the development on public facilities. 
5.  Assignability and transferability. A Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions shall not be assignable or transferable to other property, except within the same approved development. It shall be assignable or transferable to successors in interest for the same property. 
6.  Phasing. In determining whether an application for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions complies with the requirements of Sec. F, the Planning & Zoning Director may consider the phasing of development and its coordination with public facility capital improvements for a period of up to five (5) years, or some other period consistent with the terms of an Agreement. 
H.  Appeal. 
1.  General. An applicant may appeal a decision of the Planning & Zoning Director denying an application for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board by filing a petition with the Planning & Zoning Director appealing the decision of the Planning & Zoning Director within ten (10) days of the decision of the Planning & Zoning Director. 
2.  Procedure. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider the appeal petition within sixty (60) days of its filing. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall notify the applicant ten (10) working days before the hearing and invite the petitioner or the petitioner's representative to attend the hearing. At the hearing, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall provide the petitioner and Village staff an opportunity to present arguments and testimony. In making its decision, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider only the record before the Planning & Zoning Director at the time of the decision, testimony of the petitioner and the petitioner's agent, and testimony of Village Department members and Service Providers. 
3.  Standard. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall reverse the decision of the Planning & Zoning Director only if there is substantial competent evidence in the record that the application complies with the standards of Sec. F or another adequate method of meeting the concurrency requirement is provided and approved. In considering all technical issues related to Road Facilities, the decision of the Traffic Performance Standards Review Board shall be binding. 
I.  Amendment of Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions. An amendment to a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions shall be required prior to the approval of any amendment to a development order for which a Certificate has been approved if the amendment increases or decreases the need for capacity for any public facility (potable water, sanitary sewer; solid waste, drainage, parks and recreation, roads, mass transit, and fire-rescue). The amendment of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions shall only require reservation of the additional public facility capacity demanded by the proposed development and modification of the reservation of the public facility capacity if the demand is decreased. An amendment shall be required if there is a decrease in the density or intensity of development approved in a development order. Any amendment to a development order for which an Adequate Public Facilities Determination has been approved shall require a new Adequate Public Facilities Determination or a revised Certificate of Concurrency Reservation or a revised Certificate of Concurrency Reservation with conditions, whichever is appropriate. 
J.  Effect of Agreement in Conjunction with a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation. A developer may enter into an Agreement with the Village or Palm Beach County and relevant service providers, for those public facilities specifying that an Agreement is acceptable, in conjunction with the approval of a development order and a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation, to ensure adequate public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of development on the public facility. The effect of the Agreement shall be to bind the Village or Palm Beach County and the developer pursuant to the terms and duration of the Agreement to its determination pursuant to Sec. 11.4.3.D that adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed development concurrent with the impacts of the development on the public facilities. Any public facility Capital Improvement in the Five (5) Year Schedule of Capital Improvements in the CIE on which such a Conditional Certificate of Concurrency Reservation is made in conjunction with the approval of a development order and an Agreement, shall not be delayed, deferred, or removed from the Five (5) Year Schedule of Improvements in the CIE, except that any Capital Improvement may be deferred by one (1) year if the deferral is identified pursuant to the terms of an Agreement. 
CHAPTER 5. - ENTITLEMENT DENSITY 

Sec. 11.5.1. - General. 
    If after an appeal pursuant to Sec. Sec. 11.4.3.H, on an application for a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation is denied by the Planning & Zoning Director and that decision is affirmed by the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board, the applicant may submit an application for Entitlement Density pursuant to the procedural and substantive requirements of this section. 
Sec. 11.5.2. - Submission of application. 
    An application for Entitlement Density shall be submitted to the Planning & Zoning Director on a form established by the Planning & Zoning Director and made available to the public. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Village Council from time to time for the filing and processing of each application. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
Sec. 11.5.3. - Determination of sufficiency. 
    The Planning & Zoning Director shall initiate review of an application for Entitlement Density upon receipt of the application, and within fifteen (15) working days, determine whether the application is sufficient and includes data necessary to evaluate the application. 
A.  Application Insufficient. If it is determined that the application is not sufficient, written notice shall be sent to the applicant specifying the deficiencies. The Planning & Zoning Director shall take no further action on the application unless the deficiencies are remedied. 
B.  Application sufficient. If the application is determined sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the application's sufficiency, and that the application is ready for review pursuant to the procedures and standards of this section. 
Sec. 11.5.4. - Decision by Planning & Zoning Director. 
    Within thirty (30) working days after the Planning & Zoning Director determines the application is sufficient, the Planning & Zoning Director shall review the application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based upon whether it complies with the standards in Sec. 11.5.5. 
Sec. 11.5.5. - Standards for entitlement density. 
    An entitlement density for the proposed development shall be granted consistent with the entitlement densities permitted if: 
A.  A Certificate of Concurrency Reservation has been denied for the proposed development pursuant to the requirements of Sec. 11.1.3, and an appeal to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board has affirmed that decision; 
B.  The LOS for drainage facilities for the development proposed in the application is met pursuant to the requirements of Sec. 11.4.3.F.4; 
C.  A plan demonstrates how the proposed development will be designed (a) at its entitlement density and at its allowable density under the Comprehensive Plan and this Code at the time the necessary public facilities are available to adequately serve the development. Any development order issued for an application for development permit for which entitlement density has been approved shall be consistent with the plans for development in this subsection. The review of a plan for development at the allowable density under this section shall in no way reserve capacity for public facilities; 
D.  Approval of the entitlement density is conditioned on the initiation of development of the proposed project at its allowable density subject to receipt of a Certificate of Concurrency Reservation within two (2) years of the time the necessary public facilities are available to serve the proposed development at its allowable density; and 
E.  In the Urban Service Area, development orders for development proceeding at entitlement densities may be permitted at rural LOS for potable water and sanitary sewage while the development is at its entitlement density. 
Sec. 11.5.6. - Appeal. 
A.  General. A n applicant may appeal any decision of the Planning & Zoning Director on an application for entitlement density to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board by filing a petition appealing the decision to the Planning & Zoning Director within ten (10) days of the decision. 
B.  Procedure. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider the appeal petition within sixty (60) days of its filing. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall notify the applicant within ten (10) working days of the hearing and invite the petitioner or the petitioner's representative to attend the hearing. At the hearing, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall provide the petitioner and Village staff an opportunity to present arguments and testimony. In making its decision, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider only the record before the Planning & Zoning Director at the time of the decision, testimony of the petitioner and the petitioner's agent, and testimony of Village staff and Service Providers. 
C.  Standards. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall reverse the decision of the Planning & Zoning Director only if there is substantial competent evidence in the record that the decision failed to comply with the standards of Sec. 11.5.5. 
CHAPTER 6. - CONCURRENCY EXEMPTION EXTENSION 

Sec. 11.6.1. - Short Title. 
    This Section shall be known as, and may be cited as the "Concurrency Exemption Extension Ordinance of the Village of Wellington, Florida." 
Sec. 11.6.2. - Authority. 
    This Section is adopted pursuant to Fla. Stat. Chapters 125 and 163; F.A.C. Rule 9J-5; the Florida and U.S. Constitutions; other applicable statutes; and the Village's Comprehensive Plan, specifically but not limited to: (1) Administration, Concurrency and Density Determination for Committed Development; (2) Land Use, Implementation of the Land Use Element, Zoning in Compliance/Activities to be in Conformance with Plan Element Provisions, Section Status of Existing Development Approvals/Non-Conforming Uses, Structures; and (3) Capital Improvement, Policy 2-i(l), 2-j, and 2-1. 
Sec. 11.6.3. - Who May Submit Concurrency Exemption Extension Application. 
A.  Owner. An Owner or group of Owners, or the authorized agent of such including the Mortgager when property is proven to be in foreclosure and a court order is obtained, may submit an application for a Concurrency Exemption Extension as to particular Parcel or Parcels previously granted a concurrency exemption certificate pursuant to Ordinance 89-35. A Master Property Owner's Association may submit an application as to an area subject to it, provided specific authorization is given to such application in accordance with the declaration, articles, and by-laws. 
B.  Agent's Authorization. An application for an Owner made by an agent shall contain a written authorization signed by the Owner and notarized specifically authorizing the agent to represent the Owner as to the Owner's Lot or Parcel for a review and determination under this Ordinance. 
C.  Planning & Zoning Director. The Planning & Zoning Director may initiate an application for a concurrency exemption extension for a parcel or parcels previously granted a concurrency exemption pursuant to Ordinance No. 89-35. 
Sec. 11.6.4. - Procedure. 
A.  Submit to Zoning. Applications for Concurrency Exemption Extension shall be submitted to the Zoning Division of the Planning, Zoning and Building Department of the Village of Wellington no sooner than five (5) months, prior to expiration of a Concurrency Exemption Certificate or Certificate of Extension. Applications will not be accepted after the expiration date of the Concurrency Exemption or Concurrency Exemption Extension Certificate. 
B.  Contents of Application. 
1.  Form. The application shall be made on a form established by the Department of Planning, Zoning and Building and available at the Zoning Division. 
2.  Information. The application shall contain such information as the Division requires and as reasonably necessary to provide complete information for a determination under this Ordinance, as determined by the Planning & Zoning Director including any information adverse to the Applicant. 
3.  Sworn Statement. The Application shall contain a Sworn Statement by the applicant attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. 
C.  Review. The Zoning Division shall review all applications timely submitted pursuant to this Ordinance. The Zoning Division shall review the application to determine whether it is technically complete. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of an application, the Planning & Zoning Director shall send a letter to the Applicant verifying the completeness, and sufficiency of the information, or requesting additional information. If additional or revised information is required by the Planning & Zoning Director, the applicant shall have fifteen (15) working days from the date the letter is sent to submit additional or revised information. If no additional information is submitted in a timely manner, the Planning & Zoning Director shall determine that the development is not continuing in good faith. The Planning & Zoning Director shall have ten (10) working days from the date additional or revised information is submitted to determine if the application is complete and a minimum of fifteen (15) working days from the date the application is found complete to make a determination of whether or not Development is continuing in good faith based on the criteria set forth in Section Seven of this Ordinance. 
D.  Written Determination. The Planning & Zoning Director shall issue either a certificate of extension or letter denying the extension. The determination of the Planning & Zoning Director shall include a legal description and Property Control Number of the property to which it applies. The Certificate of Extension shall be valid for two (2) years from the date the Planning & Zoning Director enters the written order granting the extension. A Certificate of Extension is granted for a specific parcel of land and is not transferable outside of the approved development. A change in ownership of a parcel of land granted concurrency exemption extension shall not extinguish the concurrency exemption extension. 
Sec. 11.6.5. - Applicability. 
A.  Limitations. This Section is limited to determining whether or not a Project or Lot found exempt from the concurrency provisions of the 1989 Comprehensive Plan pursuant to Ordinance 89-35, the Concurrency Exemption Ordinance, is continuing in good faith and is eligible to remain exempt from the concurrency requirements of the 1989 Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Exemptions. All Concurrency Exemptions and Certificates of Extension shall be issued for the number of units or square footage shown on the approved Site Plan or Master Plan most recently certified by the Development Review Committee. For any Master Plan or Site Plan which was approved for acreage only, the capacity for the approved use shall be calculated by the applicant and affirmed by the Zoning Division and each service provider. Any Concurrency Exemption Certificate or Certificate of Extension shall be adjusted accordingly. Any increase in units above that shown on the current Site Plan/Master Plan shall require a concurrency reservation. 
1.  If a Certificate of Exemption was granted based on (1) a Development Order issued on or after January 1, 1984 or (2) a Development Order which is subject to the requirements of Article 5, Chapter 8 of this Code, the Exemption shall remain valid so long as the applicable Development Order remains valid in accordance with Article 5, Chapter 8 of this Code. 
2.  If a Certificate of Exemption is granted based on (1) a Development Order issued prior to January 1, 1984 which is not subject to the requirements of Article 5, Chapter 8 of this Code or (2) a Development Order issued on or after January 1, 1984 which was not subject to the requirements of Article 5, Chapter 8 of this Code, the Exemption shall expire six (6) years from the date the Certificate of Exemption was issued unless the Project is found to be continuing in good faith in accordance with See. 11.6.6 below. 
Sec. 11.6.6. - Criteria to Determine Whether Development Is Continuing in Good Faith. 
A.  Definitions. Continuing in good faith shall mean, and consideration shall be made of, diligent efforts directed toward achieving the ultimate development, marketing, and use of the land, in accordance with the development order(s). Diligent efforts shall require reasonable and timely pursuit of all necessary approvals, certifications and permits; financing; and marketing, together or in a sequence customary to the industry. Factors militating against a finding of diligent efforts shall be delays occasioned by any person holding a legal or equitable interest in the property, its agents, contractors, or employees acting on behalf of the owner; marketing of the entire project as a whole, unless the project is of such a nature or size that it can only feasibly be marketed as a single unit; the discontinuation of attempts at obtaining required approvals, certifications, and permits; the discontinuation of a construction activity (including clearing, grubbing, filling, excavating, placement of infrastructure, and building construction) prior to the completion of the particular construction activity; delay of proceeding toward the next customary phase of construction activity; the discontinuation of design work; the discontinuation of sales or leasing efforts; the removal of construction personnel, facilities, and equipment from the project; the delay of proceeding with the next phase of development. 
1.  The following shall not be considered as factors militating against a finding of proceeding in good faith: (a) delays caused solely by government action or inaction; (b) delays caused by administrative, quasi-judicial or judicial proceedings, which prevent development from occurring; and (c) delays caused by natural disaster or acts of God. 
2.  The economic state of the development industry economy shall be considered only as related to the Village region and the development industry as a whole and not a particular market segment. Economic conditions shall only be considered for purposes of determining customary practices of local developers as a measure of the diligence and good faith of the Applicant. 
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary within this Article VII, Development shall be deemed to be continuing in good faith as to a Lot which has been granted a Concurrency Exemption pursuant to appropriate Village codes or Palm Beach County Ordinance 89-35 within a validly divided area which has a Local Government Development Order. Good faith may be presumed provided that all Site Improvements required by the Local Government Development Order, or as required by the Village Subdivision Code, as a condition to obtaining a building permit upon the Lot have been installed, and that Development activity in the nature of the construction of new single family residences has taken place since the granting of the exemption or the extension thereof upon other Lots within the area. 
B.  Considerations. In determining whether development is proceeding in good faith, the Village shall recognize that land development is a complex task involving a series of governmental approvals. Recognizing this, the following factors shall be considered where relevant: 
1.  The number and type of development orders applied for or received since the exemption certificate was issued. 
2.  The relationship of the development orders to other development orders in the sequence of development orders required. 
3.  Was each development order received within the required time-frame or were time extensions necessary. 
4.  Were time extensions granted and how many? 
5.  What, if any, development activity was commenced during each respective time extension? 
6.  Whether needed permits/approvals (Village, county and others) were actively and continuously pursued. 
7.  The of development orders remaining which are needed to complete the land development. 
8.  The time customarily associated with obtaining various development orders. 
9.  The percentage of development permitted and completed during the concurrency exemption or extension period compared to the size of the project and the historic average percent of development completed each year. 
10.  The overall extent and type of development commenced and completed as related to the project's size and use. 
11.  If the project is phased, were the dates of each phase met. 
12.  Conditions placed by the Village in issuing the development order. 
13.  Whether any special exception conditions of approval limited or phased the amount of construction due to conditions beyond the property owner's control. 
14.  Fulfillment of special exception time certain conditions of approval, if any. 
15.  The marketing practices associated with the project; e.g. whether the entire Project is being marketed as a whole for sale. 
16.  The reasonable development time-line of that type and size of development. 
17.  The number and type of contractors, engineers, consultants, tradesman, and professionals working on the project, and their respective activities. 
18.  Whether any delay was caused by government changing an approved time plan for commencement of construction of infrastructure. 
C.  Section 5.8 Compliance with Time Limitations. Rezoning, revocation of a special exception, Class "A"' or "B" conditional use, or limiting development intensity or density to entitlement by the Village Council pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 8 of this Code shall be prima facie evidence that the development is not continuing in good faith and any exemption or extension thereto shall be automatically revoked. 
Sec. 11.6.7. - Approved Residential Projects Holding Concurrency Exemption Certificates. 
    For the following types of residential developments, the Planning & Zoning Director may initiate an application for a currency extension certificate provided the project received a concurrency exemption certificate properly issued pursuant to Ordinance 89-35, as amended and the following criteria are met: 
A.  Platted subdivision. A platted subdivision, if all required improvements have been installed or guaranteed. 
B.  Planned unit development. Planned unit development, if platting schedule is maintained. 
C.  Phased subdivisions. Phased subdivision, if plats are recorded in accordance with an approved phasing schedule. 
Sec. 11.6.8. - Approved Non-Residential Projects Holding Concurrency Exemption Certificates. 
    For the following types of non-residential developments, the Planning & Zoning Director may initiate an application for a concurrency extension certificate provided the project received a concurrency exemption certificate issued pursuant to Ordinance 89-35, as amended and the following criteria are met: 
    A platted non-residential parcel, if all required improvements associated with the plat have been installed or guaranteed. 
Sec. 11.6.9. - Administrative Appeal. 
A.  General. An applicant may appeal a decision of the Planning & Zoning Director denying Concurrency Exemption Extension by filing a petition with the Planning & Zoning Director appealing the decision to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board within thirty (30) days of the rendition of the decision by the Planning & Zoning Director. 
B.  Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board Membership. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consist of the Director of Community Services, the Village Attorney and the Village Engineer. 
C.  Procedure. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider the appeal petition within sixty (60) days of filing. In considering the appeal, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall consider only the record before the Planning & Zoning Director at the time of the decision, testimony of the petitioner and the petitioners' agents and testimony of Village staff. 
D.  Standard. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall reverse the decision of the Planning & Zoning Director only if there is competent substantial evidence in the record that the application complies with the standards of Sec. 11.6.6. 
E.  Written Order. The decision of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall be in writing and a copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the appealing party. 
F.  Appeal to Circuit Court. An applicant may appeal a final decision of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board within thirty (30) days of the rendition of the decision by filing a petition for Writ of Certiorari in Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit in and for Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Sec. 11.6.10. - Vested rights. 
A.  After expiration. Any application filed after the expiration of the Certificate must demonstrate to the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board, by substantial competent evidence, that common law vesting has occurred. A petition may be filed with the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board who shall make a determination upon recommendation of the Planning & Zoning Director. 
B.  Appeal to circuit court. An applicant may appeal a final decision of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board within thirty (30) days of the rendition of the decision by filing a petition for Writ of Certiorari in Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit in and for Palm Beach County, Florida. 
Article 12 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY 
Article 13 - THIS ARTICLE HAS INTENTIONALLY NOT BEEN USED 
Article 14 - ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS AND PENALTIES 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL 
    The provisions of this Code shall be enforced by Special Magistrate pursuant to the authority granted by Sec. 162 Fla. Stat., as it may from time to time be amended; (2) the Wellington Tree Board pursuant to the authority granted by this Code; (3) the Wellington Council through its authority to enjoin and restrain any person violating the Code; or (4) the Village of Wellington. 
(Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 8-26-2014) 
CHAPTER 2. - ENFORCEMENT BY CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD AND/OR SPECIAL MAGISTRATES 
    The Special Magistrates, appointed from time to time by the Wellington Council, shall have the jurisdiction and authority to hear and decide alleged violations of the codes and ordinances enacted by Wellington as provided in Chapter 2, Article V, Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 8-26-2014) 
CHAPTER 3. - OTHER LEGAL REMEDIES 
    In addition to the penalties and enforcement procedures provided in the Code of Ordinances Chapter 2, Article IV, the Wellington Council may institute any lawful civil action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, or abate: 
(Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 8-26-2014) 

Sec. 14.3.1. - Unlawful action. 
    The unlawful construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration, rehabilitation, expansion, maintenance or use of any building or structure; or 
Sec. 14.3.2. - Occupancy. 
    The occupancy of such building, structure, land, or water; or 
Sec. 14.3.3. - Illegal use of premise. 
    The illegal act, conduct, business, or use of, in or about such premises. 
CHAPTER 4. - OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 

Sec. 14.4.1. - Cease and desist orders. 
    The Planning, Zoning and Building Department shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the form of written official notices given to the owner of the subject building, property, or premises, or to the owner's agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or to any person using the land, building, or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. 
(Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 8-26-2014) 
Sec. 14.4.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, adopted August 26, 2014, repealed § 14.4.2, which pertained to building permits and certificates of occupancy and use and derived from Ord. No. 2005-16, adopted June 28, 2005. 
Article 15 - VEHICULAR TRAFFIC PERFORMANCE STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), adopted April 22, 2014, amended Article 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article 15, Chs. 1-11, pertained to traffic performance standards, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-16, adopted June 28, 2005. 

CHAPTER 1. - INTENT AND AUTHORITY 

Sec. 15.1.1. - Intent. 
    The Village Council finds that safe, convenient, and orderly flow of vehicular traffic is necessary for the health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the public. It is the intent of this Article to ensure that development and related proposals sufficiently analyze the potential impacts on the Village's roadways and address the impacts to maintain the adopted vehicular Level of Service (LOS). 
    It is the intent of this Article to implement the goals, objectives, policies, and standards of the Village's Comprehensive Plan Traffic Performance Standards. This Article will supplement the Countywide Traffic Performance Standards administered by Palm Beach County for roadways under their jurisdiction. 
    Nothing in this Article shall preclude the Village Council or other authority with the responsibility of issuing Development Orders from considering vehicular traffic, roadway, or project conditions not specifically required by this Article or which are peculiar to the location, size, configuration, use, or relationship to the area of the proposed project or the proposed project itself; and to impose conditions necessary to serve the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.1.2. - Authority. 
    The Village Council has the authority to adopt this Article pursuant to Article VII, Section 1(g) and to Article VIII, Sec. 1, Fla. Const., § 125.01 et seq., Fla. Stat., and §§ 16.161 and 16.202 et seq., Fla. Stat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
CHAPTER 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 15.2.1. - Generally. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided herein, this Article shall apply to all Site-Specific Development Orders or any other official action of a Local Government having the effect of permitting the Development of land. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.2.2. - Vested Project Traffic Determination. 
    This Section establishes a method for determining vested Project Traffic that may apply when seeking to amend a Previously Approved Development Order or when applying for a Development Order on property, which has an existing development and use. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate the eligibility and the amount of vesting for a proposed Project. 
1.  Any proposed amendment to a Previously Approved Development Order shall receive a determination of vested Project Traffic subject to the provisions of this Section. The credit shall be calculated by applying current trip generation rates and pass-by rates to the land use or uses previously approved by the Development Order. The vesting shall be adjusted as necessary to account for changes in traffic distribution resulting from modifications to the Previously Approved Development Order. The vesting shall be reduced as applicable based on any subsequent reduction of square footage or number of units built pursuant to master plan or site plan amendment, and in accordance with any subsequent amendment to applicable Wellington rules, policies or land development regulations. 
2.  Any application for a Development Order on property on which there is an existing use shall receive a vested Project Traffic determination subject to the provisions of this Section. The vesting shall be calculated by applying current trip generation rates and pass-by rates that would be generated by the most recent existing use at the time of application. The vesting shall be adjusted as necessary to account for changes in traffic distribution as a result of the proposed Project. A proposed Project shall not be eligible for an existing use vesting determination if the structure or land on the property has been discontinued or abandoned for more than three (3) years prior to the time of application. 
3.  A Project shall be eligible for a one hundred (100) percent vested Project Traffic determination if the Previously Captured non-residential Project has received a certificate of occupancy (CO) for interior tenant improvements for at least eighty (80) percent of the gross leasable area for more than five (5) years or the Previously Captured residential Project has received building permits for eighty (80) percent of the units as set forth in the master plan or site plan as applicable. 
4.  A redevelopment project located within the urban service boundary shall not be subject to the standards of Chapter 3 of this Article, for up to one hundred ten (110) percent of the traffic generation of the previously existing development. The vesting shall be calculated by applying current trip generation rates and pass-by rates that would be generated by the most recent existing use at the time of application. The vesting shall be adjusted as necessary to account for changes in traffic distribution as a result of the proposed Project. A proposed Project shall not be eligible for an existing use vesting determination if the use has been discontinued or abandoned for more than three (3) years prior to the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.2.3. - Non-applicability. 
A.  Wellington-initiated Future Land Use Map or Zoning Map Amendments. The standards of this Article shall not apply to Wellington-initiated district boundary changes or any district boundary changes to conform to the Comprehensive Plan which does not authorize Development. 
B.  Entitlement. The standards of this Article shall not apply to Development Orders not exceeding entitlement densities/intensities established in the Plan or Section 15.8, Entitlement. 
C.  Special Events. The standards of this Article shall not apply to Wellington special or community events For purposes of this Article, a special event is an activity or use which does not exceed three (3) weeks a year, occurs no more frequently than once a year, and is public or quasi-public in nature. It includes Fourth of July activities; parades; and festivals. It does not include recurring events such as baseball games, football games, concerts, races, and the like held in stadiums, amphitheaters, or other permanent facilities even if such facilities are used for special events. Special events considered special permit uses or equestrian special permit issues may be subject to the traffic impact study requirements of this Article as determined by the Village Engineer or Village Planning Director. 
D.  Subsequent or amending Development Orders. 
1.  Subsequent Implementing Development Orders. The standards of this Article shall not apply to Development Orders which are subsequent implementing Development Orders to Previously-Approved Development Orders which were captured by this Article but which are required by Local Government as part of the Development approved under the captured or Previously-Approved Development Order. Examples of these subsequent implementing Development Orders are subdivision approvals and building permits issued in a planned unit development where the planned unit development is a Previous Approval or met the requirements of this Article 
2.  Amendments to Previously-Captured-Approvals. Amendments to Development Orders which were captured by this Article which do not increase the captured Development Order's Net Peak Hour Directional Trips on any Link or Major Intersection (including increases resulting from redistribution) shall not be subject to the standards of this Article. For purposes of this determination, the generation rates and pass-by rates of the captured Development Order shall be updated to current generation and pass-by rates, if applicable, and shall be used to calculate whether there is any increase. If there is an increase, Net Peak Hour Directional Trips shall be subject to the Standards of this Article. 
E.  Vested Rights. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article to the contrary, the requirements of this Article shall not apply in any manner to impair vested rights established pursuant to Florida law, to the extent that any Project, or portion thereof, is vested as against the requirements of this Article. 
G.  Requirements. The exceptions to the standards of this Article (Level of Service standards) do not obviate the requirement to report the Development Order, or provide the Traffic Impact Study (where required), to the Village Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
CHAPTER 3. - PROJECT BUILDOUT STANDARD 

Sec. 15.3.1. - Generally. 
    There is hereby established a Vehicular Traffic Performance Standard for all Wellington Roadways as Identified on the Wellington Roadway Analysis Map Except as specifically provided in this Article, no Development Order shall be issued which is not in compliance with this standard. The Project Buildout test (Test) relates to the Buildout Period of the Project and requires that the Project demonstrate that no significant Traffic is added which would cause the Total Traffic to exceed the Adopted Level of Service at the end of the Buildout Period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.3.2. - Project Buildout Test. 
A.  Project Buildout Test-Parts One and Two. No Project shall be approved for Development Order unless it can be shown to satisfy the requirement of Parts One and Two of the Project Buildout Test as outlined below. 
1.  Part One-Intersections. This Part requires analysis of Wellington Intersections where a Project's traffic is significant on a Link For purposes of this Part One, Wellington Intersections also includes intersections of a Wellington Roadway and a non Wellington Roadway or other point of access where: 1) the intersection is signalized or where projected traffic volumes warrant a signal; and 2) the non Wellington approach is projected to carry at least two hundred (200) two-way, peak hour trips and, 3) the non-Wellington approach represents twenty (20) percent or more of the intersection critical sum volume. 
a.  The following Wellington intersections shall be analyzed: 
1)  The Wellington Intersections in each direction nearest to the point at which the Project's Traffic enters each Project Accessed Link, and where the Project Traffic entering or exiting the intersection from/to the Project Accessed Link is significant. The intersections analyzed shall not exceed two (2) intersections per Project Accessed Link. 
2)  For a Project on Southern Boulevard, the Single Point Urban Interchange(s) on Southern Blvd. where it is the nearest Intersection to the point at which the Project's Traffic enters the Project Accessed Link and where the Project Traffic entering and exiting the intersection is significant. For purposes of determining significance of the traffic entering and exiting the intersection, the traffic entering and exiting the ramps shall be considered against the combined LOS D capacity of the ramps, which shall be four thousand two hundred (4,200) vehicles per hour. 
3)  All Wellington Intersections where the Project Traffic comprises ten (10) percent or more of the Total Traffic on at least one approach. 
4)  All Wellington Intersections where links are operating at eighty (80) percent or greater of LOS D and where the project has a significant on any approach. 
b.  For signalized intersections the intersection analysis shall be conducted using the HCM Operational Analysis using the most recent version of the HCM. 
1)  The HCM Operational Analysis shall comply with the default input values published by the County Engineer no more frequently than twice per year. Revisions to the input values may be made subject to approval by the County Engineer to reflect actual or projected field conditions where substantial differences from the published values can be demonstrated. 
2)  For intersections outside the Equestrian Overlay Zoning District (EOZD), if the intersection average total delay is at or below the thresholds identified in Table 15.3.B-1B, the Project passes Part One of the Project Buildout Test and continues with the Part Two-Link Analysis. If the intersection average total delay exceeds the thresholds identified in Table 15.3.B-1B, the Project fails Part One. 
3)  For intersections within the EOZD, if the intersection average total delay is at or below the thresholds identified in Table 15.3.B-2B, the Project passes Part One of the Project Buildout Test and continues with the Part Two-Link Analysis. If the intersection average total delay exceeds the thresholds identified in Table 15.3.B-2B, the Project fails Part One. 
4)  The Applicant may make intersection improvements in accordance with published Wellington, Palm Beach County or Florida Department of Transportation Design and Traffic Engineering Standards, as applicable, in order to satisfy Part One. 
c.  For unsignalized Wellington Intersections, the intersections shall be analyzed using the most recent version of the HCM Unsignalized Intersection Analysis and all minor movements of Rank 2 or higher shall operate at LOS E or better. In addition, a signal warrant analysis with Total Traffic for the intersection may be required by the Village Engineer. 
1)  If a minor movement is not projected to operate at LOS E or better, then the applicant may make intersection improvements in accordance with applicable Wellington, Palm Beach County or FDOT Design Standards to satisfy the LOS standard. If these improvements require signalization of the intersection and if signalization is expected to be warranted at any time up to twenty-four (24) months after the Project's final certificate of occupancy, then the Project may also be required to fund signalization. If, with these improvements, all minor movements of Rank 2 or higher will operate at LOS E or better, the Project passes Part One. 
2)  If no geometric intersection improvements are determined to be feasible by the Village Engineer, then the applicant shall agree to fund signalization of the intersection if warranted at any time up to twenty-four (24) months after the Project's final certificate of occupancy and if it meets access management standards. If the applicant is not willing to agree to fund signalization of the intersection if warranted, the Project fails Part One. 
d.  Where a CRALLS (Constrained Roadway at a Lower Level of Service volume has been adopted by Palm Beach County for one (1) or more of the LINKs that constitute the legs of the intersection, the allowable service volume for the intersection shall be calculated as follows: Allowable CRALLS intersection volume = [sum of CRALLS Link volume(s) or LINK LOS D volumes (for those LINKS without CRALLS), whichever is applicable, for all legs of intersection/(sum of Link LOS D volume(s) for all legs of intersection)] × 1400. 
2.  Part Two-Links. 
a.  This Part requires analysis of Wellington Roadways and Intersections as necessary where a Project's traffic is significant on a Link. The Total Traffic in the peak hour on the Link shall be compared to applicable thresholds in Table 15.3.B-1A, The LOS D Link Service Volumes, Peak Hour Directional Traffic volume threshold. The applicable facility class for each Link shall be determined on the basis of the posted speed limit and/or number of traffic signals per mile anticipated by the Village Engineer to be in place by the buildout time frame of the proposed Project being evaluated. Additionally, for all Links where the Total Traffic peak hour directional volumes exceed the applicable threshold the Wellington Intersections on each end of the Link shall be analyzed. If the Link is on Southern Boulevard, the at-grade intersection created by an Urban Interchange shall not be considered the intersection at the end of the link since the intersection is actually not on Southern Boulevard. The Project shall include the next intersection with Southern Boulevard for analysis and compliance. 
The project shall pass Part Two, for links outside the EOZD, if: 
The Total Traffic peak hour directional volume on the Link is less than the applicable thresholds in Table 15.3.B-1B: LOS D Link Service Volumes. 
The project shall pass Part Two, for links within the EOZD, if: 
The Total Traffic peak hour directional volume on the Link is less than the applicable thresholds in Table 15.3.B-2B: LOS D Link Service Volumes. 
For Links where the Total Traffic peak hour directional volumes exceed the applicable threshold, where the Buildout period is five years or fewer, and where the intersections at the end of the failing link are less than or equal to the Delay Thresholds, as applicable, in Table 15.3.B-1B or Table 15.3.B-2B a more detailed analysis as outlined in the Optional Analysis may be completed to demonstrate compliance with Part Two. 
For Links where the Total Traffic peak hour directional volumes exceed the applicable threshold and where the Buildout period is greater than five years or where the intersections at the end of the failing link are greater than the Delay Thresholds, as applicable, in Table 15.3.B-1B or Table 15.3.B-2B, the Project fails Part Two. 
b.  Optional Analysis-The HCM Arterial Analysis Operational methodology shall be conducted. For these Links outside the EOZD, the Project shall demonstrate that the Total Traffic peak hour directional volumes do not result in an average speed on the Segment that is lower than the speed thresholds for LOS D as defined in Table 15.3.B-1C. LOS D. Speed Thresholds. If the speed is equal to or higher than the LOS D speed threshold, then the Project shall pass Part Two. If the speed is lower than the LOS D speed threshold, then the Project fails Part Two. For these Links within the EOZD, the Project shall demonstrate that the Total Traffic peak hour directional volumes do not result in an average speed on the Segment that is lower than the speed thresholds for LOS E as defined in Table 15.3.B-2C, LOS E. Speed Thresholds. If the speed is equal to or higher than the LOS E speed threshold, then the Project shall pass Part Two. If the speed is lower than the LOS E speed threshold, then the Project fails Part Two. 
c.  The Applicant may make link or intersection improvements in accordance with published Wellington, Palm Beach County or Florida Department of Transportation Design and Traffic Engineering Standards, as applicable, in order to satisfy Part Two. 
[B.]  Level of Service Standard. 
1.  The LOS D Standard Service Volumes as to Average Daily Traffic and Peak Season, Peak Hour Directional for Links are set forth in Table 15.3B-1A: LOS D Link Service Volumes. The LOS D thresholds relative to intersections are set forth in Table 15.3B-1B: LOS D Intersection Thresholds. The LOS D threshold associated with the HCM arterial analysis in terms of speed is provided in Table 15.3B-1C: LOS D Speed Thresholds. 
2.  The LOS E Standard Service Volumes for Average Daily Traffic and Peak Season, Peak Hour Directional for the Equestrian Overlay Zone for Links are set forth in Table 15.3.B-2A. LOS E Link Service Volumes, The LOS E thresholds relative to intersections are set forth in Table 15-3.B-2B, LOS E Intersection Thresholds. The LOS E thresholds associated with the HCM arterial analysis in terms of speed are provided in Table 15.3.B-2C, LOS E Speed Thresholds. The LOS E Standard is to be utilized within the EOZD. 
3.  For roads on the SIS, SIS Connectors, FIHS, and TRIP-funded facilities, the LOS standard shall be LOS D in Urban Areas, LOS C in Transitioning Urban Areas, Urban Areas, or Communities; and LOS B in Rural Areas as adopted by the FDOT. 
Table 15.3.B-1A: LOS D Link Service Volumes 
Facility Type ADT Peak Hour Directional Class I Class II Class I Class II 2 lanes undivided (1) 2L 17,700 14,800 880 750 2 lanes divided 2LD 18,600 15,500 920 790 4 lanes undivided (1) 4L 37,800 30,800 1,900 1,550 4 lanes divided 4LD 39,800 32,400 2,000 1,630 5 lanes two-way 5L 39,800 32,400 2,000 1,630 6 lanes divided 6LD 59,900 50,000 3,020 2,520 8 lanes divided 8LD 80,100 67,300 4,040 3,390 Notes: 
Based on the 2012 FDOT Quality/LOS Handbook. 
Class I - Roadways with 40 mph or higher posted speed limits. 
Class II - Roadways with 35 mph or lower posted speed limits. 
If heavy vehicle percentages for facility are greater than 10 percent, as determined by Wellington, service volumes may be subject to a corresponding reduction. 
(1) Service volumes for "undivided" roadways assume exclusive left turn lanes are provided at signalized intersections. If there are no left turn lanes, reduce these values by 20 percent.  
Table 15.3.B-1B: LOS D Intersection Thresholds 
LOS HCM Operational Analysis D Greater than 35.0 to 55.0 Seconds of Delay Note: 
The delay identifies seconds of delay greater than 35.0 and less than or equal to 55.0.  
Table 15.3.B-1C: LOS D Speed Thresholds 
Urban Street Class I II III Range of Free Flow Speeds (FFS) 55 to 45 miles per hour 45 to 35 miles per hour 35 to 30 miles per hour Typical FFS 50 miles per hour 40 miles per hour 35 miles per hour LOS Average Travel Speed (Miles per Hour)  D Greater than 21 to 27 Greater than 17 to 22 Greater than 14 to 18 Note: 
Speed values refer to a "range" of values that will achieve LOS D. For example speeds greater than 21 but less than or equal to 27 miles per hour will all be LOS D for a Class I roadway.  
Table 15.3.B-2A: LOS E Link Service Volumes 
Facility Type ADT Peak Hour Directional Class I Class II Class I Class II 2 lanes undivided (1) 2L 17,700 15,600 880 800 2 lanes divided 2LD 18,600 16,400 920 840 4 lanes undivided (1) 4L 37,800 32,100 1,900 1,610 4 lanes divided 4LD 39,800 33,800 2,000 1,700 5 lanes two-way 5L 39,800 33,800 2,000 1,700 6 lanes divided 6LD 59,900 3,020 2,560 8 lanes divided 8LD 80,100 68,100 4,040 3,420 Notes: 
Based on the 2012 FDOT Quality/LOS Handbook. 
Class I - Roadways with 40 mph or higher posted speed limits. 
Class II - Roadways with 35 mph or lower posted speed limits. 
If heavy vehicle percentages for facility are greater than 10 percent, as determined by Wellington, service volumes may be subject to a corresponding reduction. 
(1) Service volumes for "undivided" roadways assume exclusive left turn lanes are provided at signalized intersections. If there are no left turn lanes, reduce these values by 20 percent.  
Table 15.3.B-2B: LOS E Intersection Thresholds 
LOS HCM Operational Analysis E Greater than 55.0 to 80.0 Seconds of delay Note: 
The delay identifies seconds of delay greater than 55.0 and less than or equal to 80.0.  
Table 15.3.B-2C: LOS E Speed Thresholds 
Urban Street Class I II III Range of Free Flow Speeds (FFS) 55 to 45 miles per hour 45 to 35 miles per hour 35 to 30 miles per hour Typical FFS 50 miles per hour 40 miles per hour 35 miles per hour LOS Average Travel Speed (Miles per Hour)  E Greater than 16 to 21 Greater than 13 to 17 Greater than 10 to 14 Note: 
Speed values refer to a "range" of values that will achieve LOS E. For example speeds greater than 16 but less than or equal to 21 miles per hour will all be LOS E for a Class I roadway.  
C.  Project Significance. 
Table 15.3.C-1A: Levels of Significance 
Facility All Links 
(except I-95 and the Turnpike) Significance Level one (1) percent LOS D  
1.  A Project must address all Wellington Roadways Links as identified on the Wellington Roadway Analysis Map on which its Net Peak Hour Directional Trips are greater than one (1) percent of the LOS D of the Link affected on a peak hour directional basis. If no links are significantly impacted, an analysis shall be completed for the first directly accessed link. 
D.  Phasing. Phasing may be utilized by the APPLICANT to establish compliance with this standard if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The Proposed Project is able to comply with all the other Concurrency Requirements of the Plan. 
2.  The proposed phasing results in the Proposed Project complying with the standards set forth in this Article. 
3.  The proposed phasing comports with the extent and timing of the Assured Construction. 
4.  The Village Engineer confirms that construction is in fact Assured Construction. 
5.  For any Assured Construction which is to be completed by the applicant the Applicant must agree in writing prior to the application being accepted that either an Agreement must be executed by all parties prior to or concurrent with the issuance of the Development Order, or the Development Order must have as a condition the completion of the Assured Construction and timely posting of Performance Security. 
6.  Building permits for that portion of a project approved with phasing which if standing alone would be the Entitlement phase of the project may be issued notwithstanding the standards in this Article. 
7.  Conditions of the Development Order are imposed or an Agreement is entered which ensure permits are restricted in accordance with the phasing. 
E.  Reliance on Assured Road Construction. If a project is approved or phased based on Assured Construction, building permits shall be granted for the phase or portion of the project approved based on the Assured Construction no sooner than the award of the contract by a governmental agency for the construction of the improvement, or the commencement of construction, subject to the following: 
1.  If intersection improvements are required to meet the Project Buildout Test and there is a scheduled road construction Project which would incorporate all or a portion of such intersection improvements, then the Village Engineer, in his/her sole and exclusive discretion, may require payment for the cost of such intersection improvement provided all other requirements of the TPS have been satisfied. In that event, upon receipt of the payment, Building Permits shall be granted for a portion of the Project which is phased to such intersection improvements. The payment shall be based on a certified engineering estimate accepted by the Village Engineer. 
2.  However, if the Assured Construction is in the County's Five-Year Road Program or the adopted FDOT Work Program construction and was relied upon for the issuance of the Development Order and the construction is subsequently deleted building permits for development that was phased to that Assured Construction shall be issued, but not sooner than the end of the fiscal year construction was to commence. For purposes of this paragraph, "deleted" shall mean the elimination of the construction project, the material reduction in the scope of construction work or funding thereof (as it affects the construction project), the postponement of the construction project for more than two (2) years beyond the year the construction was originally programmed 
3.  Three-Year Grace Period notwithstanding the requirements in this Subsection, a Project may receive a building permit if the required roadway improvements are in the first three (3) years of PBCs Five-Year Road Program, and the Project is a facility that is wholly owned and operated by State or local government, or a public school. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
CHAPTER 4. - TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES 

Sec. 15.4.1. - Generally. 
    In order to demonstrate that an application for a Development Order complies with this Article, the applicant shall submit a Traffic Impact Study, except as set forth in Section 15.4.2.C. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.4.2. - Required Submission of Impact Study. 
A.  Submittal requirements. 
1.  Development Order Application. Traffic Impact Study or documentation sufficient to establish that the application is not subject to the standards of this Article shall be submitted as a part of any application for a Development Order. 
2.  Extension of a Development Order. In order to receive a time extension, the applicant shall be required to submit either: 
a.  A new Traffic Impact Study that meets the standards of this Article in effect at the time the extension is requested, or 
b.  Documentation sufficient to establish that the Project with the additional time provided by the extension meets the standards of this Article in effect at the time the extension is requested. 
B.  Review by Village Engineer. The Village Engineer, or designee, shall review the information submitted and determine whether the proposed project complies with this Article. The Village Engineer shall coordinate with the Planning Division whether the Development Order meets the other Concurrency Requirements of the Plan. 
C.  No Study Needed. 
1.  Residential. Residential Projects generating fewer than twenty (20) Gross Peak Hour Trips based on adopted trip generation rates shall not be required to submit a Traffic Impact Study. The Net Peak Hour Directional Trips shall be distributed over the Wellington Roadway system by the Village Engineer in accordance with generally accepted traffic engineering principles. 
2.  Non-residential. Non-residential Projects generating fewer than twenty (20) Gross Peak Hour Trips based on adopted trip generation shall not be required to submit a Traffic Impact Study-The Net Peak Hour Directional Trips shall be distributed over the Wellington Roadway system by the Village Engineer, in accordance with generally accepted traffic engineering principles. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.4.3. - Review of Traffic Impact Study. 
A.  Village Engineer Review. On all proposed Projects the Village Engineer, or designee, shall perform such review. The review shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
B.  Prohibitions. In the case of all Development Orders no application shall be certified if issuance of the Development Order would be prohibited by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.4.4. - Traffic Impact Study. 
A.  Scope. A Traffic Impact Study shall be required for any proposed project, except as set forth in Section 15.4.2.C. It shall address the requirements and standards of this Article shall be presented concisely using maps whenever practicable; and shall state all assumptions and sources of information. 
B.  Criteria. The following criteria shall be addressed: 
1.  Level of Service. The Adopted Level of Service as applicable, for all Wellington Roadways and Intersections as identified on the Wellington Roadway Analysis Map shall be used. 
2.  Study Area. The traffic study shall address all significantly impacted Wellington Roadways and Intersections. 
3.  Projected Buildout Period. 
a.  Assumption. The Buildout Period of the project shall be set forth in the Traffic Impact Study and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer based on the following criteria. 
1)  The size, type and location of the proposed project. 
2)  Customary Buildout Periods for projects of similar size, type, and location. 
3)  Any other factors or conditions relevant to the specific project, including special market conditions and schedules of Assured Construction. 
b.  Enforcement. For enforcement purposes, the Buildout Period of the Project shall be deemed complete if any of the following is true: 
1)  In the case of a non-residential project, final COs have been issued for interior tenant improvements for eighty (80) percent of the gross leasable area. 
2)  In the case of residential projects, the issuance of building permits for eighty (80) percent of the total project units as set forth in the master plan or site plan as applicable. 
4.  Project Phasing. The traffic study may reflect a proposed phasing schedule for the development of the proposed Project. This schedule shall address the time at which each phase will place traffic impacts on the Wellington Roadways and shall include the following: 
a.  Generation. Project traffic figures and assignments for each proposed phase; and 
b.  Assured Construction. Where the evaluation of phased traffic impact includes the effect of Assured Construction, sufficient information regarding the proposed construction to ensure that the roadways realistically will be constructed at the times stated. 
5.  Peak Hours. Generally, the study shall address the weekday AM and PM Peak Hours, Total Peak Hour traffic, unless traffic characteristics dictate that only one of the Peak Hours is analyzed. In some cases, the Village Engineer, may still require analysis of other Peak Hours where indicated by accepted traffic engineering principles. The total peak hours analyzed shall not exceed three (3) in number. 
a.  The afternoon Peak Hour between 4:00 and 7:00 p.m. during the Peak Season shall be studied in all cases. Generally, the morning Peak Hour between 6:00 and 9:00 a.m. during the Peak Season shall be also studied, unless higher volumes occur outside of the 6:00 to 9:00 a.m. period at the intersection are observed. In that case other Peak Hours outside of the 6:00 to 9:00 a.m. period during the Peak Season shall be used. 
b.  For Projects with significant traffic impacts on hours and days other than the weekday Peak Hour described above, as determined by the Village Engineer, this alternate Peak Hour during peak season shall also be addressed 
c.  Each AM and PM Peak Hour shall be the highest sum of the volume on the approaches to the intersection. It shall be the highest sum of four (4) continuous 15-minute periods 
d.  Once the weekday AM and PM Peak Hours and alternate Peak Hour as necessary, are established, the Net Peak Hour Directional Trips shall be assigned to the Wellington Intersections and Links for the Peak Hours studied. 
6.  Off-Peak to Peak Season Factors. Off-peak to peak season factors shall be established by the Village Engineer for based upon the best available data and generally accepted traffic engineering principles. Other factors based on generally accepted traffic engineering principles shall be used to update data where newer data cannot be obtained. 
7.  Compliance. The analysis must demonstrate compliance with the standards. 
8.  Professional Services. The traffic study shall be prepared, sealed and signed by a qualified professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Florida and practicing traffic engineering. 
9.  Site Related Improvements. In addition to the Link and intersection standards and studies, all peak hour(s turning movements (including Pass-by trips) shall be shown and analyzed for all points where the Project's traffic meets the Project Accessed Links and other roads where traffic control or geometric changes may be needed, as determined by the Village Engineer. Recommendations shall be made concerning signalization, turn lanes, or other improvements. 
C.  Traffic Volume Components. The traffic impact study shall address the Total Traffic volumes at the Project Buildout Year. 
1.  Existing Traffic-(Peak Season Peak Hour Traffic). Peak Hour Traffic, two-way and directional shall be counted by PBC during the Peak Season as defined in this Article. Where current data (collected no more than thirty (30) months prior to submittal of the Traffic Impact Study) are not available, the Project shall conduct counts. 
a.  Counts-The applicant may provide traffic counts in accordance with accepted traffic engineering principles. Counts shall be made during any continuous on a weekday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. for any AM counts and 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. for PM counts and on other hours and days, as necessary, for the peak hour of the generator. There shall be no counts on Fridays and legal holidays for the weekday analysis, unless otherwise authorized or required by the Village Engineer, in accordance with accepted traffic engineering principles. All data are subject to review and acceptance by the Village Engineer based upon accepted traffic engineering principles. 
b.  Factors-Where a Peak Season traffic count is not readily available, the count which is unavailable may be established using factors established by the Village Engineer for various areas of the County based on the best available data and generally accepted traffic engineering principles. 
2.  Traffic Generation. Traffic generated by the Project shall be computed in the following manner: 
a.  Rates. Trip generation rates presented in the County's Impact Fee Ordinance shall be used to calculate Average Daily project trips. For peak hour Project trip generation and where no appropriate Daily rates are listed in the County's Impact Fee Ordinance, the rate equation or tables published in the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation and Informational Report shall be used unless the Village Engineer accepts that other standards provide a more accurate means to evaluate the rates of generation or if documentation is supplied by the applicant which affirmatively demonstrates more accurate generation rates based on accepted engineering principles. 
b.  Local Conditions-The County and/or Village Engineer may publish, and update from time to time, trip generation rates for local conditions and, if applicable, these rates shall be used instead of the ITE rates. 
c.  Similar Developments-Actual traffic counts which establish the generation rate at three (3) similar developments located in similar areas as the one proposed may be used if approved by the Village Engineer in accordance with accepted traffic engineering principles. These counts shall be made for the weekdays and/or weekends, as necessary, (excluding legal holidays) as set forth in paragraph (1.a) for each site and averaged. 
d.  Internal Traffic-It is acknowledged that some trips generated by mixed use Projects do not exit the Project or enter the Wellington Roadway system. Unless approved by the Village Engineer, credit against the trip generation of a proposed Project shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross trip generation of the Project, not including internalization between Service Station and Convenience Store uses. Additionally, credit for any individual land use within the proposed Project shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross trip generation for the land use, except as provided herein. Internalization between Service Station and Convenience Store uses is established at thirty-two (32) percent of the gross trip generation of the Convenience Store use. 
e.  Pass by Trips-It is acknowledged that some trips generated by a proposed non-residential Project are from existing traffic passing the proposed Project and are not newly generated trips. Credit against the trip generation of the proposed Project may be taken for these trips up to the percentage shown in the County's Impact Fee Ordinance or the ITE manual when approved by the Village Engineer. The study must detail: (1) all traffic generated from the Project, and (2) the number of Pass-By Trips subtracted from the traffic generated by the Project during the Buildout Period of the Project. Uses other than those listed in County's Impact Fee Ordinance and any percentage credit proposed to be taken in excess of that shown in County's Impact Fee Ordinance must be justified based on accepted traffic engineering principles to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer as part of the required traffic study, based upon the peculiar characteristics and location of the proposed Project. Factors which should be considered in determining a different Pass-by rate include type and size of land use, location with respect to service population, location with respect to competing uses, location with respect to the surrounding Wellington Roadway system, and existing and projected traffic volumes. In no case shall the number of Pass-By Trips exceed twenty-five (25) percent of Existing traffic plus Background Traffic on the Link, unless demonstrated otherwise to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer based on generally accepted traffic engineering principles. 
3.  Traffic Assignment. Total Traffic shall be computed, and traffic assignments of the Net Peak Hour Directional Trips made, for each Wellington Roadway Link and Intersection in conformity with accepted traffic engineering principles. The assignments shall address phasing and cover the Buildout Period of the Project. 
4.  Background Traffic. 
a.  Generally. Existing traffic volumes will likely change during the Buildout Period of the proposed project. The traffic study must account for this change in traffic based on Background Traffic during the Buildout Period of the proposed project. The projection of Background Traffic shall generally be based upon the information set forth in the County's TPS Database and on the Historical Traffic Growth Rate Tables, and shall be established in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Article and accepted engineering principles. This change in traffic shall be shown as it relates to the proposed phasing. The Projection of Background Traffic during the Buildout Period of the proposed Project shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer, using the following criteria: 
1)  Historical growth shown on tables prepared by the County Traffic Division and/or Village Engineer; 
2)  Characteristics of growth in the area 
3)  Extent of existing, approved, and anticipated development in the area 
4)  Types and sizes of development in the area; 
5)  Traffic circulation in the area; 
6)  Committed Projects' impact; 
7)  New and assured road construction. 
b.  Historical Growth Rate Tables. Using the Historical Growth Rate Tables prepared by the County Traffic Division and/or the Village Engineer, the study shall forecast the change in traffic volumes based on Background Traffic within the proposed project's Radius of Development Influence during the Buildout Period of the proposed project. The Historical Growth Rate Tables shall be based on historical daily traffic volumes. However, the growth rates shall be applied on a Peak Season, Peak-Hours Directional basis The effect of committed projects shall be considered in projecting the increase or decrease in traffic volumes so as to ensure that there is no double counting or omission in Background Traffic. In using the historical growth tables, engineering judgment shall be used to take into account special circumstances such as the opening of a parallel road or a high traffic generation that may distort the growth trend. For projects with a lengthy buildout time (five (5) years or more) an area wide growth rate using a number of locations in the tables may be appropriate. No growth rate less than zero (0) percent may be used without approval of the Village Engineer when the growth rate is a negative. 
c.  TPS Database. Using the County's TPS Database, all traffic from the unbuilt portion of Projects which have received a concurrency reservation prior to the County Engineer's approval of the proposed Project's traffic study which will add significant trips to any Link within the area surrounding the proposed Project's during the Buildout Period of proposed Project shall be specifically accounted for in projecting Traffic. For Wellington intersections, the TPS Database shall specifically account for all Project Traffic volumes if at least one approach to the intersection has a Project Traffic volume greater than or equal to one (1) percent of the adopted LOS D. No double counting of trips shall occur. A comparison of the traffic projection using historic growth with traffic projections using the County's TPS database plus a nominal growth rate per year shall be completed. 
It is recognized that errors and omissions may occur in the TPS Database which may need to be accounted for in a traffic study. The traffic study shall be amended to include any correction of errors or omissions in the TPS database, so long as either the engineer preparing the traffic study or the Village Engineer or County notifies the other party within thirty (30) days of the initial submission of the traffic study and the error or omission should have been included in the database prior to the date of the initial submission of the traffic study. 
5.  Assured Construction. Assured Construction shall be considered completed as scheduled for the purpose of preparation of the study. Whether it is in fact Assured Construction and the timing of the Assured Construction shall be subject to the confirmation of the Village Engineer. The Traffic Impact Study shall specifically identify the need for phasing based on Assured Construction. 
6.  Project Phasing. The traffic study may reflect a proposed phasing schedule for the development of the proposed project. This schedule shall address the time at which each phase will place traffic impacts on the Wellington Roadways and Intersections and shall include the following: 
a.  Generation. Project traffic figures and assignments for each proposed phase; and 
b.  Assured Construction. Where the evaluation of phased traffic impact includes the effect of Assured Construction, sufficient information regarding the proposed construction to ensure that the roadways realistically will be constructed at the times stated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.4.5. - Site Related Improvements. 
    In addition to the LINK and intersection standards and studies, all peak hour(s) turning movements (including Pass-by trips) shall be shown and analyzed using the analysis in the latest Highway Capacity Manual for all points where the project's traffic meets the Directly Accessed Links and other roads where traffic control or geometric changes may be needed, as determined by the Village Engineer. Recommendations shall be made concerning signalization and turn lanes to ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
CHAPTER 5. - PROPORTIONATE SHARE PROGRAM 

Sec. 15.5.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish a method whereby the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, to be known as the Proportionate Share Program, as required by and in a manner consistent with § 163.3180, F.S. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.5.2. - Applicability. 
    The Proportionate Share Program shall apply to all Projects that fail to meet the standards of this Article on an intersection or roadway. The Proportionate Share Program does not apply to projects exempted from this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.5.3. - General Requirements. 
A.  An applicant may choose to satisfy the transportation concurrency requirements of the Village by making a proportionate share contribution, pursuant to the following requirements: 
1.  The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive plan and applicable land development regulations. 
2.  The roadway improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS is feasible within the ultimate right-of-way planned for that facility. 
B.  Any improvement project proposed to meet the developer's proportionate share obligation must meet the Village design standards for locally maintained roadways. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.5.4. - Submittal Process. 
A.  In the event of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency, the applicant shall have the opportunity to satisfy transportation concurrency through the Proportionate Share Program pursuant to the requirements of Section 15.5.3. 
B.  Eligible applicants shall submit a request to utilize the Proportionate Share Program as part of their Traffic Impact Study to the Village Engineer. 
C.  When a submittal is deemed sufficient, complete, and approved, a proposed proportionate share obligation and binding agreement will be prepared by the Village. 
D.  No proportionate share agreement will be effective until approved by the Village Council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.5.5. - Determining Proportionate Fair-Share Obligation. 
A.  Proportionate share mitigation for concurrency impacts may include, without limitation, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction and contribution of facilities. 
B.  A Project eligible for participation under the Proportionate Share Program shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate share. The fair market value of the proportionate share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ regardless of the method of mitigation. 
C.  The methodology used to calculate a Project's proportionate share obligation shall be as provided for in § 163.3180, F.S., as follows: 
The number of trips from the proposed development expected to reach roadways during peak hours from the complete build out of a stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the peak hour directional maximum service volume of roadways and or intersections resulting from construction of an improvement necessary to maintain or achieve the adopted LOS, multiplied by the construction cost, at the time of developer payment, of the improvement necessary to maintain or achieve the adopted LOS. 
OR 
Proportionate Share = S[[(Development Trips i )/(SV Increase i )] × Cost i ] 
Where: 
Development Trips = Those trips from the stage or phase of development under review that are assigned to roadway segment or intersection "i" and have triggered a deficiency per TPS. 
SV Increase = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to roadway segment or intersection "i" per Section 3. 
Cost = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment "i". Cost shall include all improvements and associated costs, such as design, right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering review, inspection, administration, and physical development costs directly associated with construction at the anticipated cost, including contingencies, in the year it will be incurred. 
D.  If the Village has accepted an improvement proposed by the applicant, then the value of the improvement shall be based on an engineer's certified cost estimate provided by the applicant and approved by the Village Engineer or other method approved by the Village Engineer. 
E.  If the Village has accepted right-of-way dedication for the proportionate share payment, credit for the dedication of the right-of-way shall be valued on the date of the dedication at one hundred twenty (120) percent of the most recent assessed value by the Property Appraiser, or at the option of the applicant, by fair market value established by an independent appraisal approved by the Village at no expense to the Village. This appraisal shall assume no approved development plan for the site. All right-of-way dedicated must be part of a roadway segment that triggered the deficiency per TPS, and must not be site-related. The applicant shall supply a drawing and legal description of the land and a certificate of title or title search of the land to the Village at no expense to the Village. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant based on a Village approved appraisal is more than the Village estimated total proportionate share obligation for the development, then the Village will give the applicant additional road impact fee credit for the difference. Prior to purchase or acquisition of any real estate or acceptance of donations of real estate intended to be used for the proportionate fair share, public or private partners should contact the FDOT for essential information about compliance with federal law and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.5.6. - Impact Fee Credit for Proportionate Share Mitigation. 
A.  Proportionate share contributions shall be applied as a credit against road impact fees. 
B.  Impact fee credits for the proportionate share contribution will be determined when the road impact fee obligation is calculated for the proposed development. Impact fees owed by the applicant will be reduced per the Proportionate Share Agreement as they become due. Once the credit has been exhausted, payment of road impact fees shall be required for each permit issued. The impact fee credit shall be established when the proportionate share contribution is received by the Village. 
C.  The proportionate share obligation is intended to mitigate the transportation impacts of a proposed project. As a result, any road impact fee credit based upon proportionate share contributions for a proposed project cannot be transferred to any other project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Sec. 15.5.7. - Proportionate Share Agreements. 
A.  Upon execution of a proportionate fair-share agreement ("Agreement"), the applicant shall receive a certificate of concurrency approval. Should the applicant fail to apply for a development permit within twelve (12) months, then the Agreement shall be considered null and void, and the applicant shall be required to reapply. 
B.  In the event an Agreement requires the applicant to build one or more road improvements, all such improvements must be commenced prior to issuance of the phased development permit and assured by a binding agreement that is accompanied by a Performance Security sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. It is the intent of this Section that any required improvements be completed before issuance of phased certificates of occupancy. 
C.  Dedication of necessary R-O-W for facility improvements pursuant to a proportionate share agreement must be completed prior to issuance of the phased building permit. 
D.  Any requested change to a development project subsequent to a development order may be subject to additional proportionate share contributions to the extent the change would generate additional traffic that would require mitigation. 
E.  The Village may enter into proportionate share agreements for selected corridor improvements to facilitate collaboration among multiple applicants on improvements to a shared transportation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(Att. A), 4-22-2014) 
Article 16 - HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - ON SITE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS - (ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL RULE I) 

Sec. 16.1.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to establish minimum standards for on-site sewage disposal systems used for treatment and disposal of domestic sewage flows of five thousand (5,000) gallons per day and less. 
Sec. 16.1.2. - Applicability. 
    The regulations of this section shall apply throughout the total area of Palm Beach County. No on-site sewage disposal system shall be installed, modified, repaired or used without first obtaining a permit or required approval from the PBCPHU pursuant to this section. No municipality or political subdivision of the State, including Palm Beach County, shall issue a building or plumbing permit for any building requiring the use of an on-site sewage disposal system unless the owner or builder has received a permit for such system from the PBCPHU. 
Sec. 16.1.3. - Adoption of Chapter 1OD-6. F.A.C. 
    Chapter 1OD-6. F.A.C., and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated into this section. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of chapter 10D-6, F.A.C. and this section, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
Sec. 16.1.4. - General provisions. 
A.  Approved system required. Buildings used or intended for human occupancy, employment or service to the public and locations where persons congregate shall provide toilets connected to an approved sewage waste disposal system. Also, property or locations where persons congregate and are employed, or where property is used by the public for temporary and short periods of duration, such as construction sites, fairs, carnivals, revivals, field locations of agricultural workers, encampments or other use, shall be provided with portable toilets or other approved toilet facilities. The number of toilet facilities to be provided shall be in accordance with the local plumbing code, other applicable local regulations and the F.A.C. No building or premises shall be occupied, sub-let or leased unless provided with an approved sewage disposal system. 
B.  Containment of wastes. Sewage wastes and effluents from an on-site sewage disposal system shall not be allowed to surface onto the ground and shall not be discharged into or permitted to enter streams, surface waters, underground aquifers, ditches or drainage structures. 
C.  Central collection of waste. Total waste flow from any one (1) establishment, whether a single structure or group of structures, shall be centrally collected for treatment and disposal. 
D.  Industrial and commercial wastewater. Wastewater generated by industrial or commercial establishments shall not be discharged into an on-site sewage disposal system if the characteristics of the waste are such that it would cause malfunctioning of the on-site sewage disposal system and/or contamination of the ground water. Wastewater from such establishments shall be owed and disposed of in accordance with FDER requirements. 
E.  FDER approval. Treatment and disposal of the wastewater from a building or establishment shall be in compliance with FDER standards and rules when any one (1) of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The volume of domestic sewage from an establishment exceeds five thousand (5,000) gallons per day. Sec. 16.1.7.A shall be used for determining the total daily sewage flow from an establishment located on one (1) or more parcels of land. 
2.  Sewage or wastewater contains industrial, toxic or hazardous chemical waste. 
3.  The district designation of an area is industrial or manufacturing use, or its equivalent, and the use of the system may be for disposing of wastes which are not domestic wastes. 
F.  Existing systems. Any existing and previously approved system which remains in satisfactory operating condition shall remain valid for use under the terms of this section, and the environmental control rule and permit under which it was approved. If the use of a building is changed or if additions or alterations to a building are made which will increase sewage flow or change sewage characteristics, any on-site sewage disposal system serving such building shall be upgraded to comply with the provisions and requirements of this section. 
G.  Modification of ousting systems. Any on-site sewage disposal system used for disposal of domestic sewage which is designed, constructed, installed, or modified after March 14, 1988 shall conform to the minimum requirements and provisions of this section. Should an emergency or epidemic occur, the PBCPHU may approve temporary systems for waste disposal which may differ from standards set forth in this section, as long as the PBCPHU supervises the operation of the temporary system. 
H.  Discontinuance. Any existing on-site sewage disposal system installed under previous rules and regulations which becomes non-conforming with this Section for conditions or purposes as approved, and which has not been placed in use for a period of one (1) year or more, shall be deemed unapproved and its use for such purpose prohibited. 
I.  Abandonment. Whenever an approved sanitary sewer is made available under the conditions set forth in Sec. 16.1.5.A.1 (sanitary sewer system available), any on-site sewage disposal system shall be abandoned and the sewage wastes from the residences or building discharged to the sanitary sewer within ninety (90) calendar days thereafter. When use of an on-site sewage disposal system is discontinued, it shall be abandoned and its further use for any purpose prohibited. An abandoned septic tank shall be (a) pumped out, (b) the bottom suitably opened or ruptured so as to prevent the tank from retaining water, and (c) filled with clean sand or other suitable material, the actions being taken in the order listed. 
J.  Responsibility for Inspection. It shall be the duty of the PBCPHU to conduct such technical inspections as are reasonable and necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 16.1.5. - Prohibited activities. 
A.  Prohibitions on the use of on-site systems. An on-site sewage disposal system shall not be permitted in any of the following instances. 
1.  Sanitary sewer system available. On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted where an existing sanitary sewer is available. A municipal or investor-owned sewerage system shall be deemed available for connection if the following conditions exist: 
a.  The system is not under a FDER moratorium, and the sewage system has adequate hydraulic capacity to accept the quantity of sewage to be generated by the proposed establishment; and the existing sewer line is within the following distance from the property: 
i.  For estimated sewage flows of six hundred (600) or less gallons per day, the sewage system shall be considered available if a sewer line exists in a public easement or right-of-way which abuts the property or is within one hundred (100) feet of the property and if gravity flow can be maintained from the building drain to the sewer line. 
ii.  For estimated sewage flows greater than six hundred (600) gallons per day to twelve hundred (1,200) gallons per day, if a sewer line, gravity or force main exists in a public easement or right-of-way which is within one hundred (100) feet of the property. 
iii.  For estimated sewage flows greater than twelve hundred (1,200) gallons per day to twenty five hundred (2,500) gallons per day, if a sewer line, gravity or, force main exists in a public casement or right-of-way which is within five hundred (500) feet of the property. 
iv.  For estimated sewage flows greater than twenty-five hundred (2,500) gallons per day to five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, if a sewer line, gravity or force main exists in a public easement or right-of-way which is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property. 
2.  Subject to frequent flooding. On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted where the property is located in an area that is subject to frequent flooding, or where the approved drainage has not been constructed in accordance with the requirements of the South Florida Water Management district and/or the DEPW. 
3.  Unapproved drainage features. On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted for lots in a subdivision where the approved drainage has not been constructed in accordance with the requirements of the SFWMD and/or the DEPW. 
4.  Treatment and disposal of industrial wastes. On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted for treatment and disposal of industrial wastes as defined in this section. 
5.  Commercial food establishments. On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted for commercial establishments where food is processed, handled, prepared or served. This restriction does not apply to retail or prepackaged food stores and to convenience stores where food service is limited to coffee, soft drinks and hot dogs. 
B.  Other prohibited activities. 
1.  Privies. It is prohibited for any person to construct, keep, use or maintain a privy from which human waste is deposited on the surface of the ground or over waters of the State. 
2.  Sale and installation of unapproved systems. No person shall manufacture, sell or install an on-site sewage disposal system unless in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
3.  Drainage into cesspools or dry wells. It is prohibited to drain sewage wastes or septic tank effluent into cesspools or dry wells as means of disposal. 
4.  Organic chemical solvents. Organic chemical solvents shall not be advertised, sold or used in the Village for the purpose of degreasing or declogging on-site sewage disposal systems. 
Sec. 16.1.6. - Permits and approvals. 
A.  General. An on-site sewage disposal system shall not be installed, modified or repaired until a valid permit has been obtained from the PBCPHU. 
1.  Expiration. Permits issued for new construction shall expire after one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance if the system has not been installed. However, if building construction has commenced, the system construction permit shall be extended ninety (90) calendar days beyond the one (1) year expiration date. 
2.  Conditions. If the PBCPHU determines that the disposal of certain wastes into the on-site sewage disposal system may interfere with the proper functioning of the system, the PBCPHU may specify on the permit those conditions that are appropriate for the proper functioning of the system. Upon request of the PBCPHU, the permit and conditions shall be recorded in the public records of Palm Beach County at the permittee's expense. 
3.  Inspections. The on-site sewage disposal system shall not be used or covered with earth before it has passed an inspection by the PBCPHU and a notice of approval has been issued. Should the installer or general contractor fail to notify the PBCPHU prior to covering the system, the PBCPHU shall require that the system be uncovered for inspection. If the system is approved, the PBCPHU shall issue a notice of approval to the owner and, when appropriate, to the Building Department. A building or structure shall not be occupied until a notice of approval has been issued by the PBCPHU. 
B.  Applications for a single lot or parcel. The application and supporting data required for approval of an on-site sewage disposal system for a single lot or parcel of property shall be submitted to the PBCPHU by the owner or his authorized representative. 
1.  Submittal requirements. The application form shall be submitted together with the following: 
a.  A site plan with the property drawn to scale, showing the following: 
i.  Property boundaries with dimensions; 
ii.  Easements; 
iii.  Location of all existing and proposed buildings; 
iv.  Location of all wells; 
v.  Location and layout of treatment receptacle and drainfield; 
vi.  Unobstructed area available for the installation of the on-site sewage disposal system; 
vii.  Potable water lines; 
viii.  Driveways; 
ix.  Parking areas; 
x.  Walkways; 
xi.  Stormwater drainage system; 
xii.  Surface water such as ponds, lakes, streams, ditches, canals or wet areas; 
xiii.  Location and elevation of percolation test and soil profile; . 
xiv.  Location of wells, on-site sewage disposal facilities or other pertinent features on adjacent properties if the features are within two hundred (200) feet of the applicant's lot; and 
xv.  The presence of any marsh area, mangroves, cypress and wetland vegetation on the property or on adjacent properties. 
b.  In cases where there is a drastic variation in the elevation of the lot, a topographical map of the property must be submitted. 
c.  At least one (1) soil profile delineating the textural classification of the native soil within the soil absorption area to a minimum depth of six (6) feet in accordance with USDA Soil Classification Methodology. The PBCPHU may require more than two (2) soil profile on isolated lots where a subdivision approval has not been granted as required under Sec. 16.1.6.C, or where marginal soils, sloping terrain or location problems are anticipated. 
d.  The results of at least one (1) percolation test conducted in the area of the proposed drainfield. When the soil conditions in the general area of the lot are highly variable, a minimum of three (3) percolation tests that are uniformly spaced shall be conducted. A percolation test is generally not required for a single-family residence, but the PBCPHU may request that the test be performed when the soils are moderately or severely limited. 
e.  The existing water table elevation and the estimated wettest season water table elevation. 
2.  Responsibility for Information. The owner shall be held responsible for all information supplied to the PBCPHU. The application and supporting data serve as the basis for the issuance of a construction permit. In the event of a change in any material fact given in the application which served as a basis for issuing a construction permit, the owner shall immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the new conditions are in compliance with the standards in this section, the construction permit shall be amended. If the new conditions are not in compliance with the standards of this section, the permit shall be revoked. 
3.  Preparation of information. The supporting data must be prepared by an engineer registered in the State of Florida. When fill soils are used, they shall be classified by a certified soils engineering testing laboratory registered in the State of Florida or registered professional engineer trained in soil science, using USDA Classification Methodology. 
4.  Documentation of exemptions. If the application is for a lot that is exempt under Sec. 16.1.6.D.1, documentation shall be submitted to substantiate the existence of the lot prior to January 1, 1972. Documentation shall be in the form of: 
a.  A survey, map, plat or drawing prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the State of Florida; 
b.  A survey, map, plat or drawing registered with the Department of Business Regulation, Division of Land Sales; 
c.  A property tax receipt; 
d.  A deed; or 
e.  An agreement for deed. 
C.  Applications for subdivisions. The application and supporting data required for approval of the use of on-site sewage disposal system for a subdivision shall be submitted to the PBCPHU by the owner or his authorized representative. 
1.  Submittal requirements. The supporting data must be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Florida and shall include: 
a.  A plan of the subdivision clearly drawn to scale, showing lot and block arrangements, lot dimensions with all lots numbered and net area of each lot; 
b.  A topographical map with contour interval to indicate surface configurations, including slopes, streams, or water courses, bodies of water, low, wet, or marshy land, and lots on which any fill is to be made; 
c.  A general site location map for reference identification of the area; 
d.  The proposed drainage plans certified by the preparer as being in compliance with existing district drainage plus as approved by the local drainage authority and the SFWMD; 
e.  SFWMD staff report and permit for the proposed drainage system; 
f.  The results of a representative number of percolation tests for at least ten (10) percent of the number of lots; 
g.  The natural soil profile delineating soil classification to a depth of six (6) feet for a representative number of test sites for at least ten (10) percent of the number of lots; the classification shall be in accordance with the USDA Soil Classification Methodology and conducted by a certified soils testing laboratory registered in the State of Florida; 
h.  Water table elevations as existing and for the wettest season, based on N.O.S. or M.S.L. datum; 
i.  All dedicated right-of-way or recorded easements proposed for use in the installation of on-site sewage disposal or water system; and 
j.  If private wells are to be used, evidence that the groundwater is of satisfactory quality and is not threatened by a source of contamination. 
D.  Approval standards. In considering applications for construction of on-site sewage disposal systems, the PBCPHU shall be governed by the following standards. 
1.  Lot area. The lot, unless exempt under Sec. 16.1.6.D.1, shall have a minimum net usable land area of: 
a.  One-half (1/2) acre if the water supply is by means of a community well; or 
b.  One (1) acre if the water supply is by means of an on-site well. 
2.  Drainfield invert. The drainfield invert shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches above the wettest season water table elevation. 
3.  Location and setbacks. 
a.  With respect to groundwater movement, system locations shall be downstream from water supply wells when practical. Systems shall be placed no closer than the minimum distances indicated for the following, except for lots addressed under Sec. 16.1.5.A.1.l.i, 16.1.6.D.14: 
i.  Seventy-five (75) feet from a private well, as defined in Article3; 
ii.  One hundred (100) feet from a non-community well for an establishment having a projected sewage flow of not more than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day or a semi-public well, as defined in Article 3; 
iii.  Two hundred (200) feet from a community well or from a non-community well, as defined in Article 3, for an establishment having a projected sewage flow of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day; and 
iv.  Fifty (50) feet from a non-potable water well, as defined in Article 3. 
b.  Systems shall not be located under buildings or within five (5) feet of building foundations, including pilings for elevated structures, or within five (5) feet of property lines except where property lines abut utility easements which do not contain underground utilities, or where recorded easements provide for the installation of systems for service to more than one (1) lot or property owner. The system shall not be located within ten (10) feet of potable water lines unless such lines are encased in at least six (6) inches of concrete or lines are placed within a sleeve of similar material pipe to a distance of at least ten (10) feet from any part of the drainfield. 
c.  On-site sewage disposal systems shall be located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from the high water line of lakes, streams, canals, or other waters, except in case of lots addressed under Secs. 16.1.6.D.A and 16.1.5.A.1.a.i, 16.1.6.D.14. This requirement also applies to the design high water level of drainage structures and storm water retention areas serving more than two (2) lots. This requirement does not apply to swales which are designed to contain water for less than twenty-four (24) hours after a rainfall. event. Systems shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from design high water level of normally dry individual lot storm water retention areas and swales. 
d.  The site of the installation and the additional required unobstructed land shall not be subject to saturation from sources such as artificial drainage of ground surfaces, driveways, roads or roofs. 
4.  Drainfields. Suitable, unobstructed land shall be available for the installation and proper functioning of drainfields. The minimum unobstructed area shall be: 
a.  At least two (2) times as large as the drainfield area required by Sec. 16.1.7; 
b.  Contiguous to the drainfield; and 
c.  In addition to the setbacks required in Secs. 16.1.6.D.3.a, b and c above. 
5.  Placement in fill. Standard subsurface systems shall not be installed in fill material unless such fill has been allowed to settle for a period of at least six (6) months, or has been compacted to a density comparable to the surrounding natural soil. 
6.  Fine soil. To prevent soil smear and excessive soil compaction, drainfields should not be installed while a fine texture soil is wet above the soil's plastic limit. Soils with textures finer than sand, loamy sand and sandy loam are considered fine texture soils. 
7.  Lot elevation. The final lot elevation at the site of the proposed system installation and the additional unobstructed land shall not be subject to frequent flooding. The drainfield shall not be subject to flooding based on ten-year flood elevations. Flood elevations may be obtained from the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, SFWMD or the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
8.  Effective soil depths. The effective soil depth throughout the drainfield installation area shall extend forty-two (42) inches or more below the bottom of the drainfield. 
9.  Sewage loading capacity. The maximum sewage loading (gallons/acre/day) shall be based on the following standards, except in the case of lots addressed under Sees. 16.1.6.D.13 and 16.1.5.A.1.l.i, 16.1.6.D.14: 
a.  Twenty-five hundred (2,500) gallons per acre per day for lots served by a community well; 
b.  Fifteen hundred (1,500) gallons per acre per day for lots served by on-site wells. Contiguous unpaved and non-compacted road right-of-ways, and easements with no subsurface obstructions that would affect the operation of drainfield systems, shall be included in total lot size calculations. Where an unobstructed easement is contiguous to two (2) or more lots, each lot shall receive its pro rata share of the area contained in the easement. Streams, lakes, drainage ditches, marshes and other such bodies of surface water shall not be included in total lot size calculations. Sec. 16.1.7.A shall be used for determining average daily domestic sewage flows for non-residential establishments. For residences and residential establishments average daily sewage flow calculations shall be based on Table 16.1-1. Where the number of bedrooms indicated on the floor plan and the corresponding heated or cooled area of a dwelling unit in Table 16.1-1 do not coincide, the standards which will result in the greatest estimated sewage flow shall apply. 
Table 16.1-1 
Residential Sewage Flow Calculations 
No. Bedrooms/Heated or Cooled Area 
Per Dwelling Unit Gallons of Sewage Flow per 
Day Per Dwelling Unit 1 Bedroom/750 sq. ft. or less 150 2 Bedrooms/751-1,200 sq. ft. 250 3 bedrooms/1,201-2,250 sq. ft. 350 4+ Bedrooms/2,251-3,300 sq. ft 450  
Each additional bedroom or each additional seven hundred fifty (750) square feet shall increase estimated sewage flows by one hundred (100) gallons per dwelling unit. 
10.  Design and size standards. The actual design and size of on-site systems to serve non-residential establishments and residences shall be based on requirements found in Sec. 16.1.7.A. 
11.  Mound system. A mound system may be used to overcome certain unfavorable site conditions such as seasonal high water table, shallow permeable soil overlying slowly permeable soil and shallow permeable soil located over creviced or porous bedrock. 
12.  Lot size exemptions. Parcels or tracts of land which were legally described on a deed, agreement for deed, survey, map, plat or drawing prior to January 1, 1972 or were part of the records of the Palm Beach County Tax Assessor's Office prior to January 1, 1972 shall be exempt from the lot size requirements of Sec. 16.1.6.D as long as a conditional use has not been granted or an amendment to the Future Land Use Map has not been made; provided, however, that neither an amendment to the Future Land Use Map which does not increase the permitted residential density of units on the parcels or tracts nor an amendment to the Future Land Use Map initiated by action of Palm Beach County shall be deemed to divest the parcels or tracts of the exemption provided. Qualification for exemption shall require submittal of documents specified in Sec. 16.1.6.B.4. Such lots are further exempt from the provisions of Secs. 16.1.6.D.3.c and 16.1.6.D.9, 16.1.6.D.9.b as follows: 
a.  A minimum surface water setback of only fifty (50) feet is required provided the soils are not of the type addressed in Sec. 16.1.7.D.14. 
b.  Lots at least five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet in total size shall qualify for a single-family residence having no more than two (2) bedrooms or no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of heated or cooled area. 
13.  Location within two hundred ten-day travel time contour. The following additional restrictions apply to on-site sewage disposal systems that are proposed within the two hundred ten-day travel time contour of an existing or proposed wellfield. These restrictions apply to requests for permits on individual lots, existing subdivisions and new subdivisions. 
Travel Time (Days) Maximum Sewage Loading 
(Gallons/acre/day) Less than or equal to 30 350 Greater than 30 
but less than or equal to 210 600  
14.  Special soil conditions. The following standards shall apply when the soil profile, as required under Sec. 16.1.6.B.1.c, shows the presence of hardpan or bedrock or of soils classified as sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, clay and organic soils. The Palm Beach County Soil Survey prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service or other available data may be used by the PBCPHU to determine the presence of the above noted soils. 
a.  The maximum sewage loading shall not exceed four hundred fifty (450) gallons per acre per day. 
b.  The on-site sewage disposal system shall be placed no closer than the minimum distances indicated for the following: 
i.  One hundred (100) feet from a private well, as defined in Article 3; 
ii.  Three hundred (300) feet from a non-community well and a semi-public well, as defined in Sec. Article 3; 
iii.  Five hundred (500) feet from a community well, as defined in Sec. Article 3; 
iv.  Seventy-five (75) feet from a non-potable water well, as defined in Sec. Article 3; and 
v.  One hundred (100) feet from the high water line of lakes, streams, canals or other surface waters. 
Sec. 16.1.7. - Design and construction standards. 
A.  Design flows. Minimum design flows for systems serving any structure, building or group of buildings shall be based on estimated daily sewage flow, as determined from Table 16.1-2 or, for all structures except residences, the PBCPHU may accept metered water use data in lieu of the estimated sewage flows set forth in Table 16.1-2. For metered flow consideration, the applicant shall provide authenticated monthly water use data documenting water consumption for the most recent twelve-month period for at least six (6) similar establishments. Similar establishments are those of comparable size and operations engaged in the same type of business or service, which are located in the same type of geographic environment and which have approximately the same operating hours. Metered flow values shall not be considered to be a reliable indicator where one (1) or more of the establishments utilized in the sample has exceeded the monthly flow average for all six (6) establishments by more than twenty-five (25) percent, or where the different establishments demonstrate wide variations in monthly flow totals. 
Table 16.1-2 
Estimated Domestic Sewage Flows 
Use Unit Gallons/ 
Day COMMERCIAL Airports Passenger 
Employee (8 hr. shift) 5 
20 Barber and beauty shops Chair 100 Bowling alleys Toilet wastes only/lane 100 Country club Resident 
Member 
Employee (8 hr. shift) 100 
25 
20 Dentist offices Wet chair 
Dry chair 200 
50 Doctors offices Doctor 250 Factories, exclusive of industrial wastes Gallons/Employee/8 hr. shift 
No showers provided 
Showers provided   
20 
35 Hotels & motels Regular/room 
Resort hotels, camps & cottages/person 
Add for establishments with self 
service, laundry facilities/machine 150 
150  
400 Office buildings Employee/8 hr. shift 20 Service stations Water closet & per urinal 250 Shopping centers without food 
or laundry establishments Square foot of floor space 0.1 Stadiums, race tracks, ball parks Seat 5 Stores Square foot of floor space 0.1 Swimming and bathing facilities, public Person 10 Theaters Indoor, auditoriums/Seat 
Outdoor, drive-ins/Space 5 
10 Trailer or Mobile Home Park Trailer space 200 Travel Trailer or recreational vehicle park Travel trailer (overnight), without water and sewerhookup/trailer space 
Travel trailer(overnight), with water and sewer 
hookups/trailer space 75 
  
100 Warehouses, dry storage only Square foot of floor space 0.04 INSTITUTIONAL Churches Seat 3 Nursing, rest homes Bed-(does not include kitchen wastewater flows) 100 Institutions Meal 5 Parks, public picnic Toilets only/Person 
Bathhouse, showers & toilets/Person 5 
10 Public institutions other than schools and hospitals Person-(does not include kitchen wastewater flows) 100 Schools Student 
Day-type 
Add for showers 
Add for day school workers 
Boarding type   
15 
5 
15 
75 Worker or construction camps, Semi-permanent Worker 50 RESIDENTIAL Single-family or multifamily Dwelling unit 
1 bdrm. and 750 sq. ft. or less heated or cooled area 
2 bdrms. and 751-1,200 sq. ft. heated or cooled area 
3 bdrms. and 1201-2250 sq. ft. heated or cooled area 
4 or more bdrms. and 2,251-3,300 sq. ft. heated or cooled area 
Each additional bdrm. over 4 add.   
  
150 
  
300 
  
450 
  
600 
75 Other Occupant 75  
    For each additional bedroom or each additional seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of building area or fraction thereof in a dwelling unit, system sizing shall be increased by one hundred fifty (150) gallons per dwelling unit. 
B.  Septic tank capacity. Minimum effective septic tank capacity shall be determined from Table 16.1-3. However, where multiple-family dwelling units are jointly connected to a septic tank system, minimum effective septic tank capacities specified in the table shall be increased by at least seventy-five (75) gallons for each dwelling unit connected to the system. 
Table 16.1-3 
Septic Tank Capacity 
Average Sewage Flow 
(Gallons/Day) Minimum Effective Capacity 
(Gallons) 0-500 900 501-600 1050 601-700 1200 701-800 1350 801-900 1500 901-1000 1650 1001-1250 1900 1251-1500 2200 1501-2000 2700 2001-2500 3200 2501-3000 3700 3001-3500 4300 3501-4000 4800 4001-4500 5300 4501-5000 5800  
C.  Laundry waste systems. A separate laundry waste system may be utilized for residences. Where a separate system is used, the following requirements shall apply. 
1.  The minimum drainfield absorption area shall be seventy-five (75) square feet for a one (1) or two (2) bedroom residences with an additional twenty-five (25) square feet for each additional bedroom. The PBCPHU may require additional drainfield area depending on site specific conditions. 
2.  The laundry waste interceptor shall meet the requirements of Sec. 16.1.9.I. 
3.  A size reduction of twenty-five (25) percent shall be allowed for the main septic tank and drainfield system. However, the minimum capacity of the septic tank shall not be reduced below nine hundred (900) gallons. 
D.  Drainfleld absorption area. The minimum absorption area for drainfield systems shall be based on estimated domestic sewage flows and Table 16.1-4. Table 16.1-4 assumes the use of drain trenches. If an absorption bed is used in lieu of drain trenches, the size of the absorption area shall be increased by twenty-five (25) percent for sand, loamy sand and sandy loam soils and by fifty (50) percent for other approved soil classes. Mound drainfield size shall be based on the quality of fill material utilized in the mound system and shall be in compliance with the following table: 
Fill Material Maximum Sewage Loading Rate 
(Gallons/sq. ft./day) Sandy or Loamy sand 1.2 Sandy Loam 0.6  
Table 16.1-4 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Soil Textural Classification Percolation Rate Maximum Sewage 
Loading Rate 
(Gallons per sq. ft./Day) Sand and Loamy Sand Less than 2 minutes/inch 2.0 Sandy Loam 
Fine Sand 2-4 minutes/inch 
2-4 minutes/inch 1.5 
1.2 Loam and Silt Loam 5-10 minutes/inch 1.0 Silt and Sandy Clay Loam Greater than 10 minutes/inch but not exceeding 15 min/inch .75 Clay Loam, Silty Clay Loam, 
Sand Clay and Silty Clay Greater than 15 minutes/inch but not exceeding 30 min/inch 0.50 Clay, Organic Soils, Hardpan and Bedrock Greater than 30 minutes/inch Unsatisfactory for standard subsurface system Very Coarse Sand, Gravel and Fractured Rock Less than 1 minute/inch and a water table less than 4 feet below the drainfield Unsatisfactory for standard subsurface system  
1.  U.S. Department of Agriculture major soil textural classification groupings and methods of field identification are explained in the Florida Soils Identification Handbook. Laboratory sieve analysis of soil samples may be necessary to confirm field evaluation be specific soil textural classification. The U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service "Soil Textural Triangle" shall be used to classify soil groupings based on the proportion of sand, silt and clay size particles. 
2.  When all other site conditions are favorable, thin horizons or strata of moderate or severe limited soil may be replaced with slightly limited soil. The resulting soil profile must be satisfactory to a minimum depth of fifty-four (54) inches beneath the bottom surface of the proposed drainfield. The width of the replacement area shall be at least three (3) times the drain trench width and for absorption beds shall include an area at least ten (10) feet wider than the proposed bed width. The drainfield shall be centered in the replaced area. 
E.  Drainfield system construction standards. 
1.  Distribution box. Where gravity flow is possible, a distribution box shall be required for distributing sewage from the septic tank or other treatment receptacle to the drainfield. The distribution box may be built as an integral part of the septic tank or may be a separate unit set on solid ground and anchored in the drainfield. 
a.  Distribution boxes shall be watertight, constructed of durable materials, have adequate structural strength, and be of sufficient size to accommodate the required number of distribution pipes. 
b.  Each distribution pipe shall be connected individually to the box. 
c.  The invert of inlets to the box shall be at least one (1) inch above the invert of the outlets. The invert of all outlets shall be level with respect to each other. 
2.  Header pipe. A header pipe shall be used in lieu of a distribution box when an automatic dosing system is used for drain trenches or absorption beds over one thousand (1,000) square feet as required under Sec. 16.1.7.E.3. The header pipe shall be installed in compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  Header pipe shall meet requirements of ASTM D3034-83, for polyvinyl chloride material or ASIM F 405412a, heavy duty classification, for smooth inner wall polyethylene material. Header pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of two (2) inches. 
b.  The header pipe shall be laid level with direct, watertight connections to each distribution pipe and the dosing tank outlet pipe. The header pipe shall be encased in filter material and restrained with concrete that blocking. 
3.  Automatic dosing system. An automatic dosing system shall be used where the required area of the drainfield is greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet or where gravity flow into the drainfield is not possible. Plans and equipment specifications for automatic dosing systems shall be approved by the PBCPHU prior to construction or installation. Pumps used to distribute sewage effluent must be certified by the manufacturer to be suitable for such purpose. 
a.  Dosing systems for less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of drainfield shall consist of a dosing tank that receives the flow from a septic tank or other treatment receptacle. This dosing tank shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches in diameter, or equivalent rectangular size, and shall be provided with one (1) or more pumps with level controls set in accordance with the requirements set forth in Secs. 16.1.7.E.3.c and 16.1.7.E.3.d. Two (2) pumps shall be required for commercial use and multifamily residential use where estimated establishment sewage flows exceed four hundred fifty (450) gallons per day. 
b.  Systems having mom than two thousand (2,000) square feet of drainfield shall have two (2) dosing pumps, with each pump serving one-half (1/2) of the total required drainfield. The pumps shall dose alternately. 
c.  The volume of the dosing chamber between the pump operating levels shall be adequate to assure that the entire distribution pipe is dosed each cycle. The volume of pipe typically used in drainfield systems is as follows: 
Pipe Size Volume of Conduit 2 inch 0.16 Gal. Per foot 4 inch 0.65 Gal. Per foot 6 inch 1.47 Gal. Per foot  
d.  When a drainfield is installed in sand, loamy sand or sandy loam soils, operating levels should be adjusted to dose the drainfield four (4) times in a twenty-four-hour period. For fine textured soils the drainfield should be dosed no more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period. 
e.  A high water alarm shall be provided to warn of pump failures. 
4.  Drain trenches and absorption beds. Drain trenches are the standard drainfield systems used for disposing of effluent from septic tanks or other treatment receptacles. Absorption beds may be approved by the PBCPHU on a case-by-case basis and used in lieu of the drain trench method; they shall not be constructed and used without prior approval. These systems shall be constructed as specified below: 
a.  When utilizing the drain trench method, the width of the trench at the bottom shall be eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches. There shall be a minimum separation distance of six (6) feet between centers of the trenches. 
b.  The distance between the centers of distribution lines in an absorption bed shall be a maximum of three (3) feet for four (4) inch pipe and four (4) feet for six (6) inch pipe. The distance between the side wall of the bed and the center of the outside drain line shall be one and one-half (11/2) feet for drain pipe. 
c.  All portions of the header pipe or perforated pipe, shall be installed in filter material of washed and screened gravel, stone, slag, or similar material meeting State of Florida Department of Transportation (DOT) specifications under Section 901, "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1991". Filter material may vary in size from one-quarter (1/4) inch to two (2) inches and shall be free of excess fines which could clog the soil infiltrative surface. Approved standard sizes for various filter materials are: 
Material DOT Size Number Limestone, slag and similar material 3, 4 or 5 Quartz rock and river gravel 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7  
d.  Filter material shall encase the distribution pipe to a minimum depth of six (6) inches under the pipe and have a total depth of at least twelve (12) inches extending throughout the width of the trench or absorption bed. 
e.  The filter material in place shall be protected from infiltration of earth backfill by an effective barrier of polyester bonded filament or other acceptable material as determined by the PBCPHU. 
f.  The maximum depth from the invert of the distribution pipe to the finished ground surface shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches. The minimum earth cover over the top of the distribution box or header pipe shall be six (6) inches. 
g.  The inside diameter of the distribution pipe shall be determined based on the type and design of the proposed drainfield system. However, for standard subsurface systems, inside pipe diameter shall not be less than four (4) inches. Perforated pipe shall have a perforated area of one and one-half (11/2) square inches per linear foot. Perforations shall be located in the bottom half of the pipe. However, for drainfield systems over five hundred (500) square feet in size, the distribution perforation area and hole configuration shall be especially designed in order to assure that effluent is distributed throughout the drainfield area. All plastic pipe shall conform to the standards of ASTM F 405-82a. For standard subsurface systems, distribution pipe shall be graded with a downward slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch to one-half (1/2) inch per ten (10) feet. In case of an automatic dosing system, the distribution pipe may be placed level or on a downward slope not exceeding one-half (1/2) inch per ten (10) feet. The maximum length of distribution pipe shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet and where two (2) or more pipes are used, they shall be, as near as practical, the same length. The ends of two (2) or more distribution pipes in an automatic dosing system, shall be connected to produce a continuous circuit. 
5.  Mound system. A mound system may be used to overcome certain unfavorable site conditions and must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The design shall comply with all the standards outlined in Sec. 16.1.6.D. 
b.  The maximum height, base to crest, of a mound system shall be thirty-six (36) inches. However, prior to the construction of a mound system, all or a portion of a lot may be filled utilizing satisfactory soil. If a lot or portion of a lot is filled, the fill shall extend a minimum of twenty (20) feet in all directions beyond the perimeter of the mound base. 
c.  The "O" Horizon of original topsoil and vegetation must be removed from the fill site and the exposed underlying soil plowed or roughened to prevent formation of an impervious barrier between the fill and natural soil. If unsatisfactory soil is to be replaced beneath the mound, the width of the replacement area shall be at least ten (10) feet wider than the proposed drainfield absorption bed. 
d.  There shall be a minimum five (5) feet separation between the shoulder of the fill and the nearest trench or absorption bed sidewall. To taper the maximum elevation of the mound down to the toe of the slope, additional fill shall be placed at a minimum four to one (4:1) grade, provided that where the mound is to be sodded concurrent with its construction, the additional fill may be placed at a minimum two to one (2:1) grade. When a mound is not sodded concurrent with its construction, the mound shall be seeded with grass and a layer of hay or similar cover shall be placed to prevent mound erosion. The mound shall be stabilized within thirty (30) days of completion of mound construction. 
e.  There shall be a nine (9) to twelve (12) inch soil cap spread evenly over the drainfield gravel. 
f.  The site shall be landscaped according to permit specifications and shall be protected from vehicular traffic or other activity that could damage the system. Storm water run off from the mound system shall not be allowed to drain onto neighboring property. 
6.  Large diameter drainpipe trench (LDDT) systems. Large diameter drainpipe trench systems can be substituted for gravel filled drain trenches where the systems are to be installed in sand, loamy sand or sandy loam soils. Verification of the aforementioned soil categories shall be made by certified laboratory. Where LDDT systems are utilized, they shall be constructed of at least eight (8) inch minimum inside diameter corrugated tubing encased in a filter wrap. Each linear foot of eight (8) and ten (10) inch diameter drainpipe is equivalent to two (2) square feet and three (3) square feet respectively of soil absorption area. LDDT systems shall not be utilized in mound systems. Large diameter drainpipe shall be manufactured in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  The eight (8) inch or ten (10) inch inside diameter tubing shall be corrugated polyethylene, or of material in strength and durability meeting the requirements of ASTM F667, standard specification for eight (8) inch, ten (10) inch, twelve (12) inch and fifteen (15) inch corrugated polyethylene tubing with the following exceptions: 
i.  Perforations shall be cleanly cut and uniformly spaced along the length of the tubing as follows: two (2) rows of three-eighths ( 3/8 ) to one-half (1/2) inch diameter holes located one hundred fifteen (115) degrees - one hundred twenty-five (125) degrees apart along the bottom half of the tubing with each row of holes 57.5 degrees - 62.5 degrees up from the bottom centerline. These perforations should be staggered so that there is only one (1) hole in each corrugation. 
ii.  The tubing shall be marked with a visible top location stripe. 
b.  All large diameter drainpipe shall be encased, at the point of manufacture, with a spun bonded nylon, or other material of similar strength and durability. This wrap shall have the following general qualities: 
Physical Properties Minimum 
Values Grab Strength, lbs. 
(ASTM D1682) 11 Burst Strength, psi (ASTM D3887) 26 Air Permeability, cfm per sq. ft. (ASTM D737) 500 Water Flow Rate, gpm per sq. ft. at 3" head 500 Surface Reaction to water (Polyethylene 
particles in water solution) Hydrophilic Particle Size (Microns) Percent 
Retained 70 80 60 68 50 56 40 40 30 22 20 5  
c.  LDDT system installations shall conform to all rules and regulations which apply to gravel filled trench systems with the following exceptions: 
i.  The large diameter drainpipe shall have at least twelve (12) inches but not more than twenty-four (24) inches of soil cover. In addition, the distribution box outlet invert of header pipe invert shall be at least one (1) inch higher than the invert of the large diameter drainpipe perforations. The invert of the large diameter drainpipe shall be considered as the bottom surface of the drainfield when applying the site evaluation criteria of Sec. 7.7. 
ii.  The pipe shall be laid level and positioned in the trench so that each row of drain holes is located approximately sixty (60) degrees from the bottom centerline of the pipe. A cap shall be placed on the end of each line. 
iii.  The trench shall be backfilled to grade with slightly limited soil. 
F.  Treatment receptacles. The following requirements shall apply to all treatment receptacles manufactured for use in the Village or Palm Beach County unless specifically exempted by other provisions of these sections: 
1.  Treatment receptacles shall be watertight and may have single or multiple compartments, or receptacles may be placed in series, to achieve required liquid capacity. The first chamber of a multi-compartment receptacle or the first receptacle of two (2) or more receptacles placed in series shall have an effective liquid capacity of at least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total required liquid capacity. Additional chambers shall have a minimum effective liquid capacity equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) of the liquid capacity of the first chamber. 
2.  Each compartment shall have access provided by twenty-four (24) inch maximum width sectional lids, or have manholes, with each manhole having a minimum area of two hundred twenty-five (225) square inches. Manholes or sectional lids shall be located so as to allow access to the inlet and outlet devices. Single compartment receptacles shall have either (1) an access manhole or a sectional lid over the inlet extending to ground surface, or (2) a permanent marker, such as a minimum one hundred forty-four (144) square inch by four (4) inch thick concrete pad, exposed at finished grade to indicate the location of the inlet manhole or sectional lid. For multi-compartment receptacles in series, manholes or sectional lids shall extend to finished grade; or, alternatively, permanent markers shall be placed at finished grade over the first compartment inlet and the last compartment outlet. When exposed at ground surface, an appropriate mechanism shall be provided to make access manholes resistant to vandalism and tampering. 
3.  The liquid depth of compartments shall be at least forty-two (42) inches. Liquid depths greater than seventy-two (72) inches shall not be considered in determining the effective liquid capacity. 
4.  A minimum free board or air space of fifteen (15) percent of the volume of the holding capacity of the receptacle shall be provided. 
5.  The inlet invert shall enter the receptacle one (1) to three (3) inches above the liquid level of the receptacle. A vented inlet tee, vented sweep or a baffle shall be provided to divert incoming sewage. The inlet device shall have a minimum diameter of four (4) inches and shall not extend below the liquid surface more than thirty-three (33) percent of the liquid depth. 
6.  A minimum four (4) inch diameter vented outlet tee sweep or baffle shall extend below the liquid level of the receptacle a distance not less than thirty (30) percent nor greater than forty (40) percent of the liquid depth, and shall extend at least five (5) inches above the liquid level. The submerged opening of the outlet fixture shall be provided with an approved solids deflection device to reduce the area exposed to the vertical rise and fall of solid particles by at least ninety (90) percent. Turning the submerged opening of an outlet device ninety (90) degrees from the vertical will satisfy the solids deflection device requirement. 
7.  The inlet and outlet devices shall be located at opposite ends of the receptacle so as to be separated by the maximum distance possible and shall be attached in a watertight manner. 
8.  Sewage now between the first and second chamber of a multi-chamber receptacle shall interconnect, utilizing either a minimum six (6) inch diameter hole or equivalent size slot in the wall or with a minimum six (6) inch diameter vented and inverted U-fitting or a tee. Receptacles in series shall interconnect utilizing a vented, inverted U-fitting or a tee. The intake of the outlet device or hole invert shall extend below the liquid surface approximately thirty-three (33) percent of the liquid depth. 
9.  Receptacles shall be provided with a suitable legend cast or stamped into the wall at the inlet end, and within six (6) inches of the top of the wall. The legend shall identify the manufacturer, the year the tank was manufactured and shall indicate the effective liquid capacity of the receptacle in gallons. 
G.  Construction materials for treatment receptacles. 
1.  Concrete receptacles. Concrete treatment receptacles shall be watertight and may be built of precast or poured-in-place concrete which has a design mix for unit compressive strength of at least three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch after twenty-eight (28) days curing. 
a.  Precast concrete receptacles with a capacity of twelve hundred (1,200) gallons or less shall have a minimum wall and bottom thickness of two (2) inches. Precast receptacles with a capacity exceeding twelve hundred (1,200) gallons shall have a minimum wall and bottom thickness of three (3) inches. Precast concrete receptacles shall contain reinforcing to facilitate handling. Receptacles of concrete poured in place shall have a minimum wall and bottom thickness of four (4) inches. The bottoms of concrete treatment receptacles shall be monolithic and an integral part of the walls. 
b.  Receptacles with capacities of twelve hundred (1,200) gallons or less shall have tops or covers of concrete with a minimum thickness of three (3) inches when precast and four (4) inches when poured in place. When capacities exceed twelve hundred (1,200) gallons, the tops shall be precast with a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. 
c.  Tops shall be reinforced with three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch steel reinforcing rods on six (6) inch centers in each direction. Whenever vehicular traffic is anticipated to cross over any treatment receptacle, traffic lids shall be installed with manhole covers to finished grade. Traffic lids and treatment receptacles shall be designed to support a minimum load of ten (10) tons. 
2.  Fiberglass receptacles. Fiberglass reinforced plastic treatment receptacles shall not be used under any area subject to vehicular traffic. The following structural requirements are applicable to fiberglass receptacles and other receptacles made of a comparable class of materials. 
a.  Resins and sealants used in the receptacles manufacturing process shall be capable of effectively resisting the corrosive effects of sewage, sewage gases and soil burial. Materials used shall be formulated to withstand shock, vibration, normal household chemicals, earth and hydrostatic pressure when either full or empty. 
b.  Not less than thirty (30) percent of the total weight of the receptacle shall be fiberglass reinforcement. Fiberglass receptacles with an effective liquid capacity of fifteen hundred (1,500) gallons and less shall have a minimum wall thickness of one-quarter (1/4) inch. However, a wall thickness of not less than three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) inch will be allowed in small isolated areas of the receptacle. 
c.  Internal surfaces shall be coated with an appropriate gel coating to provide a smooth, porefree, and watertight surface. 
d.  Two (2) piece receptacles shall be made watertight, by the use of an approved sealer and approved non-corrosive fasteners. 
e.  Receptacles shall be constructed so that all parts meet the following mechanical requirements: 
i.  Ultimate tensile strength - minimum twelve thousand (12,000) PSI when tested in accordance with ASTM D 638-82, Standard Method of Test for Tensile Properties of Plastics. 
ii.  Flexural strength - minimum nineteen thousand (19,000) PSI when tested in accordance with ASTM D 790-81, Standard Method of Test for Flexural Properties of Plastics. 
iii.  Flexural modulus of elasticity - minimum eight hundred thousand (800,000) PSI when tested in accordance with ASTM D 790-81, Standard of Test for Flexural Properties of Plastics. 
f.  A test report from an independent testing laboratory is required to substantiate that individual receptacle designs and material formulations meet the requirements of Sec. 16.1.7.D.2.l above. 
g.  Physical properties for receptacles over fifteen hundred (1,500) gallons effective liquid capacity must be approved by the PBCPHU. 
h.  Receptacle lids shall be securely fastened or sealed to prevent unwarranted access to the contents of the receptacles. 
3.  Other materials. Treatment receptacles to be constructed of other materials shall have prior approval from the PBCPHU. 
H.  Grease trap. A grease trap is not required for a residence. However, one (1) or more grease traps are required where grease waste is produced in quantities that could otherwise cause line stoppage or hinder sewage disposal. The design of grease traps shall be based on standards found in applicable local plumbing codes. In addition, the following general requirements apply when determining the proper use and installation of a grease trap used as a component of an on-site sewage disposal system. 
1.  Grease traps must be located so as to provide easy access for routine inspection, cleaning and maintenance. Manholes shall be provided over the inlet and outlet of each grease trap and be brought to finished grade. 
2.  Where a grease trap is required, wastewater containing grease shall first pass through the trap and then be discharged into the first compartment of a treatment receptacle or other approved system. 
3.  Invert of inlet shall be a minimum of three (3) inches above liquid level line of grease trap. 
4.  Flow from trap shall be baffled with tee or vented sweep (quarter bend) at outlet and extending within eight (8) inches of bottom of trap. 
5.  The minimum size grease trap shall be no smaller than seven hundred fifty (750) gallons. 
I.  Laundry waste interceptor. When a separate system is installed to dispose of wastewater from home washing machines only, the retention tank or interceptor for such system shall meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  The minimum effective capacity shall be two hundred twenty-five (225) gallons when the estimated sewage flow is less than or equal to nine hundred (900) gallons per day and seven hundred fifty (750) gallons for flows greater than nine hundred (900) gallons per day. 
2.  The interceptor shall be baffled and vented as specified in the septic tank construction standards found in Sec. 16.1.7.F. 
3.  The interceptor shall not be used as a grease trap. 
J.  Portable toilets. The following general standards apply to portable toilets: 
1.  Portable toilets shall be self contained, have self-closing doors, have screened vents and shall be designed and maintained so that insects are excluded from the waste container. 
2.  Waste receptacles shall be watertight and made of non-absorbent, acid resistant, non-corrosive and easily cleanable material. 
3.  The floors and interior walls shall have a non-absorbent finish and shall be easily cleanable. 
4.  The inside of the structure housing the storage compartment shall be cleaned and disinfected on each service visit. 
5.  Portable toilets shall be serviced weekly or at more frequent intervals to prevent the creation of unsanitary conditions. 
K.  Alternative systems. When approved by the PBCPHU, alternative systems may be utilized where septic tank systems are not suitable or where a greater degree of treatment is desirable. All rules pertaining to drainfield systems and their design shall apply to alternative systems. Use of an alternative system may require the establishment of procedures for routine maintenance, operational surveillance and environmental monitoring to assure that the system continues to function properly. Use of a system to serve more than one (1) residence or commercial building under separate ownership and when located on separate lots shall require the establishment of a local sewer district, maintenance franchise or other legally binding arrangement for the operation and maintenance of such system. In addition, the PBCPHU shall require the submission of plans prepared by an engineer registered in the State of Florida and qualified in the field of waste water system design prior to considering the use of any alternative system. The PBCPHU shall also require the design engineer to certify that the installed system complies with the approved design and installation requirements. The following alternative systems may be considered for approval by the PBCPHU. 
1.  Compost toilets. Organic waste composting toilets may be approved for use, provided that graywater and any other liquid and solid waste is properly collected and disposed of in accordance with standards established in this Section; odor control is provided; and the system has NSF approval. 
2.  Aerobic treatment. Aerobic treatment units may be utilized for residential and commercial domestic sewage treatment, provided that the unit to be installed is in compliance with National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) standards for Class I or Class 11 systems as defined by NSF Standards Number 40, revised May 1983, and provided the unit is approved by the PBCPHU. The following additional requirements shall also apply: 
a.  An appropriate failure warning device shall be installed in a conspicuous location. 
b.  Servicing equipment and replacement parts must be readily available to provide for continuous operation of the system. 
c.  There shall be no bypass designed into the unit. Effluent shall not leave the unit without receiving treatment necessary to achieve the appropriate NSF Class I or Class II effluent quality. 
d.  Effluent from an aerobic sewage treatment unit shall be disposed of on the owner's property in conformance with other requirements of this Section. 
e.  There shall be an approved public or private management entity to service and maintain each aerobic treatment. Eligible management entities include cities, counties, water and sewer districts, sanitary districts, and public or private utilities. A private commercial management entity may be utilized provided each homeowner, or group of homeowners, submits a written contract to the PBCPHU which guarantees that the aerobic treatment unit will be maintained for the life of the system. Also, where State or local laws require a homeowners association for a particular type of development, such non-profit corporation may be considered to be an acceptable management entity. 
f.  Other alternative systems meeting the general requirements of this Section may be approved by the PBCPHU on a case-by-case basis, where evidence exists that use of such systems will not create sanitary nuisance conditions, health hazards or pollute receiving waters. 
Sec. 16.1.8. - Percolation tests. 
A.  When a percolation test is required to be performed, one (1) or more test holes shall be dug within the area proposed for a drainfield system. Where soil conditions within the area are highly variable, a minimum of three (3) percolation test holes, uniformly spaced, shall be required. 
B.  The diameter of each test hole shall be six (6) inches, dug or bored to the proposed depth of the absorption system. To expose a natural soil surface, the sides of the hole shall be scratched with a sharp pointed instrument and the loose material shall be removed from the bottom of the test hole. To protect the bottom from scouring action when water is added, two (2) inches of one-half (1/2) to three quarter (3/4) inch gravel shall be placed in the hole. 
C.  The hole must be carefully filled with at least twelve (12) inches of clear water. This depth of water shall be maintained for at least four (4) hours and preferably overnight if clay soils are present. Automatic siphons or float valves may be employed to automatically maintain the water level during the soaking period. In sandy soils with little or no clay, soaking is not necessary. If, after filling the hole twice with twelve (12) inches of water, the water seeps completely away in less than ten (10) minutes, the test can proceed immediately. 
D.  Except for sandy soils, percolation rate measurements shall be made at least fifteen (15) hours, but no more than thirty (30) hours, after the soaking period began. Any soil that sloughed into the hole during soaking period shall be removed and the water level adjusted to six (6) inches above the gravel (or eight (8) inches above the bottom of the hole). At no time during the test shall the water level be allowed to rise more than six (6) inches above the gravel. Immediately after adjustment, the water level is measured from a fixed reference point to the nearest one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) inch at thirty (30) minute intervals. The test shall be continued until two (2) successive water level drops do not vary by more than one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) inch. At least three (3) measurements must be made. After each measurement, the water level shall be readjusted to the six (6) inch level. The last water drop shall be used to calculate the percolation rate. In sandy soils or soils in which the first six (6) inches of water added, after the soaking period, seeps away in less than thirty (30) minutes, water level measurements are made at ten-minute intervals for a one hour period. The percolation rate is calculated for each test hole by dividing the time interval used between measurements by the magnitude of the last water level drop. This calculation results in a percolation rate in terms of minutes/inch. To determine the percolation rate for an area where soil conditions are highly variable, the rates obtained from each test hole shall be averaged. However, if the individual rates vary by more than twenty (20) minutes per inch, the maximum rate shall be used. 
Sec. 16.1.9. - Collection, treatment and disposal of septage. 
A.  No person(s) or corporation shall engage in the business of servicing septic tanks, grease traps, portable toilets or other treatment receptacles without first obtaining an annual license from the PBCPHU. 
B.  Application for a septage disposal service license shall be made to the PBCPHU. The following must be provided for evaluation prior to issuance of a license: 
1.  Evidence that the applicant possesses adequate equipment such as a tank truck, pumps appurtenances and tools for the work intended. 
2.  The permanent location and address of the business where operations will originate and where equipment is to be stored when not in use. 
3.  The proposed disposal method and the site to be used for disposing of septage. 
C.  The service truck shall display in three (3) inch or larger letters: 
1.  The date license was issued; 
2.  The license number; and 
3.  The name of the company, its address, and telephone number. 
D.  After septage is removed from a treatment receptacle, grease trap or laundry interceptor, the tank lid shall be properly secured, sealed, backfilled and the site left in a safe and nuisance free condition. 
E.  Septage shall be transported to the disposal site in a manner that will preclude leakage, spillage or the creation of a sanitary nuisance. 
F.  The septage from an on-site waste disposal system shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the PBCPHU. Untreated septage shall not be applied to the land. 
G.  No on-site storage facility shall be utilized without prior approval by the PBCPHU. 
H.  All service records shall be maintained at the business location and made available to any representative of the PBCPHU upon request. 
I.  The following equipment, maintenance and service requirements shall be complied with: 
1.  All waste transportation equipment shall be maintained in good working order at all times. Valves, hoses, tanks and appurtenances shall be properly maintained and shall not leak. Valves shall be locked to prevent accidental opening during transportation and storage. 
2.  Tank trucks used for servicing portable toilets shall be provided with a dual compartment tank and shall be approved by the PBCPHU. One (1) tank shall be used for receiving and removing wastes and shall be equipped with a suction hose having a cut-off valve not more than thirty-six (36) inches from the intake end. The second tank shall be used for clean water storage and shall be of adequate size to allow proper cleaning of each serviced unit. Water from the second tank shall be provided under pressure. 
3.  Standby service equipment shall be available for use during breakdown or emergencies. If equipment from another approved service is to be used for standby purposes, a written agreement between the services must be provided to the PBCPHU. 
4.  The waste storage compartment of a tank truck shall be maintained as necessary to prevent the creation of sanitary nuisance conditions. 
5.  There shall appear in a conspicuous place on each portable or temporary toilet the name, address and telephone number of the servicing company. 
Sec. 16.1.10. - Maintenance. 
    Any person owning or controlling property upon which an on-site sewage disposal system is installed shall be responsible for maintenance of the system. The following criteria are provided for guidance in proper system maintenance. 
A.  Systems shall be maintained at all times to prevent seepage of sewage or effluent to the surface of the ground. 
B.  Septic tanks and other sewage retention tanks should be checked at least once every three (3) years, or once a year if garbage grinders are discharging to the tank, to determine if sludge must be removed. Tanks should be cleaned whenever the bottom of the scum layer is within eight (8) inches of the bottom of the outlet device or when the sludge level is within eighteen (18) inches of the bottom of the outlet device. 
C.  Grease traps should be cleaned at appropriate intervals to insure that at least fifty (50) percent of the grease retention capacity of the trap is retained. 
D.  Organic chemical solvents shall not be used for the purpose of degreasing or declogging on-site sewage disposal systems. 
Sec. 16.1.11. - Appeals. 
    Persons aggrieved by a requirement, interpretation or determination of this section made by the PBCPHU or the Environmental Control Officer may appeal to the Environmental Appeal Board by filing a written notice of appeal to the Environmental Control Officer. However, no appeal shall be filed which requests relief from the construction standards required under Sec. 16.1.7. 
A.  Fee. The notice shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order made payable to the PBCPHU to defray the cost of processing and administering the appeal. The fee for filing the appeal shall be non-refundable and in the following amounts: 
1.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a single family residence. 
2.  One hundred twenty-five ($125.00) for all others, including, but not limited to, multifamily, commercial, or subdivisions. 
B.  Application submittal requirements. Each notice of appeal shall state the factual basis for the appeal and the relief requested. There shall be attached to each notice supportive materials and documents, including the information listed in subsections 3 and 4 below, if applicable to the appeal. The Environmental Appeal Board may require such additional information as it deems necessary. A separate application must be filed for each site or system considered for an appeal. The burden of presenting supportive facts in the application shall be the responsibility of the person filing the appeal. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proving entitlement to relief. The PBCPHU or the Environmental Control Officer shall defend all appeals before the Environmental Appeal Board. 
C.  Information required for an appeal for an individual lot. Ten (10) copies of the following information prepared by an engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of Florida must be submitted with the notice of appeal for an individual lot. 
1.  Floor plan. 
2.  A site plan drawn to scale showing: 
a.  Boundaries with dimensions 
b.  Elevations or slope of land 
c.  Location of building(s) 
d.  Location and layout of septic tank 
e.  Location and layout of drainfield 
f.  Location of potable water supply lines 
g.  Location of well 
h.  Location of public sewers 
i.  Location and elevation of percolation test 
j.  Location of septic tank, drainfield and well on adjacent properties (sides, front and rear) 
k.  Location of driveways, parking and walkways 
l.  Benchmark on or adjacent to property 
3.  The site plan must indicate the following (related to the system): 
a.  Distance from private well 
b.  Distance from public well 
c.  Distance of septic tank and drainfield from building 
d.  Distance of septic tank and drainfield from property line 
e.  Distance from water supply lines 
f.  Distance to high water line of lakes, canals, streams, etc. 
4.  Percolation test results in the drainfield area. 
5.  A soil profile to six (6) feet (in drainfield area) indicating the soil classification and showing the existing water table and the estimated wettest season water table. 
D.  Information required for an appeal for a subdivision. Ten (10) copies of the following information prepared by an engineer registered in the State of Florida must be submitted with the notice of appeal for a subdivision. 
1.  General Information. 
a.  Name of subdivision 
b.  Owner 
c.  Address 
d.  Location of subdivision 
e.  Total area of subdivision (in acres) 
f.  Number of lots 
g.  Minimum lot size 
h.  Location, size, and distance of adjacent subdivisions 
i.  Approximate adjacent acreage available for expansion 
j.  Description of typical home to be constructed, including number of bedrooms and square footage of heated or cooled area 
2.  Required exhibits. 
a.  A location map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to the surrounding areas and nearby built-up areas. 
b.  A contour map indicating all streams or watercourses, bodies of water, low, wet or marshy land, rock outcrops and filled areas. 
c.  A plat of the subdivision showing the individual lots, if available, or a proposed subdivision layout. 
d.  A plan of the subdivision indicating all drainage structures and features, designed in accordance with the requirements of the SFWMD and the local drainage district. 
e.  A plan of the subdivision indicating proposed water and sewer lines. 
3.  Water supply. 
a.  Source of proposed water supply (community, non-community, private well). 
b.  If a utility is expected to supply water, submit evidence of availability of the water supply. 
c.  If an on-site well is utilized, submit evidence that ground water is of adequate quality. 
4.  Sewage disposal. 
a.  Name of municipal, county, or investor-owned utility sewerage system 
b.  Description of nearest existing sewer (distance, size, and whether gravity flow is possible) 
c.  Copy of a letter from responsible official outlining municipality's or county's position on connection to sewerage system 
d.  Description of the status of municipality or county plans to extend sewers to this area in the future (preliminary plans approved, final plans approved, contract awarded, estimated date sewers will be available) 
5.  Water and/or sewer lines. 
a.  Are dry water and/or sewer lines being proposed (if not, explain why it is not economically or technically feasible)? 
b.  What arrangements has the developer made to connect the dry lines to water and/or sewer upon the availability of such lines? 
6.  On-site water and sewage treatment facilities. 
a.  Explain why on-site water and sewage treatment facilities are not economically or technically feasible. 
7.  Survey of subsoil conditions. 
a.  A sufficient number of percolation test and soil classifications shall be performed so as to adequately represent the existing subsoil conditions, including water table elevation (minimum of ten (10) percent of the number of lots). 
b.  All test hole locations shall be clearly indicated on the required topographical map. 
c.  Submit data for the wettest season water table expected for the proposed subdivision after the drainage system is constructed. 
E.  Requirements. The person filing the appeal shall also submit to the Environmental Control Officer a list of the names and addresses of every property owner who may be affected by the granting of the appeal in the following cases: 
1.  The proposed individual sewage disposal system fails to meet the minimum distance required between the system and a well, as provided by this section; or 
2.  The proposed septic tank is within five (5) feet of a neighboring lot; or 
3.  The proposed septic tank is within fifty (50) feet of a water body on a neighboring lot. 
F.  Hearing. A hearing on the appeal shall be set within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal by the Environmental Control Officer. This provision does not mean that the applicant is entitled to a hearing on the first available agenda following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
G.  Due Process. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. All testimony shall be under oath. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded; but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in the trial courts of Florida. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. 
H.  Rights. The parties shall have the following rights: to be represented by counsel; to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine witnesses on any relevant matter, even though the matter was not covered in direct examination; and to rebut evidence. 
I.  Environmental Appeal Board. The Environmental Appeal Board shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and shall issue findings of fact based upon the greater weight of the evidence and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted herein. The findings and order shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting. 
J.  Findings. In order to grant an appeal authorizing an individual sewage disposal system on a single lot, the Environmental Appeal Board must find that: 
1.  Because of special factors, which may include economic factors, the applicant is unable to comply with this Section and 
2.  The individual sewage disposal system complies with current construction standards; and 
3.  The granting of the appeal is the minimum alternative that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, structure or building; and 
4.  The granting of the appeal is consistent with the general intent, purpose and requirements of the Village or Palm Beach County laws and ordinances; and 
5.  The granting of the appeal will not be injurious to the area involved or to the public health and general welfare. 
K.  Granting. In order to grant an appeal authorizing individual sewage disposal systems in subdivisions containing lots smaller than those required under this section, the Environmental Appeal Board must additionally find: 
1.  That for a proposed subdivision to be served by individual private wells, each lot has at least one-half (1/2) acre, with a minimum dimension of one hundred (100) feet and that said subdivision contains no more than fifty (50) lots; or that for the proposed subdivision to be served by a public water system, each lot has at least one-third [ 1/3 ] acre with a minimum dimension of seventy-five (75) feet and that said subdivision contains no more than one hundred (100) lots; and 
2.  That satisfactory ground water can be obtained if an individual private well is to be used; and 
3.  That all distance and setbacks, soil conditions, water table elevations and other related requirements of this Section and Chapter 10D-6, F.A.C., are met; and 
4.  That the proposed subdivision does not represent sequential development of contiguous subdivisions, the purpose of which is to avoid the requirements of Sec. 16.1.11.K.1, and 
5.  That a municipal, county or investor-owned public sewerage system is not available contiguous to the proposed subdivision or within one-quarter (1/4) mile thereof with public right-of-way accessibility; and 
6.  That the proposed plat contains notification that the lots must be connected to a municipal, county or investor-owned water supply and/or sewerage system within ninety (90) calendar days from the date such system becomes available; and 
7.  That the proposed density of the subdivision is consistent with the density recommended in the Comprehensive Plan or in the Land Use Plan of the appropriate municipality; and 
8.  That the developer has made every reasonable effort to obtain public water and sewer; and 
9.  That dry water and/or sewer lines are to be installed by the developer and that the developer will establish an escrow account to pay for the cost of connection when water and/or sewer becomes available, or that the installation of the same is not feasible from a technical or economic standpoint; and 
10.  That on-site, water and/or sewage treatment facilities are not feasible from a technical or economic standpoint; and 
11.  That the proposed development will consist of no more than one (1) single-family residence per lot; and 
12.  That land uses surrounding and adjacent to the proposed subdivision and soil qualities of the area do not indicate that the area's health is endangered by an inordinate proliferation of septic tanks. 
L.  Conditions. Provided that the factual findings specified in Secs. 16.1.11.J or 16.1.11.K are made, the Environmental Appeal Board may reverse, modify or affirm, wholly or partly, the requirement, interpretation or determination made by the PBCPHU or the Environmental Control Officer. In granting an appeal, the Environmental Appeal Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards consistent with this section. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the appeal is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this section. The Environmental Appeal Board may also prescribe a reasonable time within which the action for which the appeal is granted shall be started or completed or both. Any decision of the Environmental Appeal Board shall be in the form of a written order. 
M.  Change in facts. If there is a change in facts or circumstances supporting a request for relief after an order granting relief has been issued, then the applicant shall notify the PBCPHU. The PBCPHU may request the Environmental Appeal Board to revoke or amend the order. 
N.  Termination. Except where the relief granted is to exempt an applicant from the requirement to connect to a sanitary sewer under Sec. 16.1.5.A.1, any relief granted shall automatically terminate upon the availability of sewer service to the lot or parcel. Unless otherwise provided in an order issued pursuant to Sec. 16.1.11.L, relief granted under this section shall automatically lapse if action for which the appeal was granted has not been initiated within one (1) year from the date of granting such appeal by the Environmental Appeal Board or, if judicial proceedings to review the Environmental Appeal Board's decision shall be instituted, from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals. 
O.  Decision. The decision of the Environmental Appeal Board shall be final administrative action. Any person who is a party to the proceeding may apply for review to the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
Sec. 16.1.12. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the County Health Director to conduct such inspections as are reasonable and necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 16.1.13. - Violations, penalties, enforcement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this section or any duly constituted order of the Palm Beach County Environmental Control Hearing Board enforcing this section. Such violations shall be punished according to the provisions of Chapter 77-616, Special Acts, Laws of Florida, as amended. 
CHAPTER 2. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS - (ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL RULE II) 

Sec. 16.2.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to establish minimum standards for the design, construction, installation and operation of all water supply systems from which water is used for human consumption, culinary, sanitary, domestic or other purposes. 
Sec. 16.2.2. - Applicability. 
    The regulations of this section shall apply to both new and existing water supply systems, except as otherwise expressly provided, located throughout the total area of Palm Beach County. 
Sec. 16.2.3. - General provisions. 
A.  Water service required. All buildings used or intended for human occupancy, employment or service to the public shall be provided with piped water under pressure from a water system which complies with the provisions of this section. Bottled water shall not be considered an acceptable substitute for such a water system. 
    A single water supply system shall be constructed for any new structure, lot or facility containing more than one (1) building with common access parking. This provision shall not affect buildings and water supply systems existing prior to March 14, 1988. 
B.  Connections required. All existing buildings served by non-community, non-transient non-community, and semi-public water supply systems or new private water supply systems shall connect to an approved community water system where such a system has a water main within one hundred (100) feet in a public right-of-way or easement abutting the property on which the building is located. 
1.  Exemptions. A property owner shall not be required to connect to an approved community water system: 
a.  If connection requires an extension of the main; 
b.  If the main is located across four (4) or more lanes of paved roadway; or 
c.  If the utility is unable to provide water. 
2.  Health threats. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 16.2.3.B.1 above, if the Health Department determines that a potential or existing health threat exists on property served by a non-community, non-transient non-community or semi-public water system, then the connection shall be made as required pursuant to Sec. 16.2.3.B.3 below. 
3.  Existing non-community or non-transient non-community systems. Establishments or buildings that utilize a non-community or non-transient non-community system and are being constructed, modified, expanded or changed in operation shall connect to an approved community water supply system when said system is available within one thousand (1,000) feet by existing right-of-way or easement to the property. Each foot of water crossing, paved roadway, or sidewalk shall be considered as two (2) feet; the proposed supply shall not be required to cross interstate highway or railroad systems. Property owners connecting to community water supply systems under this subsection shall be required to extend the water main along the public right-of-way utility easements which abut the property. 
C.  Review for approval. Request for PBCPHU approval of amendments to the Future Land Use Map, site plan, subdivision and building permit matters shall be reviewed in light of the regulations of this section. 
D.  Fees. All fees charged for the administration of this section shall be in accordance with the fee schedule pursuant to Ordinance No. 78-5 and the amendments thereto. 
E.  Adoption of state standards. Chapters 17-550, 551, 555, 560, 602 and 10D-4, F.A.C., and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated into this section. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of Chapters 17-550, 551, 555, 560, 602 and 10D-4, F.A.C., and this section, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
Sec. 16.2.4. - Procedures. 
    The PBCPHU shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny any construction or use of any water supply system or facility based on the standards contained in this section. Prior to submission to the PBCPHU, plans involving distribution mains shall be reviewed by the Fire Marshall or by the appropriate fire department official. 
A.  Construction permits. No person shall install, extend or alter any water supply system or facility including any well, plant, tank, pump station, distribution system, fire line or other pipe or structures without first obtaining a construction permit from the PBCPHU. 
1.  Evidence of other approvals. Newly proposed community, non-community, non-transient non-community and semi-public water systems shall provide evidence of their ability to secure a water use permit from SFWMD and proper district designation prior to PBCPHU approval. 
2.  Application and required information. The applicant shall provide the necessary information and design specifications requested and required by the PBCPHU to conduct an adequate review of any proposed activity or construction in addition to that information provided on the DER application forms. The plans, applications and specifications for community, non-community or non-transient non-community water systems shall be prepared by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Florida. 
3.  Water supplier's stamp. Any submittal for community water systems, for which the supplier of water is not the applicant but will require ownership, operation or maintenance by the supplier of water, shall require the acceptance stamp of the supplier of water on the plans. 
4.  Construction permit exemptions. A permit shall not be required for distribution extensions or service connections of less than four hundred (400) feet of one (1) inch pipe, two hundred (200) feet of two (2) inch pipe, one hundred (100) feet of four (4) inch or larger pipe, or road crossing with less than four (4) inch pipe when system capacity is adequate as specified in Sec. 16.2.10. 
5.  Inter-jurisdictional extensions. Any extension of a distribution system within Palm Beach County for which the water supply facility is not located within Palm Beach County, or distribution extension outside Palm Beach County when the water supply facility is located within the Village or Palm Beach County, shall require a permit from the PBCPHU and written acceptance of the development from the responsible agency outside the County. During construction, partial releases may be given by the PBCPHU. However, the pressure and leakage test and the disinfection and bacteriological procedures shall be followed in all cases. 
B.  Approval of water systems. No person shall put into service or use any drinking water system or facility, including any well, plant, tank, pump station, distribution system, fire line or other pipes or structure without first having received written approval from the PBCPHU. 
1.  Submittal requirements. Upon completion of construction and satisfactory chemical and bacteriological clearance of the water supply system or facility, the engineer of record shall submit to the PBCPHU the following: 
a.  Certification of completion, 
b.  Record ("as built") drawings on which sampling points must be highlighted, 
c.  Chemical and bacteriological sample results, and 
d.  If the approval involves a well, a "Well Completion Report." 
2.  Certification of completion. The Certification of completion for the water supply or facility shall include certification of any accompanying sewerage system and evidence of the acceptance of the system or facility by the supplier of water. 
3.  Construction meters. Uses of construction meters for construction water may be approved by the PBCPHU in cases when accompanying sewer has not been certified if the PBCPHU determines the water facility has been satisfactorily tested and certified by the engineer of record. 
4.  Well completion reports. The Well Completion Report for all water supply wells shall be submitted to the PBCPHU according to Sec. 16.2.10.K. 
5.  Water main connections. The connection of new water mains to existing mains shall not be completed until after the new mains have passed their pressure and leakage test and completed tile disinfection and bacteriological clearance procedures. During construction partial releases may be given by the PBCPHU. However, the pressure and leakage test and the disinfection and bacteriological procedures shall be followed in all cases. No water supply system or facility, including any well, plant, tank, pump station, distribution system, or other pipes or structure through which water is delivered to the consumer for drinking or household purposes, except certain community water supply service connections not requiring a permit, shall be put into service or used until such facility has been effectively disinfected and bacteriologically cleared. Sample results shall be submitted to the PBCPHU as follows: 
a.  For all water systems, except wells, two (2) consecutive daily samples with the total coliform bacteria count not exceeding one (1) coliform per one hundred (100) milliliters of the sample shall be required. 
b.  For a community, non-community or non-transient non-community water supply system well clearances, a minimum of twenty (20) consecutive workday samples are required with no more than two (2) samples taken daily. Well sample results for community or non-community water supply system well clearance shall not exceed four (4) coliform per one hundred (100) millimeters of the sample in more than ten (10) percent of the samples analyzed. 
c.  For a semi-public or private water supply system well clearance, a minimum of three (3) consecutive daily samples are required. The well sample results shall not exceed more than one (1) coliform per one hundred (100) millimeters as an average. 
d.  Any sample analysis with heavy and/or too numerous to count (TNTC) non-coliform counts shall not be accepted. 
e.  Sample results from any water supply facility or well shall not be accepted if more than thirty (30) calendar days has elapsed since the taking of the last sample. 
Sec. 16.2.5. - Water quality standards. 
    The following maximum contaminant levels shall not be exceeded in any system to which they apply: 
A.  Maximum microbiological contaminant levels. The following contaminant levels for coliform bacteria are applicable to all drinking water systems including individual water systems: 
1.  When the membrane filter technique is used, the number of total coliform bacteria shall not exceed any of the following: 
a.  One (1) per one hundred (100) milliliters as the arithmetic mean of all samples examined per month. 
b.  Four (4) per one hundred (100) milliliters in more than five (5) percent of the samples examined per month. 
2.  When the fermentation tube method and ten (10) milliliters standard portions are used, coliform. bacteria shall not be present in any of the following: 
a.  More than ten (10) percent of the portions in any month. 
b.  Three (3) or more portions in more than five (5) percent of the sample examined per month. 
3.  When the fermentation tube method and one hundred (100) milliliter standard portions are used, coliform bacteria shall not be present in any of the following: 
a.  More than sixty (60) percent of the portions in any month. 
b.  Five (5) portions in more than twenty (20) percent of the samples examined per month. 
B.  Primary inorganic chemical contaminant levels. The maximum contaminant levels for primary inorganic chemicals are applicable to community, non-transient non-community and non-community supply systems, except that the standard for nitrates is applicable to semi-public, as well as community, non-transient non-community and non-community systems. 
Contaminant Maximum Level 
(Milligrams per Liter) Arsenic 0.05 Asbestos (medium and long fibers) 7.1 million fibers/liter Barium 1.0 Cadmium .005 Chromium .05 Fluoride 4.0 Lead 0.02 Mercury 0.002 Nitrate (as N) 10.0 Nitrite 1.0 Selenium 0.01 Silver 0.05 Sodium 160.0  
C.  Primary organic chemical contaminant levels. The following maximum contaminant levels for organic chemicals shall apply to community water systems: 
Contaminant Maximum Level 
(Milligrams per Liter) CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS: Endrin (1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 10-hexa-chloro-6, 7-epoxy,4, 4a, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a,- 
oct-hydro-1, 4-endo,endo-5, 8-dimethano naphthalene) 0.0002 Lindane (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6-hexachloro-cyclohexane, gamma isomer) 0.004 Methoxychlor (1, 1, 1 - Trichloro-2, 2-bis (p-ethoxyphenyl) ethane) 0.1 Toxaphene ( C H C1 - Technical Chlorinated camphene 67-69% chlorine) 0.005 CHLOROPHENOXYS: 2, 4-D (2, 4-Dichlorophenoxyace-tic acid) 0.1 2, 4, 5 - TP Silvex (2, 4, 5,-Trichlorophenoxypropionic acid) 0.01  
D.  Drinking water turbidity contaminant levels. The maximum contaminant levels for turbidity in drinking water for community and non-transient non-community water systems measured at a representative entry point(s) to the distribution system(s) or at other points that may be significant to post-precipitation condition or iron precipitate buildup and release is one (1) turbidity unit (NTU), as determined by a monthly average. 
E.  Maximum radionuclides contaminant levels. The following maximum contaminant levels for radionuclides shall apply to community and non-transient non-community water systems: 
1.  Radium-226, radium-228 and gross alpha particle radioactivity. 
a.  Combined radium-226 and radium-228-5 Pci/1. 
b.  Gross alpha particle activity (including radium 226 but excluding radon and uranium)-15 Pci/l. 
2.  Beta particle and photon radioactivity from man-made radionuclides. 
a.  The average annual concentration of beta particle and photon radioactivity from man made radionuclides in drinking water shall not produce an annual dose equivalent to the total body or any internal organ greater than four (4) millirem/year. 
b.  Except for the radionuclides listed in the table below in this subsection, the concentration of manmade radionuclides causing four (4) millirem total body organ dose equivalents shall be calculated on the basis of a two (2) liter per day drinking water intake using the one hundred sixty-eight (168) hour data listed in "Maximum Permissible Body Burdens and Maximum Permissible Concentration of Radionuclides in Air or Water for Occupation Exposure" NBS Handbook 69 as amended August, 1963, U.S. Department of Commerce. If two (2) or more radionuclides are present, the sum of their annual dose equivalent to the total body or to any organ shall not exceed four (4) millirem/year. Average Annual Concentration Assumed to Produce a Total Body organ Dose of four (4) millirem/year. 
Radionuclide Critical Organs Pci per Liter Tritium Total Body 20,000 Strontium-90 Bone Marrow 8  
F.  Secondary inorganic chemical maximum levels. The following maximum contaminant levels for secondary inorganic contaminants shall apply to community water systems: 
Contaminant Maximum Level 
(Milligrams per Liter)* Chloride 250 Color 15 color units Copper 1.0 Corrosivity Neither corrosive nor scale forming** Fluoride 2.0 Foaming Agents 0.5 Iron 0.3 Manganese 0.05 Odor 3 (threshold odor number) Ph 6.5-9.5 range Sulphate 250 Total Dissolved Solids at 103-105 degree C 500 Zinc 5.0  
 * ;hg;except color, odor, corrosivity and Ph. 
** Assessment of degree of corrosion or scale forming tendencies must be based on historical water characteristics of the system. A Langelier index range of -0.2 to +0.2 should be used as a guideline toward obtaining water stability if calcium carbonate is present. If stabilizers are used, the -0.2 to +0.2 range may not be applicable. 
G.  Trihalomethane. 
    The following maximum contaminant levels are for trihalomethanes (THMs), as set forth in Sec. 16.2.5.H, and water supply systems serving a population of ten thousand (10,000) or more individuals and which add a disinfectant (oxidant) to the water in any part of the drinking water treatment process. 
H.  Total trihalomethanes. 
    Total Trihalornethanes (TTHM) shall include the sum of the concentrations bromodichloromethane, dibromochloromethane tribomomethane (bromoform) and trichloromethane (chloroform) at 0.10 mg/1 (MCL). 
I.  Volatile organics. 
    The following maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for volatile organics are applicable to all community and non-transient non-community water systems. These concentrations are based on present "state of the art" analytical detection limits as applied to routine sampling, risk analysis, carcinogenicity and chronic toxicity, and may be altered in the future, commensurate with increasing laboratory capability or future data indicating adverse effects on human health. 
Contaminant Maximum Level 
(Milligrams per Liter)* Trichloroethylene 3 Tetrachloroethylene 3 Carbon Tetrachloride 3 Vinyl Chloride 1 1,1,1 - Trichloroethene 200 1,2 - Dichloroethane 3 1,1 - Dichloroethylene 7 Benzene 1 P - Dichlorobenzene 75 Ethylene Dibromide 0.02 (sample before chlorination)  
J.  Synthetic organics. Analyses for purgeables, pesticides base neutral extractable and acid extractables shall be performed as specified in Chapter 17-550, F.A.C., as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 16.2.6. - Water monitoring requirements. 
A.  Microbiologicals; and chlorine residual monitoring. Monitoring of water systems shall be provided by the supplier of water as follows. 
1.  Community water systems. For community water systems, coliform density samples shall be taken from the distribution system at regular time intervals and in a number proportionate to the maximum population served by the system. Sample locations shall be varied to provide a representative cross section of the water supplied to users. The number and minimum frequency of samples shall be as follows. In addition, a minimum of one (1) representative raw water sample per month shall be taken. 
Population Served Minimum Number of 
Samples Per Month 25-2,500 2 2,501-3,300 3 3,301-4,100 4 4,101-4,900 5 4,901-5,800 6 5,801-6,700 7 6,701-7,600 8 7,601-8,500 9 8,501-9,400 10 9,401-10,300 11 10,301-11,100 12 11,101-12,000 13 12,001-12,900 14 12,901-13,700 15 13,701-14,600 16 14,601-15,500 17 15,501-16,300 18 16,301-17,200 19 17,201-18,100 20 18,101-18,900 21 18,901-19,800 22 19,801-20,700 23 20,701-21,500 24 21,501-22,300 25 22,301-23,200 26 23,201-24,000 27 24,001-24,900 28 24,901-25,000 29 25,001-28,000 30 28,001-33,000 35 33,001-37,000 40 37,001-41,000 45 41,001-46,000 50 46,001-50,000 55 50,001-54,000 60 54,001-59,000 65 59,001-64,000 70 64,001-70,000 75 70,001-76,000 80 76,001-83,000 85 83,001-90,000 90 90,001-96,000 95 96,001-111,000 100 111,001-130,000 110 130,001-160,000 120 160,001-190,000 130 190,001-220,000 140 220,001-250,000 150 250,001-290,000 160 290,001-320,000 170 320,001-360,000 180 360,001-410,000 190 410,000-450,000 200 450,001-500,000 210 +500,000 220  
2.  Noncommunity and semi-public systems. For non-community and semi-public water systems, a sample for total coliform bacteria shall be taken from the distribution system in each calendar quarter during which the system provides water to the public, except for non-transient non-community water supply systems which shall monitor monthly. 
3.  Community, non-transient non-community and non-community systems. For community, non-transient non-community and non-community water systems, the following monitoring requirements shall apply: 
a.  When the bacteria in a single sample exceeds four (4) coliform per one hundred (100) milliliter or moderate non-coliform count using the membrane filter technique, daily repeat samples shall be collected and examined from the same sampling point until the results obtained from at least two (2) consecutive repeat samples show less than one (1) coliform bacterium per one hundred (100) milliliters and moderate or lower non-coliform count. 
b.  When coliform bacteria occur in three (3) or more ten (10) milliliter portions of a single sample using the fermentation tube method, daily repeat samples shall be collected and examined from the same sampling point until the results obtained from at least two (2) consecutive repeat samples show no positive tubes. 
c.  When coliform bacteria occur in all five (5) of the one hundred (100) milliliter portions of a single sample using the fermentation tube method, daily check samples shall be collected and examined from the same sampling point until the results obtained from at least two (2) consecutive check samples show no positive tubes. 
d.  The location at which the repeat samples were taken pursuant to the above paragraphs of this subsection shall not be eliminated from future sampling without approval of the PBCPHU. 
e.  Repeat samples shall be taken within forty-eight (48) hours of the time the supplier of water learns of the failure unless the State Laboratory is closed, in which case seventy-two (72) hours shall be allowed. 
4.  Semi-public systems. For semi-public water systems, the following monitoring requirements shall apply: 
a.  Where coliform bacteria in a single sample from these water systems exceed one (1) per one hundred (100) milliliters using the membrane filter technique, at least two (2) consecutive daily repeat samples shall be collected and examined from the same sampling points. Additional repeat samples shall be collected daily or at a frequency established by the PBCPHU until satisfactory results are obtained from at least two (2) consecutive repeat samples. These samples shall show less than one (1) coliform bacteria. 
b.  When coliform bacteria occur in one (1) or more ten (10) milliliter portions of a single sample using the fermentation tube method, at least two (2) consecutive daily repeat samples shall be collected and examined from the same sampling point. Additional repeat samples shall be collected daily at a frequency established by the PBCPHU until the results obtained from at least two (2) consecutive repeat samples show no positive tubes. 
5.  Well and surface water sources. Water samples shall be taken from each well and/or surface water source at the following intervals and analyzed for total coliform density as follows: 
a.  Monthly for community and non-transient non-community water systems; and 
b.  Quarterly for non-community and semi-public water systems. 
6.  Calculation of contaminant levels. The result from all total coliform bacterial analyses performed pursuant to Sec. 16.2. 5. A shall be used to determine compliance with the maximum contaminant level for total coliform bacteria. Repeat samples shall not be included in calculating the total number of samples taken each month. 
7.  Special purpose samples. Special purpose samples, such as those taken to determine whether disinfection practices following pipe placement, replacement or repair have been sufficient, shall not be used to determine compliance with Secs. 16.2.5.A or 16.2.6.A.1. However, the supplier of water may undertake a complete bacteriological survey of the system, if time permits, in an attempt to meet the average count and five (5) percent standards. 
8.  Reporting of residuals. The free and total chlorine residual or combined residual at all treated water bacteriological sample points shall be measured at the time of sampling and reported along with the results of the bacterial analyses. 
B.  Primary inorganic chemicals monitoring. Monitoring for primary inorganic chemicals shall be provided by the supplier of water as follows: 
1.  Community systems. For community water systems using surface water, two sample analyses for each chemical listed in Sec. 16.2.5.B, 16.2.5.C shall be provided on an annual basis. For community water systems and non-transient non-community water supply systems using groundwater, two (2) sample analyses for each chemical listed in Sec. 16.2.5.E shall be provided once every three (3) years except for systems with chlorination only treatment. Such samples shall be of a composite of all raw water sources and the finished water from a representative point in the distribution system. The distribution sample point shall be moved from year to year to give complete coverage of the distribution system. Only the distribution sample analysis shall be provided when chlorination is the only treatment given the water. 
2.  Non-community systems. For non-community water systems, a single analysis of the finished water for each chemical listed in Sec. 16.2.5.B shall be provided once every five (5) years. 
C.  Primary organic chemical monitoring. Monitoring for primary organic chemicals shall be provided by community water system suppliers as follows: 
1.  Surface water. For water systems using surface water in whole or in part, two (2) sample analyses for the chemicals specified in Sec. 16.2.5.B shall be provided on an annual basis. Such water samples shall be of a composite of all raw water sources and the finished water from a representative point of the distribution system. 
2.  Ground water. For water systems using ground water, two (2) sample analyses shall be provided as in Sec. 16.2.6.C.1 above, except that such analyses shall be required only once every three (3) years and systems with chlorination only treatment shall only provide the distribution sample analysis. 
D.  Physical contaminants monitoring. Monitoring for physical contaminants shall be provided by the supplier of water for community and non-transient non-community water systems as follows: 
1.  Chlorine-only treatment systems. For water supplies using a treatment of only chlorination, monthly, analyses for turbidity, color and threshold odor number shall be provided on the composite raw and finished water. 
2.  Chlorine-plus treatment systems. For water supplies using treatment in addition to chlorination, analyses shall be provided on composite raw and finished water at the following frequency: 
Turbidity Daily Color Daily Threshold Odor: 
 Surface Water 
 Ground Water   
Once a month 
Quarterly  
3.  All systems. For all water supplies, monthly analyses for turbidity, color and threshold odor number shall be provided from a representative point(s) of the distribution system on a basis of one (1) set of analyses for each twenty thousand (20,000) population served or fraction thereof. Sample point locations shall be moved monthly to ensure a complete coverage of the distribution system. Additional samples may be required based upon complaints. 
E.  Radionuclide monitoring in community systems. Monitoring for radionuclides shall be provided by the supplier of water for community water systems and non-transient non-community water supply systems, as follows: 
1.  The analysis of water for gross alpha particle activity, radium-226 and radium-228, sampled from the distribution system shall consist of an annual composite of four (4) consecutive quarterly samples or the average of the analyses of four (4) samples obtained at quarterly intervals. 
a.  A gross alpha particle activity measurement may be substituted for the required radium-226 and radium-228 analysis provided that the measured gross alpha particle activity does not exceed five (5) Pci/1 at a confidence level of ninety-five (95) percent (1.65 where six (6) is the standard deviation of the net counting rate of the sample). In localities where radium-228 is known to be present or may reasonably be expected to be present in drinking water, radium-226 and/or radium-228 analyses shall be provided when the gross alpha particle activity exceeds two (2) Pci/1. 
b.  When the gross alpha particle activity exceeds five (5) Pci/1, the same or an equivalent sample shall be analyzed for radium-226. If the concentration of radium-226 exceeds three (3) Pci/l, the same or an equivalent sample shall be analyzed for radium-228. 
2.  Suppliers of water shall monitor for radionuclides at least once every four (4) years. When an annual record taken in conformance with Sec. 16.2.6.E.1 above has established that the average annual concentration is less than half the maximum contaminant level, an analysis of a single sample may be substituted for the quarterly sampling procedure during the next sampling year and during subsequent sampling years for as long as the concentration remains at less than half the maximum contaminant level. 
3.  A supplier of water shall begin monitoring in conformance with Sec. 16.2.6.E.1 within one (1) year of the introduction of a new water source. 
4.  All community water systems serving more than ten thousand (10,000) population shall monitor composite raw source water in the specified manner as provided for in Sec. 16.2.6.E. 
5.  Monitoring for compliance with this after the initial period need not include radium-228 except when required by the PBCPHU, provided that the average annual concentration of radium-228 has been assayed at least once using the quarterly sampling procedure required by Sec. 16.2.6.E.1. 
6.  Community water systems using surface water sources in whole or in part and serving more than one hundred thousand (100,000) persons and such other community water systems as are designated by the PBCPHU shall monitor for beta particle and photon radioactivity by analysis of a composite of four (4) consecutive quarterly samples. Monitoring shall be conducted every four (4) years. Compliance with Sec. 16.2.5.E may be assumed if the average annual concentration of gross beta particle activity is less than fifty (50) Pci/1 and if the average annual concentrations of tritium and strontium-90 are less than those listed in Sec. 16.2.5.E.2. provided that if both radionuclides are present, the sum of their annual dose equivalents to bone marrow shall not exceed four (4) millirem/year. 
7.  If the gross beta particle activity exceeds fifty (50) Pci/l, an analysis of the sample must be performed to identify the major radioactive constituents present; and the appropriate organ and total body doses shall be calculated to determine compliance with Sec. 16.2.5.E.2. 
F.  Secondary inorganic contaminants monitoring in community systems. Monitoring for secondary inorganic contaminants in community water systems shall be provided by the supplier of water as follows: 
1.  Two (2) samples for the contaminants specified in Sec. 16.2.5.F shall be provided to the PBCPHU by each supplier using surface water sources, one (1) during the wet season and the other during the dry season. 
2.  One (1) sample for the contaminants specified in Sec. 16.2.5.F shall be provided annually to the PBCPHU by each supplier using groundwater sources. 
3.  Samples for Secs. 16.2.6.F.1 and 16.2.6.F.2 above shall be taken from a representative entry point to the water distribution system. 
G.  Trilialomethanes, volatile organics and synthetic organics monitoring. Monitoring for trihalomethanes, volatile organics and synthetic organics shall be provided by the supplier of water for water systems in accordance with, and as specified in Chapter 17-550, F.A.C., and as it may be amended from time to time. 
H.  Microbiological and chlorine residual monitoring In consecutive community and non-community systems. Consecutive community and non-community water systems shall provide microbiological and chlorine residual monitoring in a manner complying with Sec. 16.2.6.A. The PBCPHU may require additional monitoring for primary or secondary contaminants from any consecutive system which, due to its size or other factors, merits such additional monitoring. 
I.  Raw water monitoring for volatile and synthetic organics in community systems. Community water systems shall monitor a composite raw water sample from each wellfield for volatile and synthetic organics including pesticides and herbicides every three years. The first sample results shall be submitted no later than June 1, 1989. 
J.  Raw water monitoring in community and noncommunity systems. Community and non-transient non-community water systems shall monitor for the following from each raw water source or well semi-annually: 
Calcium, Ca 
Chloride, Cl 
Color 
Iron, Fe 
Nitrate, N0 3 
Ph (Field) 
Total dissolved solids at 103 degree - 150 degree C or 
Conductivity 
Total hardness, as C0 3 
Sec. 16.2.7. - Sampling and analytic methods. 
A.  Sampling procedures. All water samples required under this section for community, non-community, nontransient non-community and semi-public water systems, including well and main clearance, shall be taken by an employee of a laboratory certified to perform drinking water analyses by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services in a accordance with Sec. 403.863, Fla. Stat., and Chapter 10D-41, F.A.C., or an operator certified under Chapter 17-602, F.A.C., or an employee of the PBCPHU. Water samples for private well clearance shall be taken by the licensed well contractor that installed the well or his representative. 
B.  Certified laboratories. All water samples shall be analyzed by a laboratory certified to perform drinking water analyses by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services in accordance with Sec. 403.863, Fla. Stat., and Chapter 10D-41, F.A.C. 
C.  Methods of analysis. Analyses conducted to determine compliance with this section shall be made in accordance first with the methods specified in Chapter 17-550, F.A.C., and if not specified then in accordance with "Standard Methods of Examination of Water and Wastewater," 17th Edition, 1989, or methods approved by the United States EPA. 
Sec. 16.2.8. - Reporting. 
    The supplier of water of any community. non-community or non-transient non-community water supply system shall comply with the following reporting requirements in writing. However, the supplier of water is not required to report analytical results to the PBCPHU in cases where a Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services or DER's Laboratory performs the analysis and reports the results to the PBCPHU. 
A.  Reporting period. Except where a shorter reporting period is specified in this section, the results of any analysis required to be made under Sec. 16.2.6 shall be reported to the PBCPHU within forty (40) calendar days following the analysis. 
B.  Report contents. Bacteriological results and physical contaminants results shall be reported with the monthly operation reports. The free and total chlorine residual at all treated water bacteriological sample points shall be measured and reported with the monthly operation reports along with the results of the bacterial analyses. When the presence of coliform bacteria in water taken from a particular sampling point has been confirmed by any repeat samples, the supplier of water shall report such confirmation to the PBCPHU within forty-eight (48) hours. 
C.  Plant operation reports. Water plant monthly operation reports shall be submitted to the PBCPHU within fifteen (15) calendar days after the end of that month. Operation reports are required of every community, non-community or non-transient non-community water supply which is required to have a certified operator under Chapter 17-602, F.A.C., or this section. Operation reports shall include water and chemical usage, emergency power operation, information required by this section and other data requested on the operation report forms supplied by the PBCPHU. 
D.  Inorganic chemicals. If the result of the analysis for primary inorganic chemicals indicates that the level of any contaminant in the finished water exceeds the maximum contaminant level, the supplier of water shall report said fact to the PBCPHU within forty-eight (48) hours of the time it receives the results and shall initiate and complete three (3) additional analyses for the suspect contaminant from the same sampling point within one (1) month. However, when a level exceeding the maximum contaminant level for nitrate is found, a second analysis shall be initiated within twenty-four (24) hours; and if the average of the two (2) analyses exceeds the maximum contaminant level, the supplier of water shall report its findings to the PBCPHU within forty-eight (48) hours of the time it receives the results. 
E.  Primary organic contaminants. If the results of the analysis for primary organic chemicals indicates the level of any contaminant in the finished water exceeds the maximum contaminant level, the supplier of water shall report said fact to the PBCPHU within forty-eight (48) hours of the time it receives the results and shall initiate and complete three (3) additional analyses for the suspect contaminant from the same sampling point within one (1) month. 
F.  Turbidity. For community and non-transient non-community water suppliers, if the result of a turbidity analysis indicates that the maximum allowable limit has been exceeded for the finished water, the sampling and measurement shall be confirmed by resampling within one (1) hour. If the repeat sample confirms that the maximum allowable limit has been exceeded, the supplier of water shall report the result to the PBCPHU within forty-eight (48) hours. 
Sec. 16.2.9. - Notification. 
    The supplier of water of any community, non-community or non-transient non-community water supply system shall comply with the notification requirements of this section. 
A.  Notification of users. Notices to users given pursuant to this section shall be written in the following manner. The notice shall be conspicuous and shall not use unnecessary technical language, unduly small print or other methods which would frustrate the purpose of the notice. The notice shall disclose all material facts, including the nature of the problem and, when appropriate, a clear statement that a drinking water regulation has been violated and any preventive measures that should be taken by the public. Where appropriate or when requested by the PBCPHU, bilingual notice shall be given. Notice may include an explanation of the significance or seriousness to the public health, an explanation of steps taken by the system to correct any problem and the results of any additional sampling. If the PBCPHU considers it appropriate, notices to the users required by this section may be given by the PBCPHU on behalf of the supplier of water. 
B.  Notification of PBCPHU. Notification to the PBCPHU shall be by telephone and in writing on the monthly operating report form. For community and non-transient non-community water supplies, if the monthly average of the daily samples for turbidity exceeds the maximum allowable limit or if the average of any two (2) samples on consecutive days, including repeat samples, exceeds five (5) NTU, the supplier of water shall report to the PBCPHU within forty-eight (48) hours and notify the users of the system. For purposes of calculating the monthly average, the repeat sample taken pursuant to Sec. 16.2.8.F shall be the sample used. 
C.  Notification of noncompliance. If the average annual maximum contaminant level for gross alpha particle activity, man made radioactivity or total radium on the finished water, as set forth in Sec. 16.2.5.E is exceeded, the supplier of water shall give notice to the PBCPHU and notify the users. Monitoring at quarterly intervals shall be continued until the annual average concentration no longer exceeds the maximum contaminant level or until a monitoring schedule as a condition to an enforcement action shall become effective. If a community water system fads to perform any monitoring required in Sec. 16.2.6 for primary contaminants, or turbidity in the case of surface water suppliers, the supplier of water shall notify users of the system of the failure by inclusion of a notice in all water bills issued after the failure. The notice shall remain in effect until the failure is corrected. 
1.  Notification procedure. If a supplier of water is required to notify users of the system because of failure to comply with an applicable maximum contaminant level, the users of the water shall be notified of such failure as follows: 
a.  By publication on not less than three (3) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation in the area served by the system. Such notice shall be completed within fourteen (14) days after the supplier of water learns of the failure. 
b.  If the area served by a community or non-transient non-community water system is not served by a daily newspaper of general circulation, notification by newspaper shall be given by publication on three (3) consecutive weeks in a weekly newspaper of general circulation serving the area and by furnishing a copy of the notice to the radio and television stations serving the area served by the system. Such notice shall be finished within seven (7) calendar days after the supplier of water learns of the failure. 
D.  Signs. If a non-transient non-community or non-community water system fails to comply with an applicable maximum contaminant level established in Sec. 16.2.5 or fails to comply with an applicable testing procedure established in Sec. 16.2.6, the supplier of water shall give notice of such failure to the persons served by the system by fixed signs located at all potable water outlets or connections. 
E.  Potential water quality dangers. In case of breakdown in purification or protective equipment, breaks in main transmission lines, loss of water pressure below twenty (20) p.s.i., abnormal taste or odor, any interruption of water service to users, or any circumstances which could affect the quality of the drinking water, it shall be the duty of the water supplier to notify the PBCPHU within one (1) hour of the occurrence. Notification shall include the following information: 
1.  Description of the problem; 
2.  Area affected; 
3.  Number of connections or users affected; 
4.  Estimated duration of problem; and 
5.  Method of notification to users. 
Such information shall also be provided in writing on the monthly operation report. 
F.  Loss of water or water pressure. If the water is shut off to the users and/or the water pressure falls below twenty (20) p.s.i., notification shall be given immediately to the users either by written notice or through the media of newspaper, radio or television of the interruption of water service and/or the necessity to boil water. The notice to boil water shall remain in effect until two (2) consecutive days of satisfactory bacteriological sample results have been obtained from the area affected. The PBCPHU shall notify the water supplier when the boil water notice may be rescinded. Where public fire protection is provided by the mains affected by the interruption, the utility shall notify the Fire Marshall or the appropriate Fire Department official that an interruption has occurred or will occur. 
Sec. 16.2.10. - Design and construction requirements. 
    The design and construction requirements of this section shall govern the construction, extension, expansion or use of any community or non-community water supply system. The design standards specified in Chapter 17-550 and Chapter 10D-4, F.A.C., as well as other standards considered as modem sanitary engineering practices shall also apply to the construction, extension, expansion or use of any community or non-community water supply system. The design standards in the following reference works are incorporated into this Code. If any differences in design standards exists, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
Technical Volume Author, Publisher and Address Manual for Evaluating Public Drinking Water Supplies, Current Edition U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office; Washington, D.C., 20402 Water Treatment Plant Design, Current Edition American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association, and Conference of State Sanitary Engineers; American Water Works Association, Inc.; 66666 West Quincy Avenue, Denver, CO Recommended Standards for Water Works, Current Edition Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers; Health Education Service; P.O. Box 7283, Albany, NY 12224 Water Quality Treatment, Current Edition American Water Works Association; 66666 West Quincy Avenue, Denver, CO Standards of the American Water Works Association, Current Edition American Water Works Association; 66666 West Quincy Avenue, Denver, CO Manual of Treatment Techniques of Meeting the Interim Primary Drinking Water Regulations, May 1977 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, EPA-600, 8-77-055 Water Fluoridation Manual, October 1985 National Fluoridation Engineer; U.S. Center for Disease Control; Atlanta GA  
A.  Lead. Lead pipes, solder and flux are prohibited for use in the installation or repair of any drinking water system as of the effective date of this section. This does not apply to leaded joints necessary for the repair of cast iron pipes. Solders and fluxes must contain not mom than two-tenths (0.2) of one (1) percent lead and fittings not more than eight (8) percent lead. 
B.  Number of wells and pumps. A minimum of two (2) drinking water supply wells and pumps shall be provided for each community water system that will serve three hundred fifty (350) or more persons upon completion of construction. 
C.  Licensing of contractors. All water wells shall be constructed by a water well contractor licensed by the SFWMD in accordance with Chapter 17-21 and Chapter 17-550, F.A.C., and Chapter 40E-3, F.A.C. 
D.  Vertical well casings. The vertical well casing shall extend at least six (6) inches above ground or into an approved sump pit. Whenever the pump is not set at the vertical casing, the line between the vertical casing and pump shall be considered an extension of the casing and protected from sanitary hazards in a similar manner as the casing. 
E.  Community, non-community and non-transient noncommunity wells and on-site disposal systems. For community, non-community, and non-transient non-community water systems having on-site sewage disposal with flows greater than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day, as estimated in accordance with Sec. 16.1, wells shall be placed a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet from the disposal system. However, when on-site sewage disposal flows are less than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day, as estimated in accordance with Sec. 16.1, wells shall be placed a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the disposal unit. These distances may be increased if required under Sec. 16.1.5, 16.1.6.D. 
F.  Semi-public wells and on-site sewage disposal systems. Semi-public wells shall be placed a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from any septic tank or drainfield. This distance may be increased if required under Sec. 16.1.5, 16.1.6.5. 
G.  Private wells and on-site sewage disposal systems. Private water wells shall be placed a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from any septic tank, drainfield or brine disposal area. 
H.  Separation of wells from other possible contaminant sources. Community, non-community, nontransient non-community, and semi-public water wells shall be located a minimum distance of: 
1.  One hundred (100) feet from other pollution sources, including but not limited to drainage wells, gasoline or other petroleum product underground storage tanks, water softener brine disposal areas or other waste disposal areas except as otherwise provided in Sec. 7.4, Wellfield protection. 
2.  Fifty (50) feet from any non-drinking water well, pond, canal, or other body of water. 
3.  Twenty-five (25) feet from poisoned soils, including but not limited to, building foundations. 
4.  Five hundred (500) feet from any sanitary landfill or recognized hazardous or toxic waste site. 
I.  Construction of semi-public and private wells. For semi-public and private water system wells, construction shall be in accordance with standards specified in Chapters 10D-4 and 40E-3, F.A.C., as amended or transferred. 
J.  Waste collection and transmission lines. Any waste collection or transmission line within the defined locations shall be constructed in accordance with current American Water Works Association, Inc., water main standards, including the passing of the appropriate pressure and leakage tests. 
K.  Post-construction reporting. Within thirty (30) days after the completion of the construction or repair of any drinking water well, the water well contractor shall submit a report to the PBCPHU on the approved forms in accordance with the instructions provided thereon. 
L.  Protective fencing. Wells shall be enclosed within protective fencing when access is open to the general public. 
M.  Cones of influence. The cone of influence of a new well or wells serving a community water supply system shall comply with the requirements of the Sec. 9.3, Wellfield protection. 
N.  Closure of abandoned wells. All wells formerly serving water supplies which have been abandoned or which use has been permanently discontinued shall be plugged by filling them from the bottom to the top with neat cement grout, concrete or other method approved by the PBCPHU. 
O.  Emergency power systems. All existing community systems serving three hundred fifty (350) or more persons and all newly proposed community systems shall be equipped with a source of auxiliary power to allow operation of the raw water supply, water treatment units and pumping capacity. In addition, such systems shall be provided with automatic start-up devices except where elevated storage or twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) day per week operation is provided. Such emergency power shall be of a sufficient capacity to operate the water supply facility at one-half (1/2) design capacity. A minimum fuel supply for one (1) week of continuous operation for each item of auxiliary power shall be maintained at the water treatment plant or under the control of the utility and reserved for the water treatment plant. Any fuel pumps required to transfer the fuel to the auxiliary power units shall be equipped with their own auxiliary power or manual pumping system. 
P.  Reserve chlorine supplies. All community, non-community systems, and non-transient non-community systems, including semi-public systems where applicable, shall maintain a minimum reserve supply of chlorine for emergency conditions. Such reserve shall be figured for fourteen (14) days consumption for systems using gas chlorine and seven (7) days consumption for systems using hypochlorite solution. The consumption shall be based as a minimum on fifty (50) percent of design capacity. 
Q.  Disinfection. 
1.  Community, non-community, or non-transient non-community water systems. Community, non-community, or non-transient non-community water supplies shall be designed to maintain a minimum continuous and effective free chlorine residual of 0.2 mg/1 liter or equivalent disinfection if other than free chlorine is used as the disinfection measure throughout the system. When utilizing chlorine in combination with ammonia, a minimum combined residual of 0.6 mg/1 liter shall be maintained. 
2.  Semi-public water systems. The department shall require disinfection if bacteria is discovered in any sample of water. 
3.  Chlorination facilities. A minimum of two (2) chlorination facilities at the water treatment plant shall be provided for each community water system. Each chlorinator shall be of adequate capacity to supply the total demand of the raw water at the rated capacity of the treatment plant. Where more than two (2) chlorinators are available, adequate capacity to supply the total chlorine demand of the raw water shall be provided with the largest unit out of service. Disinfection other than chlorination will be considered on an individual basis by the PBCPHU. 
4.  Booster chlorination facilities. Booster chlorination facilities in the distribution system shall be provided along with the necessary controls to maintain free chlorine residuals or equivalent disinfection within the acceptable range of 3.0 mg/1 liter maximum and 0.2 mg/1 liter minimum or a minimum combined residual of 0.6 mg/1 liter when utilizing chlorine in combination with ammonia. 
R.  Water treatment plant and storage. The approved design capacity shall be adequate to provide for the maximum day demand plus fire flow requirements and maintain the water quality standards specified in this Code. 
S.  Distribution. 
1.  Water pressure. The sizing of the distribution lines shall be adequate to provide both of the following without the development of distribution pressures lower than twenty (20) pounds per square inch (psi): 
a.  maximum day demand plus fire flow requirements and 
b.  maximum hourly demand. 
2.  Line size. Except for repair or replacement of existing lines, the size of new piping for any community system shall be no less than six (6) inch diameter unless a departure in sizing is justified by hydraulic analysis or historic analysis and future water use for the area and is approved by the PBCPHU based on such circumstances. 
3.  Responsibility for operation and maintenance. In metered distribution systems, the supplier of water shall be responsible for operation maintenance and repair of new water lines up to and including the water meter. 
4.  Water main extensions. Any new development or construction connecting to an off-site water main shall provide an extension of that water main along the public right-of-way or utility casements abutting the property. 
5.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be maintained by the owner in accordance with standards established by the Standards of the American Water Works Association." If a fire hydrant is located downstream of a water meter, the meter shall be designed to provide an adequate flow without excessive pressure drop. Private fire hydrant owners shall be required to request a dedicated private fire line, separate from any drinking water line, where an excessive drop through a metered source exists. 
6.  Fire flows. The required fire flow from fire hydrants approved for installation prior to the effective date of this section shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) gallons per minute for two (2) hours. Those approved after the effective date of this section shall meet the following requirements. 
a.  Residential subdivision. In single-family or duplex dwellings not exceeding two (2) stories in height, the system shall provide capability for fire flow of at least five hundred (500) gallons per minute. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings of three (3) or more units. Commercial, institutional, or industrial subdivisions, or other high daytime or nighttime population density developments; in new subdivisions which include these developments fire hydrants in the areas of such development shall provide a fire flow of fifteen hundred (1,500) gallons per minute. However, a lower or higher flow may be required by the fire marshal or by the appropriate fire department official according to the Insurance Services Office recommendations. 
c.  Minimum fire flows for all systems. All systems shall have sufficient storage or other facilities so that the minimum fire flow will be maintained for at least four (4) hours or the current recommendations of the Insurance Services Office, whichever is greater. 
7.  Dead-end lines. Dead end lines shall be minimized by the looping of all rating where possible. Where dead end lines occur, they shall be provided with flush hydrants, fire hydrants or blowoffs for flushing purposes. 
8.  Demand at eighty (80) percent. When the distribution demand, as determined in Sec. 16.2.10 above, reaches eighty (80) percent of approved design capacity, the supplier of water shall initiate the procedures for water treatment plant expansion. In the event expansion procedures are not initiated, the system shall be considered inadequate for additional distribution expansion, and approval for additional distribution expansion shall not be granted. 
a.  Demand at ninety (90) percent. When the distribution demand, as determined in Sec. 16.2.10 above, reaches ninety (90) percent of the approved design capacity, the supplier of water shall have the water treatment plant expansion under construction. In the event construction is not underway, the system shall be considered inadequate for additional distribution expansion and approval for additional distribution expansion shall not be granted unless otherwise justified by an engineering report covering the circumstances and approved by the PBCPHU. 
T.  Backflow prevention. The following buildings, establishments or facilities connected to a drinking water supply system shall install and maintain backflow prevention devices complying with current American Water Works, Inc., standards: nursing homes, hospitals, mortuaries, funeral parlors, restaurants, sewage treatment plants, sewage lift stations, swimming pools and buildings using corrosive, toxic, infectious, radioactive or other substances which would be a health hazard if they entered a drinking water supply. 
Sec. 16.2.11. - Operation and maintenance. 
A.  Community, non-community and non-transient non-community water supply systems. The following operation and maintenance requirements shall apply to community, non-community and non-transient non-community water supply systems, and shall also apply to semi-public water supply systems. 
1.  The supplier of water shall maintain all items of the water supply facility in the approved operational condition. 
2.  The supplier of water shall operate the water supply facility to produce continuously water meeting the pressure quality requirements of this section. 
3.  The supplier of water shall introduce no new source of water into the system, and no purification process or protective provisions shall be altered or discontinued or by-passed, except where the supplier of water notifies the PBCPHU and secures approval therefrom. 
4.  Cross-connection to community, non-community, non-transient non-community and semi-public water supply systems are prohibited. Upon detection of a cross-connection, the supplier of water shall either eliminate the cross-connection by installation of an approved backflow prevention device or discontinue service by providing a physical separation cross-connection. 
5.  The supplier of water shall establish a routine cross-connection control program and keep a maintenance log on each backflow prevention device connected to its system. Testing and maintenance on each backflow prevention device shall be performed by a certified backflow prevention device tester. The frequency of testing shall be a minimum of once per year or other schedule recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the PBCPHU. The cross-connection control program shall be established no later than December 31, 1988, and a copy of the program submitted to the PBCPHU by March 30, 1989. 
6.  The supplier of water shall establish a routine testing and maintenance program on each fire hydrant connected to its system. The frequency of testing shall be a minimum of once per year or other schedule recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the PBCPHU. 
7.  The supplier of water shall conduct the necessary flushing programs to remove lime, sand or other objectionable sediments, matter or material from its water system. 
8.  Each community, non-transient non-community and Non-community water system shall maintain a distribution map showing the general locations of the water lines and sizes, valves, fire hydrants, flush hydrants and any inter-connections. The scale of the distribution map shall be between two hundred (200) and one thousand (1,000) feet per inch or other scale acceptable to the PBCPHU. A microfilm quality copy of the current edition of this map shall be submitted to the PBCPHU by February 28, of each even numbered year. The PBCPHU may waive the submittal requirements for any water supply in which no significant change has taken place within the distribution system. 
B.  Community, non-community, and non-transient non-community water supply systems. 
1.  The supplier of water shall schedule planned water outages during periods of low water usage. 
2.  The supplier of water shall operate for at least fifteen (15) minutes all emergency power units at least once per week to ensure starting capabilities and continuously for four (4) hours under load once each calendar quarter to ensure dependability. 
3.  The supplier of water shall provide a certified operator as specified in Chapter 17-602, F.A.C., except that all community systems shall meet at least the State minimum Class "D' certified operator requirements specified in Chapter 17-602, F.A.C., as it may be amended or transferred. 
4.  The supplier of water shall operate the water supply facility to maintain continuously the free available chlorine residual or equivalent disinfection between 3.0 mg/1 and 0.2 mg/ 1 throughout the distribution system, and the total chlorine residual no greater than 5.0 mg/1. When utilizing chlorine in combination with ammonia, a minimum combined residual 0.6 mg/1 shall be maintained. 
Sec. 16.2.12. - Emergency operation. 
A.  Interconnections. Where two (2) community water supply systems have distribution or transmission lines within one thousand (1,000) feet of each other, they shall provide an emergency interconnection between the two (2) systems when the PBCPHU determines that such a connection would be of benefit to the citizens of the Village or Palm Beach County. Such determination shall be based on the possibility of destruction of the water source or treatment system in the event of a disaster and the possible benefits in moving water between the systems. Such interconnecting lines shall be no smaller than the smallest of the two (2) lines being interconnected and shall be provided with at least one (1) valve and any necessary flush points. If the two (2) water suppliers are unable to reach an agreement on the payment for installation of such an interconnection, each supplier shall pay the cost of construction from the supplier's line to the point of connection and shall pay fifty (50) percent of the cost of a meter and meter box if either party desires a meter and meter box. The point of connection shall be at the following: 
1.  Municipal limits or franchise boundaries if the supplier's limits or boundaries are adjacent and contiguous. 
2.  The midpoint of the municipal limits or franchise boundaries if the limits or boundaries are not adjacent and contiguous. The inter-connection shall be completed within one (1) year after the PBCPHU notifies the systems involved. 
B.  Flushes, hydrants, taps and other emergency provisions. Any community water system may be required to provide a flush or fire hydrant, water tap or other provision for securing an emergency water service from an existing main at a location that the PBCPHU determines would be of benefit to the citizens of the area. Such determination shall be based in part on the possibility of a prolonged power outage or other disaster which would render individual wells in the area unusable. Other considerations will include the density of individual wells in the area and the distance of the nearest possible potable water supply during an emergency. Such water taps shall be constructed within one hundred twenty (120) days of notification by the PBCPHU. It shall be the responsibility of the Village or Palm Beach County to secure an agreement with the community water system for use of that emergency water service. 
Sec. 16.2.13. - Appeals. 
    Persons aggrieved by a requirement, interpretation or determination of Secs. 16.2.3.B and 16.2.10 of this section made by the PBCPHU or the Environmental Control Officer may appeal to the Environmental Appeal Board by filing a written notice of appeal to the Environmental Control Officer. Only those appeals requesting relief from setbacks under Sec. 16.2.10 or requesting an exemption from connection to a public or investor-owned community water supply under Sec. 16.2.3.B shall be filed. 
A.  Fee. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) made payable to the PBCPHU, which shall be non-refundable, to defray the cost of processing and administering the appeal. 
B.  Notice of appeal. Each notice of appeal shall state the factual basis for the appeal and the relief requested. There shall be attached to each notice supportive materials and documents, including a site plan indicating proposed and existing individual sewage disposal systems and wells on the property that is the subject of the appeal and all other systems and conditions on neighboring properties which could affect the requirements of Secs. 16.2.3.B or 16.2.10 of this section if the appeal were granted. The Environmental Appeal Board may require such additional information as it deems necessary. A separate application must be filed for each site or system considered for an appeal. The burden of presenting supportive facts in the application shall be the responsibility of the person filing the appeal. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proving entitlement to relief. The PBCPHU and/or the Environmental Control Officer shall defend all appeals before the Environmental Appeal Board. 
C.  Notice to property owner. The person filing the appeal shall also submit to the Environmental Control Officer a list of the names and addresses of every property owner who may be affected by the granting of the appeal. 
D.  Hearing. A hearing on the appeal shall be set within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal by the Environmental Control Officer. This provision does not mean that the applicant is entitled to a hearing on the first available agenda following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
E.  Rules of evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. All testimony shall be under oath. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in the trial courts of Florida. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. 
F.  Rights. The parties shall have the following rights: to be represented by counsel; to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine witnesses on any relevant matter, even though the matter was not covered in direct examination; and to rebut evidence. 
G.  Environmental Appeal Board. The Environmental Appeal Board shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and shall issue findings of fact based upon the greater weight of the evidence and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted herein. The findings and order shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting. 
H.  Appeals. In order to grant an appeal authorizing a new or existing well for use in lieu of connecting to a public or investor-owned community water supply, the Environmental Appeal Board must find that: 
1.  Satisfactory ground water is available or can be obtained; and 
2.  The well complies with all setbacks, construction standards and other requirements of this section and Chapters 17-21, 17-550, 10D-4 and 40E-3, F.A.C.; and 
3.  Every reasonable effort has been made to obtain a water supply from a public or investor-owned community water supplier. 
I.  Relief. In order to grant relief from Secs. 16.2.3.B or 16.2.10 of this Code and related sections of Chapter 10D-4, F.A.C., the Environmental Appeal Board must find that: 
1.  Satisfactory ground water can be obtained; and 
2.  Every reasonable effort has been made to comply with the requirements of this section and Chapter 10D-4, F.A.C., in the location of the well; and 
3.  The proposed well complies with all construction standards and other requirements of this section and Chapters 17-21, 17-550, 10D-4 and 40E-3, F.A.C.; and 
4.  Advance notice shall be given to future purchasers of the semi-public -and/or non-community water systems that the system shall be connected to a public or investor-owned community water supply when such a supply becomes available, and that the purchaser has certain operational requirements until such connection is completed. 
J.  Conditions and safeguards. Provided that the factual findings specified in Secs. 16.2.13.H or 16.2.13.I above are made, the Environmental Appeal Board may reverse, modify or affirm, wholly or partly, the requirement, interpretation or determination made by the PBCPHU or the Environmental Control Officer. In granting an appeal, the Environmental Appeal Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards consistent with this section. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the appeal is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this section. The Environmental Appeal Board may also prescribe a reasonable time within which the action for which the appeal is granted shall be started or completed or both. Any decision of the Environmental Appeal Board shall be in the form of a written order. 
K.  Change in facts. If there is a change in the facts or circumstances supporting a request for relief after an order granting relief has been issued, then the applicant shall notify the PBCPHU. The PBCPHU may request the Environmental Appeal Board to revoke or amend the order. 
L.  Termination of relief. Except where the relief granted is to exempt an applicant from the requirement to connect to a public or investor-owned community water supply under Sec. 16.2.10, any relief granted shall automatically terminate upon the availability of a community water supply to the lot or parcel. Upon the request of the PBCPHU or the Environmental Control Officer, the Environmental Appeal Board may modify or rescind an order granting relief from the requirements to connect to a public or investor-owned community water supply under Sec. 16.2.3.B if the conditions under which the appeal was granted no longer exist. Unless otherwise provided in an order issued pursuant to Sec. 16., relief granted under this section shall automatically lapse if action for which the appeal was granted has not been initiated within one (1) year from the date of granting such appeal by the Environmental Appeal Board or, if judicial proceedings to review the Environmental Appeal Board's decision shall be instituted, from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals. 
M.  Decision. The decision of the Environmental Appeal Board shall be final administrative action. Any person who is a party to the proceeding may appeal to the Circuit Court of Palm Beach County in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
Sec. 16.2.14. - Violations, penalties, enforcement and inspections. 
A.  Violations and penalties. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section or any duly constituted order of the Palm Beach County Environmental Control Hearing Board enforcing this section. Such violations shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 77-616, Special Acts, Laws of Florida, as amended, and Palm Beach County Environmental Control Ordinance No. 78-5, as amended. 
B.  Inspections. It shall be the duty of the County Health Director or his authorized representative to conduct such inspections as are reasonable and necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. 
CHAPTER 3. - PROHIBITION OF DUMPING, REGULATION OF WASTE DISPOSAL AND CLEAN FILL ACTIVITY 

Sec. 16.3.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to protect the surficial aquifer and prevent sanitary nuisances and public health threats by prohibition of dumping, regulation of waste disposal and clean fill activity. The specific objectives of this section are to establish prohibition for dumping or placing of waste upon any land or water on private or public property and regulate the disposition of clean fill. 
Sec. 16.3.2. - Applicability. 
    The standards of this section shall apply to all activities involving disposal of waste and clean fill activities within the unincorporated or incorporated areas of Palm Beach County. 
Sec. 16.3.3. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempted from the standards of this section: 
A.  Existing Approvals. All waste management activities which are approved by Department of Environmental Regulations, Solid Waste Authority, or the Palm Beach County Public Health Unit (PBCPHU). 
B.  Agricultural Waste. Agricultural waste disposal, provided the agricultural wastes are generated and disposed of on site and the property is agriculturally zoned. 
C.  Soil and Mulch. Soil and mulch brought on to a property and used for the purpose of improving soil/plant relations through improving retention of nutrients and water for plants in ground or above ground on that site. 
D.  Clean Fill. Clean fill disposed on land located in the Village or Palm Beach County if the person obtains the property owner's consent and the property has provided the Palm Beach County Public Health Unit (PBCPHU) with required notification as set forth herein. 
Sec. 16.3.4. - Prohibition for Dumping and Placing Waste. 
    It is unlawful and shall constitute willful causing of pollution for any person to dump, or cause or allow to be dumped; or place, or cause or allow to be placed; or bury, or cause or allow to be buried; any waste upon any land, or any water located in Village. 
Sec. 16.3.5. - Regulation of Clean Fill Activities. 
A.  Prohibitions of Clean Fill Activities. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the following activities: 
1.  Create or maintain a sanitary nuisance due to clean fill activities; 
2.  Adversely affect drainage resulting from clean fill activities; or 
3.  Store waste which results from clean fill activities for more than seven (7) days. 
B.  Notification of Clean Fill Activities. 
1.  Initial notification. Forty-five (45) working days prior to the commencement of clean fill activities, the property owner shall provide the PBCPHU written initial notification. Initial notification shall include; property owner(s) name, mailing address, phone number, clean fill material to be utilized, amount of clean fill activity, a survey prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, and a sketch indicating location of fill on property. 
2.  Exception. Initial notification shall not be required for the following activities: 
a.  Clean fill activities at parcels that have received a Palm Beach Village Engineering Department subdivision approval and have a Land Development Permit; 
b.  Clean fill activities necessitated by the Building Department permit standards for individual lot improvements which previously have not received a Land Development Permit. The intent is to allow the clean filling of individual unplatted or by-passed platted lots to meet current standards without deleteriously impacting the surrounding parcels; 
c.  Clean fill activities at sites that have received a dredge and fill permit; or 
d.  Clean fill activities conducted by any governmental agency. 
3.  Other permits required. Notification to the PBCPHU does not relieve the property owner from the need to obtain any local, state, or federal permit nor does it relieve the property owner from abiding by all local, state or federal laws, as applicable. 
Sec. 16.3.6. - Enforcement, Penalties, Circuit Court Proceedings. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of this Section shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
A.  Enforcement. The PBCPHU shall have available to it all enforcement remedies made available pursuant to Chapter 77-616, Laws of Florida, as amended, and County ordinances adopted pursuant thereto. Violations will be heard by the Environmental Control Hearing Board. 
B.  Penalties. Penalties that may be imposed include the following: 
1.  A civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each violations; and 
2.  Affirmative action such as a requirement that the violator perform roadside waste clean-up services or bear the cost of waste removal in lieu of such services. 
C.  Circuit Court Proceedings. Circuit Court proceedings may be instituted to abate and prosecute violations, or enforce orders. Such relief may include both temporary and permanent injunctions. 
ARTICLE 17 - PARK AND RECREATION STANDARDS 
REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY 
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS - CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the Ordinance No. 2005-11, adopted September 13, 2005, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted before Ordinance No. 2005-11, adopted September 13, 2005, and listed herein and are the end of the appropriate section as a history. Land development regulation ordinances that have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature are not listed in the Code Comparative Table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code 2005-11  9-13-2005 1 6.6.4.D 2005-14  6-14-2005 1 6.5 I 2005-16  6-28-2005 1 Art. 1(note) 2005-22 11-29-2005 1 6.12.1-6.12.4 2006-02  2-14-2006 1       Added 6-13.1 2006-21  9-12-2006 1 7.14.14 2006-25  4-10-2007 1       Rpld 6.6.4 2 6.6.4 2007-04  2-27-2007 1 8.9.2 2 6.4.4. 110 2007-07  6-26-2007 1       Added 6.8.6 2 Table 6.8.2 2007-19 11-13-2007 3 6.3.1-6.3.3 2008-19 11-25-2008 1 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2 6.4.4.30(b) 3 7.2.2.C 2009-10 10-27-2009 2 6.10.4.B 3 6.10.6 Table A notes (3)-(5) 2009-12  7-14-2009 1 5.1.15 2009-13  8-11-2009 1 6.8.4 2 Table 8.8-2 3 6.2.12(note) 4       Added 6.4.4. 19.1, 49.1 2009-17  1-12-2010 1 6.2.17 2 6.10.1-6.10.12 2010-05  4-27-2010 1 6.8.7 2 Table 6.8-2 3       Added 6.4.4. 69.1 4 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2010-08  4-27-2010 1 6.8.8 2 Table 6.8-2 2010-10  5-25-2010 1 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2 Table 6.4-1 Table 6.8-1 3       Added 6.4.4. 81.5 2010-14  6- 8-2010 1 8.24.9 2010-21 12-14-2010 1 6.8.14 2 Table 6.8-2 3 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2010-22 12-14-2010 1 Table 6.8-2 2011-04  5-24-2011 1 6.8.2.F.1.b.vii.(f)(ii.) 2012-09  7-10-2012 1 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2 6.4.4. 30. 2009-16 11-24-2009 1(Att. A) 7.14.1-7.14.20 2012-03  2-14-2012 1       Rpld 5.1.1-5.1.15, 5.2.1-5.2.4, 5.3.1-5.3.6, 5.4.1-5.4.6, 5.5.1-5.5.6, 5.6.1-5.6.5, 5.7.1-5.7.6, 5.8.1-5.8.10, 5.9.1-5.9.4, 5.10.1-5.10.13 2(Exh. A)       Added 5.1.1-5.1.18, 5.2.1-5.2.3, 5.3.1-5.3.4, 5.4.1-5.4.4, 5.5.1-5.5.4, 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.7.1-5.7.5, 5.8.1-5.8.10, 5.9.1-5.9.4, 5.10.1-5.10.13, Art. 5, Ch. 11 3       Rpld 6.8.1.D.-U.       Rnbd 6.8.1.V., W.       as 6.8.1.D., E. 4       Rpld 6.8.5       Rnbd 6.8.6-6.8.8       as 6.8.5-6.8.7 5 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2012-06  4-10-2012 1 7.14.19 2013-01  5-14-2013 1(Exh. A)       Added 5.12.1-5.12.8 2(Exh. B) 6.8.2.F.1.b.vii.(f)(ii.) 2013-03  5-14-2013 1(Att. A) Art. 3, Ch. 2 2(Att. B)       Rpld 6.4.3.D.       rnbd 6.4.3.E.-H.       as 6.4.3.D.-G. 3(Att. B) 6.4.3 (Table 6.4-1) 4(Att. C) 6.4.4. 98. 5(Att. D) 6.8.1.D. 6(Att. E) 6.8.1 (Table 6.8-2) 7(Att. F) 6.8.2.G.7.b.i. 8(Att. G) 6.8.3.G.2.a. 9(Att. H) 6.10.7 (Table C) 2013-11  9-10-2013 1 6.13.6 6.13.9 2014-04  4-22-2014 1(Att. A) Art. 15 (tit.) 15.1.1, 15.1.2       Rpld 15.2.1, 15.2.2       Rnbd Art. 15, Ch. 3, 15.3.1-15.3.3       as Art. 15, Ch. 2, 15.2.1-15.2.3       Rpld 15.3.4, 15.3.5       Rnbd Art. 15, Ch. 4, 15.4.1, 15.4.2       as Art. 15, Ch. 3, 15.3.1, 15.3.2       Rnbd Art. 15, Ch. 5, 15.5.1, 15.5.2, 15.5.4       as Art. 15, Ch. 4, 15.4.1, 15.4.2, 15.4.5       Added 15.4.3, 15.4.4       Rpld 15.5.3, 15.5.5       Added 15.5.1-15.5.7       Rpld 15.6.1-15.6.4       Rpld 15.7.1, 15.7.2       Rpld 15.8.1-15.8.4       Rpld 15.9.1-15.9.4       Rpld 15.10.1-15.10.5       Rpld 15.11.1-15.11.5 2(Att. B) Art. 3, Ch. 2 Art. 3, Ch. 3 2014-06  9-23-2014 1       Rpld 6.12.1-6.12.4 2 6.10.9.D. 2014-23  8-26-2014 1 Art. 14, Chs. 1-3 14.4.1       Rpld 14.4.2 2014-25 11-11-2014 2       Added 5.13.1-5.13.5 2014-27  1-13-2015 1 5.1.13 2015-01  3-24-2015 1 6.6.4.E.-I. 2015-02  5-12-2015 1 6.4.4. 34. 2015-04 10-27-2015 1 7.2.1-7.2.4 2015-08 10-27-2015 1 7.7.2.A.1. 2016-09 12-13-2016 1(Exh. 1) 6.8.7 2016-12  9-27-2016 1 6.4.4. 20. 2 6.10.7.B.4. 2016-17  2-28-2017 2       Added 6.10.4.F. 6.10.6 3 6.10.8 (Table D) 4 6.10.9.D. 5 6.10.9.G. 2016-20  9-13-2016 1 6.10.6.B. 2017-07  6-13-2017 1 6.4.4. 30.c 2017-09  8-22-2017 1 6.5.19. I.4.c. 2017-11  9-26-2017 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 5.1.1-5.1.18, 5.2.1-5.2.3, 5.3.1-5.3.4, 5.4.1-5.4.4, 5.5.1-5.5.4, 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.7.1-5.7.5, 5.8.1-5.8.10, 5.9.1-5.9.4, 5.10.1-5.10.13, Art. 5, Ch. 11, 5.12.1-5.12.8, 5.13.1-5.13.5       Added 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.2.1-5.2.4, 5.3.1-5.3.11 2017-21  1- 8-2018 1 Art. 3, Ch. 2 2 6.4.4. 95.  
