Barnesville Zoning Ordinance 

Table of Contents ARTICLE IIINTRODUCTION 
Section 100 Introduction  Section 110 Purpose, Authority, Enactment  Section 120 Jurisdiction  Section 130 Short Title  
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS 
Section 200 General Definitions  Section 210 Specific Definitions  
ARTICLE III ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
Section 300 Districts  Section 310 District Boundaries  
1 1 1 2 
1 1 
1 1 
Section 320 Rules for Determining District Boundaries  2 
Section 330 Zoning of Property to Be Annexed  3 

ARTICLE IV APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
Section 400 Use  1 Section 410 Building Height and Density  1 Section 420 Lot Size  1 Section 430 Yards  1 Section 440 One Principal Building on a Lot  1 Section 450 Building Permit  2 Section 460 Pending Applications  2 Section 470 Conformity with Existing Codes  2 Section 480 Dwellings Abutting Public Streets  2 Section 490 Approval to Move Buildings  2 
APPROVED 

T c Date: /-1.2- y
RO V 
ARTICLE V GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL DISTRICTS 

Section 500 Section 510 Section 520 Section 530 Section 540 Section 550 Non-conforming Buildings and Uses Off-Street Automobile Parking Off-Street Loading and Unloading Spaces Control of Curb Cuts and Vision Clearance Storage and Parking of Trailers and Vehicles Screening and Lighting 
ARTICLE VI USE PROVISIONS BY DISTRICT 

Section 600 Section 605 Section 610 Section 615 Section 617 Section 620 Section 625 Section 630 Section 635 Section 640 Section 645 Section 650 Section 655 Section 660 Section 665 Section 670 Section 675 General Agricultural District 
.1 .4 .11 .12 .13 .14 
. 
1
. 
1 
Single-Family, Low Density Residential District (R-1A) 3
.
Single-Family, Low Density Residential District (R-1B) 5 Single-Family, High Density Residential District (R-1C) 8
.
Multi-Family Residential District (R-2) 
Manufactured Housing Residential District (R-3) 
Professional District (P) 
Central Commercial District (C-1) 
General Commercial District (C-2) 
Neighborhood Commercial District (C-3) 
Highway Commercial District (C-4) 
Industrial and Manufacturing (I) 
Reserved 
Reserved 
Reserved 
Unclassified Uses 

9
.
13
. 
14
. 
17
. 
19
. 
21
. 
24
. 
27
. 
35
.
36
. 
37
.
38 
ARTICLE VII DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS 
Section 700 Charts of Dimensional Requirements .1
.
Section 710 Exceptions and Modifications 2 
ARTICLE VIII SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 
Section 800 Section 810 Section 820 Section 830 Section 840 Section 850 Section 860 Section 870 Accessory and Temporary Buildings . 1 Accessory Dwelling Units . 2 Automobile Service Stations and Convenience Stores .. 4 Cemeteries . 6 Home Occupations . 6 Manufactured Homes . 8 Manufactured Home Parks . 10 Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds .16 


&of Dnde'71-32.70 

ARTICLE IX STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND 

ANTENNAS 
Section 900.Intent . 1 Section 910.Applicability . 1 Section 920.General Standard . 2 Section 930.Permitted Uses . 4 Section 940.Uses Requiring Administrative Approval .5 Section 950.Uses Requiring A Conditional Use Permit .5 Section 960.Application Contents . 6 Section 970.Permit Approval . 6 
ARTICLE X SIGNS 
Section 1000 Purpose . 1 Section 1010.Definitions . 1 Section 1020 Permitting Requirements . 4 Section 1030 Signs For Which A Permit Is Not Required .5 Section 1040 Temporary Sign Permits . 7 Section 1050 Prohibited Signs . 7 Section 1060 General Requirements . 9 Section 1070.Signs Permitted in Specific Zoning Districts .11 Section 1080 Non-Conforming Signs . 17 
ARTICLE XI ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Section 1100 Enforcement . 1 Section 1105 Required Permits . 3 Section 1110 Planning Commission . 5 Section 1115.City Council . 5 Section 1120 Zoning Ordinance Amendments . 5 Section 1125.Conditional Uses . 11 Section 1130 Variances . 15 Section 1135.Special Use Permits . 18 Section 1140 Notice Provisions . 22 Section 1145 Public Hearing Procedures . 23 Section 1150 Disclosure of Campaign Contributions . 25 Section 1155.Conflict of Interest in Zoning Decisions . 26 
ARTICLE XII ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Section 1200 Conflict With Other Laws . 1 Section 1210.Severability . 1 
Section 1220 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances . 1 Section 1230 Effective Date . 1 
APPROVED Rec. by: ze Date: /-/20 
City of Barnesville, Georgia Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION 
Section 100 - Title 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BARNESVILLE, GEORGIA, CREATING ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATING LAND THEREIN INCLUDING REGULATING THE LOCATION, HEIGHT, BULK, NUMBER, SIZE AND APPEARANCE OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, THE SIZE OF YARDS, COURTS, AND OTHER OPEN SPACES, THE DENSITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION, THE USES OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AND LAND FOR RESIDENCE, TRADE, COMMERCE, INDUSTRY, RECREATION, PUBLIC ACTIVITIES OR OTHER PURPOSES; PRESERVING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR AREAS HAVING NATIONAL, REGIONAL, STATE OR LOCAL HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE; ADOPTING GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS; ADOPTING A MAP FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING THE BOUNDARIES OF SAID DISTRICTS; DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS USED HEREIN ; PROVIDING A METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
Section 110 - Purpose, Authority, and Enactment 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, and the Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Georgia Laws, 1957, p. 420, as amended) and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and the general welfare of the municipality; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; improving the aesthetic appearance of the municipality; promoting desirable living conditions and sustained stability of neighborhoods; preserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the municipality; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements; all in accordance with the municipality's adopted comprehensive plan, the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville, Georgia, hereby ordain and enact into law the Official Zoning Ordinance as amended for the incorporated area of the City of Barnesville for planning and zoning control purposes. 
Section 120 - Jurisdiction 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall govern the use and development of all land, buildings, and structures within the incorporated limits of Barnesville, Georgia. 
ARTICLE I -PAGE 1 
APPROVED Rec. by: DZ Date: /-/.2-oy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
Section 130 - Short Title 
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Official Zoning Ordinance as, amended, City of Barnesville, Georgia. 
• 
ARTICLE I - PAGE 2 
APPROVED Rec. by: 02 Date. 1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS 
Section 200 - General 
Except as specifically provided herein, all words used in this ordinance shall have their customary dictionary definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall have the meaning herein indicated. 
(a)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense.  
(b)  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in plural number include the singular.  
(c)  The word "person" includes any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual.  
(d)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."  
(e)  The word "building" includes the word "structure".  
(f)  The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.  
(g)  The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."  

(h) 	
- The word "map", "zoning map" or City of Barnesville Zoning Map" shall mean the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Barnesville, Georgia". 

(i) 	
The word "Ordinance" shall mean the Official Zoning Ordinance of the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 


Section 210 -Specific Definitions 
When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases, whether capitalized or not shall have the meaning indicated in this section. 
(1)
 ACCESSORY BUILDING! USE: A building of that: 

(a) 	
is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principle use, is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure

(b) 

or use served, 
is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served,


(c) 


except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Ordinance, 

TRUED 
ARTICLE II - PAGE 1 RE, by: i0C-Date: /--/2-0(-1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(d).is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. 
(2) 	
ADDITION: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or which is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing wall is new construction. 

(3) 	
ALLEY: A platted service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 

(4) 	
APARTMENT: A single-family dwelling unit in a multi-unit structure. 

(5) 	
APARTMENT BUILDING: A multi-family dwelling unit structure consisting of single-family dwelling units separated by fire resistance as required by the Building Code of the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(6) 	
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories, and incidental services, including facilities for lubricating, washing and cleaning, of otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting and major repair. 

(7) 	
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE: Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail service of major repairs, minor repairs and painting of automobiles, including the incidental services of lubrication and cleaning 

(8) 	
- AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD, AUTOMOBILE USED PARTS LOT OR JUNKYARD: Any place where three (3) or more vehicles not in running condition, and not being restored to operative condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open, or any building or structure used principally for wrecking of storage of automobiles not in running condition. Any vehicle on which repairs to restore the vehicle to operative condition have not begun within a 30 day period from the time such a vehicle appears on the property shall be considered as "not in running condition" for the purpose of this definition. 

(9) 	
BASEMENT: A space having one-half (1/2) or more of its floor-to­ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half (6-1/2) feet. 

(10) 	
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Any owner,-occupied dwelling of portion thereof offering transient lodging accommodations and breakfasts to not more than 12 paying guests. Commercial restaurant or kitchen facilities are prohibited. 


APPROVED , hely: /?'Date: P-/2--oy
ARTICLE II - PAGE 2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(11) 	
BLOCK: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways of streets, other than alleys. 

(12) 	
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or wall and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or goods. 

(13) 	
BUILDING, ALTERATIONS OF: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 

(14) 	
BUILDING. HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front to the height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs and to the deck line of a mansard roof. 

(15) 	
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 

(16) 	
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The individual who is designated as the official by the City Manager of the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(17) 	
CEMETERY: Any plot or ground, churchyard, building, mausoleum or other enclosure used for the burial of the dead. 

(18) 	
CITY: The City of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(19) 	
CITY CLERK: The individual who is employed by the City of Barnesville as the City Clerk. 

(20) 	
CLINIC: An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment. 

(21) 	
CLUB, NONPROFIT: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational, or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service to the general public. 

(22) 	
COMMISSION: The Bamesville/Lamar County Planning Commission. 

(23) 	
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Any part or element of the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the City of Barnesville as it pertains to the City of Barnesville. 


APPROVED ARTICLE II -PAGE 3. Rec.by: 00 Date: /-0 —Cr 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(24) 	
CONDOMINIUM: A building (or group of buildings) in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 

(25) 	
CONVENIENCE STORE: A one-story, retail store containing less than 3,500 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and household supplies, auto fuel, to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket"). It is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. 

(26) 	
COUNCIL: The Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville, Georgia 

(27) 	
DAY-CARE-HOME: A child care facility located in a private residence and operated by any person who receives pay for three (3) to six (6) children under eighteen (18) years of age, without transfer of custody, for more than four (4) hours and less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, and is registered by the state. 

(28) 	
DAY CARE CENTER: A private establishment enrolling seven (7) or more children under the age of 18 and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged, and which is licensed by the state and city to operate as a day care facility. A private home in which seven (7) or more children are kept shall be considered a day care center for the purpose of this Ordinance and shall be permitted to operate only where licensed by the state and permitted by the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Foster homes, group homes and other private homes in which children reside 24 hours a day are not considered day care centers. 

(29) 	
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land. 

(30) 	
DISTRICT: A section of the City of Barnesville within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 

(31) 	
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential occupancy including one-family, two family and multi-family but not motels or hotels. 

(32) 	
DWELLING. MULTI-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, provided that manufactured housing shall not be included within this definition. 

(33) 	
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 


APPROVED ARTICLE II - PAGE 4.Rec.by127Datel.c9Y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia 	Zoning Ordinance 
(34) 	
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A building designed for and occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other. 

(35) 	
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling or portion thereof providing permanent living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 

(36) 	
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose of purposes by the general public, or a corporation or a certain person or persons. 

(37) 	
FCC: Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 

(38) 	
FAMILY: One or more related persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with separate kitchen facilities, or no more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit. 

(39) 	
FLOOR AREA: The total area of all floors of a building as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls of from the centerline of walls separating two (2) connecting buildings, and including halls, stairways, and elevator shafts, but excluding attached garages, porches, balconies, unfurnished basements, and attics with headroom of less than seven (7) feet. 

(40) 	
FRONTAGE LOT: The distance for which the front property line of the lot and the street right-of-way line are coincident. 

(41) 	
FRONTAGE, STREET: All the property on the side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end street. 

(42) 	
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for one (1) family erected above a private garage detached from the main dwelling. A type of accessory unit. 

(43) 	
GARAGE, PARKING: A commercially or publicly owned building or portion thereof open to the general public designed and/or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold, and in connection with which may be performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 

(44) 	
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. A carport shall be considered as a private garage. 


APPROVED
ARTICLE II - PAGE 5 
Rec. by: OZ Date: /-1-2 -0V 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(45) 	
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing, equipping and hiring of motor driven vehicles. 

(46) 	
GROSS ACRE: Total acreage included in property. 

(47) 	
HEIGHT: Shall mean when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 

(48) 	
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory business use conducted entirely within a minor portion of a dwelling by the occupants thereof. The term "home occupation" includes all categories of home occupations, including home businesses, and residential businesses. 

(49) 	
HOTEL: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for more than 12 persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 

(50) 	
INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDINGS: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been made, fabricated, formed or assembled in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. "Industrialized building" does not include manufactured housing. All industrialized buildings erected in the City of Barnesville shall bear the seal of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 

(51) 	
INSTITUTION: A non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment. 

(52) 	
JUNKED AUTOMOBILE: Any automobile the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, or discarded, and is not currently licensed by the State of Georgia. 

(53) 	
KENNELS: Any location where raising, grooming, caring for, boarding, or treating of dogs, cats, of other small animals for commercial purposes is carried on within the City of Barnesville. 

(54) 	
LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING PICK-UP: A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking up of laundry and dry cleaning machines. 

(55) 	
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE: A business that provided washing, drying, and/or ironing machines, and/or coin-operated dry cleaning machines. 


ARTICLE II - PAGE 6 
APPROVED Rec. by:___OZ_ Date: /-/-2- —69 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(56) 	
LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 

(57) 	
LOT: The basic development unit, an area with fixed boundaries, used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building and not divided by any public highway or alley. A "zoning lot" must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must front on a public street. 

(58) 	
LOT DEPTH: The distance between front and rear lot lines. If two opposite sides of said lot are not parallel, the depth shall be deemed to be the mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. 

(59) 	
LOT OF RECORD: A lot or parcel of land whose existence, location, and dimensions have been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Lamar County. 

(60) 	
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 

(61) 	
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets not intersecting at a point common with the boundary lines of the lot. 

(62) 	
LOT. INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot. 

(63) 	
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side boundaries of a lot measured at the front building line but not more than 50 feet from the front lot line. 

(64) 	
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42,U.S.C. 5401, et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of this part is as follows: 


"Manufactured Home' means a structure, transportable in one or 
more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet 
or more in width or forty (40) body feet in length, or, when erected 
on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and 
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a 
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected 
to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air 
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that 
such term shall include any structure which meets all the 
ARTICLE II - PAGE 7. APPROVED Rec. by:_e_Date: /42-°Y 
City of Bamesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and 
with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files 
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban 
Development complying with the standards established under this 
title." 
A manufactured home is a single-family detached dwelling the placement of which in a R-3 district is dependent upon compliance with the standards in Section 850 of this Ordinance. 
(65) 	
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any lot where manufactured or mobile homes are customarily parked for a longer period of time than 30 days for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces are set aside and offered for rent for use by manufactured or mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or facility used by occupants of manufactured or mobile homes on such premises. 

(66) 	
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is primarily in manufactured or mobile homes. 

(67) 	
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured or mobile home. 

(68) 	
MOBILE HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width of forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 


Any structure meeting the requirements under this definition shall be 
permitted only in manufactured home parks subject to the conditions and 
requirements as set forth in Article VII, Section 860 of this Ordinance. 
Existing lots or parcels containing mobile homes at the time of the 
adoption of this ordinance are hereby grandfathered and may be continued 
for that use as nonconforming use subject to Section 500 of this 
Ordinance. 
(69) 	
MOTEL: A building or a group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for rental primarily to automobile transients and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally to the outside the building. 

(70)
 NET ACRE: Gross acre less all land dedicated to public use. 


ARTICLE II - PAGE 8. An Rec.by: D 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(71) 	
NON-CONFORMING USE: The use of any building or land which was legal at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, but which building or use is no longer legal after the enactment of this Ordinance amendment thereto, with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 

(72) 	
OPEN SPACE: A yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage area. 

(73) 	
PARKING. OFF-STREET: An area designated for automobile storage which is wholly beyond any public street right-of-way. 

(74) 	
PERSONAL CARE HOME: A profit or nonprofit facility, home or structure providing protective care and watchful oversight for residents. Such home, however, shall not provide chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care. Personal care involves responsibility for the safety of the residents while inside the building. Personal care may include daily reminding of residents of their appointments, the ability and readiness of management to intervene if a crisis arises for a resident, and supervision by management in areas of nutrition, medication, and actual provision of transient medical care. The residents and staff shall live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment. 


Personal care homes shall not provide services to any person who would 
constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The 
term "personal care home" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment 
centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other 
housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. All personal 
care homes must have a permit from the Georgia Department of Human 
Resources and be located in commercial districts only. 
(75) 	
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Barnesville Lamar County Planning Commission. 

(76) 	
PLAT: A map, plan or layout of a county, city town, section, or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 

(77) 	
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS: Any telecommunication tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 

(78) 	
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 


APPROVED , ARTICLE II - PAGE 9 Rec. by: 0 7 Date: I'12-0y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(79) 	
PROFESSIONAL: When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy," a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use which would created any loud noise or noxious odors within the City of Barnesville. 

(80) 	
PUBLIC UTILITY: A privately owned and operated business, franchised to use public rights-of-way and whose purpose is to systematically provide energy; power; water; transportation; or liquid, gaseous, or solid commodities to the general public. 

(81) 	
RESTAURANT. DRIVE-IN: An eating establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food and/or drink while sitting in a motor driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside an enclosed building. 

(82) 	
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THRU: An eating establishment wherein a patron is served through a window or other device while remaining in a motor vehicle and where product is served to persons in a vehicle are not normally consumed on the premises. 

(83) 	
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 

(84) 	
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 

(85) 	
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments planned, developed, and managed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 

(86) 	
SIGN: Definitions for signs are set forth in Article X of this Ordinance. 

(87) 	
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: Permit which must be granted by the City Council in accordance with Article VI, Section 675 and Article XI of this Ordinance prior to establishing or erecting a use that is unclassified under this Ordinance of amendments thereto. 

(88) 	
STABLE: An accessory building constructed for the caring and boarding of horses. 

(89)
 STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 


PROS , Rec. by1_,CLZ Date: ( <
ARTICLE II -PAGE 10.
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(90) 	
STREET: A public way dedicated to and accepted by the city for the use of vehicular or pedestrian traffic by the general public and may be refereed to as a street, highway, parkway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, etc. 

(91) 	
STREET, ARTERIAL: A major street designed for continuous movement of all types of traffic but with less control over the access points from streets and adjacent property than freeways. 

(92) 	
STREET, COLLECTOR: Provides frontage for access to lots and carries traffic to and from local streets. Traffic should have origin or destination in the immediate neighborhood. 

(93) 	
STREET. FREEWAY: A multi-lane, limited access street designed for fast continuous movement of all types of traffic, with control over access to abutting property. 

(94) 	
STREET, HALF: A street which does not meet the minimum right-of­way widths as set forth in this Ordinance. 

(95) 	
STREET, LINE: The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 

(96) 	
STREET, LOCAL: The lowest order street, providing frontage for access to private lots, and carrying traffic having destination or origin on the street itself. Designed to carry traffic a slowest speed. 

(97) 	
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 

(98) 	
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined within the confines of Barnesville. 

(99) 	
SUBDIVISION; Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, including any division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and including re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, related to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 


(a).the sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the modified lots are in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other 
APPROVED
ordinances of the City. 
Rec. by: U7 Date:.-oy
ARTICLE II -PAGE 11.
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(100) 	TOWER: Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
(101) 	TOWNHOUSE: One of a single-family dwelling units which are erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit of units by a approved fire resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement of cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
(102) 	VARIANCE: A departure from the applicable standards of the zoning ordinance relating to dimensional requirements which is granted or denied by the City Council based on a recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
(103) 	VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. 
(104) 	YARD: A space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments an accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
(105) 	YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the yard shall be measured at right angles from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. On lots having frontage on more than one street, the minimum front yard shall be provided for each street in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(106) 	YARD, REAR: An open space on the same lot with the main building, such space being unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot. On all corner lots, the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
(107) 	YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and adjacent sAirkis 
ARTICLE II - PAGE 12. be: by: 0Z Dale: /-12 —0 if 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line 
of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the front boundary of the side 
yard shall be the front line of the lot. On corner lots, the side yard shall be 
considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest 
dimension. 
(108) 	ZONING: The power of the City of Barnesville to provide within its territorial boundaries for the zoning of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the use of property for which said zones or districts were established. 
(109) 	ZONING DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL: The individual designated by the City Manager to administer and enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
.te (-72 OK
Rec Dror
ARTICLE II — PAGE 13 
City of Barnesville, Georgiaa Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE HI -ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
Section 300 - Districts 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Barnesville is hereby divided into the following districts, designated as follows: 
A - Agricultural R-1A - Single-Family Residential, Low Density R-1B - Single-Family Residential, Low Density R-1C — Single-Family Residential, High Density 
R-2 - Multi-Family Residential R-3 - Manufactured Housing Residential District P - Professional District C-1 - Central Commercial District C-2 - General Commercial C-3 - Neighborhood Commercial District C-4 - Highway Commercial I - Industrial and Manufacturing District 
Section 310 -District Boundaries 
310.1- Incorporation of the Zoning Map 
The boundaries of the above described districts are hereby established as shown on the map, entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Barnesville, Lamar County, Georgia," adopted on  , by the Mayor and City Council of Barnesville, Georgia, and certified by the Barnesville City Clerk. This map shall be the official zoning map of the City of Barnesville and hereby made a part of this zoning ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Said map is a public record and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Barnesville. 
310.2 - Map Amendment 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in the district 
boundaries or other information portrayed in the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall 
be made on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved 
by the Council, together with a numerical entry on the Official Zoning Map referring to 
the application on file which states the date of the official action and a brief description of 
the nature of the changes. No amendment to this Ordinance which involves matter 
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change an 
entry shall have been made on said map. 

Section 320 -Rules for Determining District Boundaries 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as 
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 

ARTICLE Ill - PAGE 1 ARCS Ret by: U2. Date: 1-()--CM 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 


320.1- Boundaries Following Property Lines 
Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, center lines of streets, highways, alleys, or railroads, shorelines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
320.2 - Boundaries Parallel to Centerlines of Streets 
Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of the same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, of said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Official Zoning Map. 

320.3 - Boundaries Dividing Lots 
Where a district boundary line as appearing on the Official Zoning Map divides a lot that is in single ownership at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, the zoning district classification of one portion may be extended to the remainder by the Council without recourse to the zoning ordinance amendment procedure set forth in this Ordinance. 

320.4 - Abandoned, Vacated Roads 
Where a public road, street, or alley is vacated or abandoned by official action of the Council, the regulationsapplicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 

320.5 - Determination of Boundary by Council 
In a case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the above described methods, the Council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 

320.6 - Comprehensiveness of Zoning Districts 
The purpose of these regulations and the accompanying map is to place all portions of Barnesville, Georgia into zoning districts. Should any area appear either by reference to the maps or by interpretation to be inadvertently or otherwise omitted from a zoning district classification, such area or areas are hereby placed in an R-1A (Residential ­Single Family Low Density District) and are subject to all the regulations pertaining thereto until such time as the Planning Commission and the City Council can determine its proper zoning district classification. 
APPROVED 
.7)—o y
Rec. by: De Date: /­
ARTICLE III - PAGE 2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 330 - Zoning of Property to Be Annexed 
Property that is to be annexed into the City shall be zoned by the City in accordance with the following procedures: 
330.1 - Initiation of Zoning Procedures 
The City of Barnesville may begin the required procedures for rezoning of property to be annexed to the City as required in Article XI, Section 1120 at any time on or after the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the County Commission of Lamar County as required under O.C.G.A. Section 36-36-6. 

330.2 - Notice of Hearing 
The City shall cause to be published within newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of Lamar County wherein the property to be annexed is located, a notice of hearing as required in Article XL, Section 1140.1, and shall place a sign on the property complying with Article XI, Section 1140.2 of this Ordinance. 

330.3 - Hearing Required 
The hearing process required under Article XI, Section 1145 for zoning amendments shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the municipality. 

330.4 - Effective Date 
The zoning classification approved by the City of Barnesville shall become effective on the later of: 
(a) 
- The date the zoning is approved by the City, or 

(b) 	
The date the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-36-2. 



330.5 - Fees 
A fee schedule will be established by the Mayor and Council for the costs associated with annexation. 
APPROVED Rec.by.ff_Dale: ARTICLE III - PAGE 3 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 




ARTICLE IV -APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
Section 400 - Use 
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, remodeled, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, for the district in which it is located. Said conformity shall be demonstrated by the issuance of a valid building permit. 
Section 410 -Building Heights and Density 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered so as to exceed the height limits, or to accommodate or house a greater number of families than are specified or required in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. 
Section 420 -Lot Size 
Except as hereinafter provided, no lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that lot width of depth, front, side or rear yard, inner or outer courts, lot area per family or other requirements of this ordinance are not maintained. 
Section 430 -Yards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building, nor shall any building have narrower or smaller front, side, or rear yards or courts than are required in this Ordinance. Every part of a required yard or court shall be unobstructed and open from its lowest point to the sky, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projections shall not extend more than two (2) feet into the yard area or open space requirements. 
Section 440 -One Principal Building on a Lot 
Except as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, only one principal building and its permitted customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot. 
APPROVED ARTICLE IV - PAGE 1.Rec. by: Z. Date: - ). -CY/ 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
Section 450 -Requirement for Building Permit 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except upon application for and issuance of a building permit by the City Building Official. 
Section 460 -Pending Application for Building Permits 
Except as hereinafter provided, nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, design, or use of any building, structure, or part thereof, for which a building permit has been issued prior to the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, provided that construction shall start within 60 days after the issuance of such building permit. 
Section 470 -Conformity with Existing Codes 
No housing unit shall hereafter be constructed, located, erected, or otherwise situated in the City of Barnesville, Georgia, which does not meet building, fire, electrical, gas, plumbing and other then existing codes of the City of Barnesville, Georgia and all other then applicable government laws and regulations. 
Section 480 -Dwellings to Abut Public Streets 
Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provides frontage onto a paved public street. 
Section 490 -Approval Required to Move Buildings 
Except as hereinafter provided, no existing building or other structure shall be moved into any zone except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and not before a permit shall be granted by the Zoning Department. Any such relocated building shall meet the applicable standards of the building codes as required for new construction. 
APPROVED 
Rec. by: 0 Z Dale:.-0 y
ARTICLE IV - PAGE 2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL DISTRICTS 

Section 500 - Non-conforming Buildings and Uses 
Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance of future amendments. It is the intent of these regulations to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, altered, destroyed, etc..., but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of these regulations that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, extended or used as grounds for adding other structures or uses that are prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
500.1 Avoidance of Undue Hardship 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 

500.2 Incompatibility of Non-conforming Uses 
Non-conforming uses are declared by these regulations to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such uses are located. After passage of this Ordinance, a Non-conforming use of structure, a Non-conforming use of land, or a Non-conforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be changed to another Non­conforming use, nor shall it be extended by any of the following: 
(1) 	
the attachment on a building or premises or the addition of signs intended to be seen from off premises, 

(2) 	
the addition of other uses of the property which would generally 
prohibited in the district in which such use is located, or 


(3) 	
additions to any existing, Non-conforming structure except in conformity with this Ordinance. 



500.3 Non-conforming Lots of Record 
(a).Single Non-conforming Lots of Record. A single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not meet the requirements for area, width, or both that are applicable in the district may be used or sold for the erection of those buildings and accessory buildings necessary to carry out the permitted uses in that district provided that: 
APPROVED 
/— -oy
Rec.ARTICLE V - PAGE 1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(1) 	
Yard dimensions and lot coverage requirements except requirements for total land area, lot width, or both shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located; 

(2) 	
Variance for yard dimensions and lot coverage requirements shall be obtained only through action of the City Council in accordance with Section 1130 (Variances) of this Ordinance; 

(3) 	
Location requirements of accessory buildings and uses are met as provided in Section 800 (Accessory and Temporary Buildings) of this Ordinance; 

(4) 	
Parking space requirements for all districts are met as provided in Section 510.3 et seq. of this Ordinance; 

(5) 	
Such lots do not have continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership; and 

(6) 	
In residential districts, buildings shall be limited to single-family 


detached dwellings. 
. 

(b) 	Non-conforming Lots of Record in Combination. If two (2) or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of these regulations and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or areas less than specified by the requirements stated in this Ordinance. 

500.4 Non-Conforming Uses of Land 
. 
(a) 	
Where, at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or amendments thereto, lawful uses of land exist that would not be permitted by the requirements imposed by these regulations, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided that: 

(1) 	
No such Non-conforming use shall be changed to another Non­conforming use; 

(2) 	
No such Non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance; 

(3) 	
No such Non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance; 

(4) 	
If any such Non-conforming use of land is discounted for a period of more than 6 months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the requirements specified by this Ordinance, or 


ARTICLE V - PAGE 2 
APPROVED Rec. byl_PZ_.
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
amendments thereto, for the district in which such land is located; and
. 
(5) No additional structures not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, shall be erected in connection with such Non-conforming use of land. 

500.5 Non-conforming Structures 
(a).Continued Use of Non-conforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment this Ordinance which could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise, lawful, provided that: 
(1) 	
No such Non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a manner that increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity, provided that any such alteration must comply with the requirements of this Ordinance and must not in itself be Non­conforming; 

(2) 	
Should such structure be voluntarily moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements for district in which it is located after it is moved. 

(b)
 Restoration of Damaged Building. Should such Non-conforming structure be hereafter damaged or destroyed to an extent exceeding fifty 

(50)
 percent of the reasonable estimated replacement cost of the structure, as determined by the Building Official, said structure shall not be reconstructed or restored to the same or other Non-conforming use except upon written approval of the Building Official. 


. 
(c) 	Repairs and Maintenance. On any Non-conforming structure of portion of a structure containing a Non-conforming use work may be done on ordinary repairs including remodeling, or repair or replacement of non­loadbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the total square footage existing when it became Non-conforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 

500.6 Non-conforming Uses of Structures or Structures and Premises in Combination 
. 
(a) 	If lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of 
APPROVED ,
ARTICLE V - PAGE 3 
Rec. by:.Date: -.— 0y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
this Ordinance which would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided that: 
(1) 	
No such Non-conforming use shall be changed to another Non­conforming use; 

(2) 	
No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, voluntarily moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 

(3) 	
Any structure, or structure and premises in combination, in or on which a Non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted, use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the Non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 

(4) 	
Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, but no such use shall be extended to any land outside such building; 

(5) 	
When a Non-conforming use of a structure or structure and premises in combination is discontinued or abandoned for more than one (1) year, the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 

(6) 	
Where Non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, should the structure be damaged to.the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its current replacement value as determined by the Building Official, said structure shall not be reconstructed or restored to the same or other Non­conforming use except upon written approval of the Building Official. 


Section 510 -Off-Street Automobile Parking 
Within the City of Barnesville, off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted of conditional use is established in accordance with this Ordinance. No structure shall be hereafter erected nor any of the following uses established unless the minimum number of parking spaces as specified below are provided. 
510.1 Purpose 
The purposes of the off-street parking regulations are as follows: 
(a).To progressively alleviate or prevent traffic congestion and shortages of 
on street parking spaces; 
ARTICLE V -PAGE 4 

ROVED Rec. by: UC Dale: (1-2-0 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(b) 	
To ensure that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities are provided proportionally t the needs of each land use; and 

(c) 	
To ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed in a manner that will ensure efficiency, safety, and where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from adverse effects commonly caused by parking areas. 



510.2 General Requirements 
(a) 	
Definition - "Off-street Parking Space". The term "off-street parking space" shall mean a space at least nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long with a minimum net area of one hundred and eighty (180) square feet, excluding area for egress and ingress and maneuvering of vehicles. Each parking space shall have access for vehicles to a public street. 

(b) 	
Provision of Off-Street Parking Space on Different Lot. If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Building Official may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided that such space lies within 400 feet of the property line of such principal use; and further provided that such space is under the exclusive control of the person responsible for the principal. For the purpose of this subsection, "exclusive control" means ownership of such remote space of a lease of such space for no less than twenty-five (25) years. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced of encroached upon in any manner. 

(c) 	
Provision of Parking Spaces for Separate Uses. The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one 

(1)
 lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that the portion of the parking space required for a religious use whose peak attendance will be at night or on a particular day of the week may be assigned to a use which will be closed during the said peak attendance times. 

(d) 	
No Reduction of Off-Street Parking Areas. Areas reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the Building Official. 

(e) 	
Pre-existing Parking. Off-street parking existing on the effective date of this Ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 

(f) 	
Alteration of Existing Commercial Buildings. Any commercial building existing on the effective date of this Ordinance may be reconstructed, 


ARTICLE V - PAGE 5. APPROVED Rec. by. D 2 Dale /— —0 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
remodeled, or enlarged without increasing the existing off-street parking 
spaces, provided such reconstruction, remodeling, or enlargement does not 
exceed more than ten (10) percent of the original gross commercial floor 
area. Additional off-street parking must be provided for only that portion 
of the additional gross commercial floor area in excess of ten (10) percent 
in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Ordinance. In the case of 
an existing structure changing use, off-street parking requirements 
applicable to the new use must be provided, unless a variance is obtained 
in accordance with Article XI Section 1130 of this Ordinance, 
(Variances). 
(g) 	
Extension of Parking Space into Residential Districts. Required parking space may extend up to one hundred (100) feet into residential district provided that the parking space adjoins a commercial or industrial district and has its only access on the same street as the property that it serves and is separated from abutting residential lots by a planned buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide. 

(h) 	
No Obstruction of Emergency Vehicles. The arrangement of parking 
shall not obstruct Emergency Vehicles from access to the site or its 
buildings. 


(i) 	
Handicapped Parking Access. Handicap Parking Access shall be provided as required in the Americans with Disabilities Act. The parking requirements for disabled individuals are defined in the Federal Register, 28 CFR part 36, Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by Public Accommodations and in Commercial Facilities; Final Rule dated July 26, 1991. 

(j) 	
Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions. The following diagrams specify the required stall and aisle dimensions for the situation depicted. Alternate configurations may be authorized by the Building Official or his authorized representative. 


APPROVED Rec. by: ve-Dale: 7-7.2= 0 y
ARTICLE V - PAGE 6 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
INSERT PARKING 
AISLE DIAGRAM HERE 



510.3 Parking Space Requirements for All Districts 
Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal to at least the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth below. Where the Building Official determines that fewer parking spaces are necessary for a specific proposed use, the Building Official is authorized to reduce the parking requirements set forth in this Section to an appropriate level. 
APPROVED  
Rec.  
ARTICLE V - PAGE 7  

City of Barnesville, Georgia Zoning Ordinance 
Land Use 
1..Residential 
(a) One and two family dwellings 
Parking Requirements 
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit of 1,000 square feet or less; three (3) spaces or each unit of over 1,000 square feet. For one and two family dwelling units, all available driveway space may be used in meeting the requirements of this section. 
(b) 
Multiple-family dwellings.Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit of 1,000 

(c) 
Hotels. 

(d) 
Motels, tourist courts and homes, manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle 

(e) 
Bed and Breakfasts and dormitories 


2..Public Assembly 
(a) 
Churches and other places worship 

(b) 
Private clubs, lodges and fraternal buildings not providing overnight accommodations 


square feet or less; three (3) spaces for each unit over 1,000 square feet. 
One (1) space for each room plus one additional space for each five (5) employees. 
One (1) space for each guest bedroom, manufactured home, or recreational vehicles space, plus one additional space for a resident manager or owner. 
One (1) space for each guest bedroom, plus one space for each employee. 
One space for each four (4) seats in the main auditorium of sanctuary. 
One space for each five active members. 
(c)
 Theaters, auditoriums, coliseums One space for each four (4) seats in the stadiums and similar places main auditorium or sanctuary. 

(d) 
Libraries, museums 

(e) 
Schools, including kinder­gartens, playschools and day care centers 


One space for every 500 feet of gross floor space. 
One space for each four (4) seats in the assembly hall, or one space for each employee, including teachers and administrators which ever is greater, plus five (5) spaces for each classroom for high schools and colleges. 
WRVS /-1-2--0 y
E.
ARTICLE V - PAGE 8 Rec. by: 
City of Barnesville, Georgia Zoning Ordinance 
(f) 
Skating rinks, dance halls, exhibition halls, pool rooms and other places of amusement or assembly with­out fixed seating arrangements. 

(g) 
Bowling alleys 


3. Health Facilities 
(a) 
Hospitals, nursing homes, and similar institutional uses 

(b) 
Kennels and animal hospitals 

(c) 
Medical, dental and health offices and clinics 

(d) 
Mortuaries and funeral parlors 


4. Businesses 
(a) 
Automobile service and repair establishments 

(b) 
Food Stores 

(c) 
Restaurants including bars, cafes, taverns, night clubs, lunch counters and all similar dining and/or drinking establishments 

(d)
 Office buildings, including banks, business, commercial and professional offices 


One space for every 100 square feet of floor area or ground area. 
Four (4) spaces for each lane. 
One (1) space for each four (4) beds, plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees including nurses. 
One and a half (1-1/2) spaces for every 100 square feet of waiting room area, plus one 
(1) space for each two employees. 
One space for every 200 square feet of floor area used for offices and similar purposes. 
Fifteen (15) spaces per parlor or chapel unit, or one space per four (4) seats, whichever is greater. 
One (1) space for each regular employee, plus one (1) space for every 250 square feet of floor area. 
One (1) space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
One space for each four (4) seats provided for patrons use, plus one (1) space for every 75 square feet of floor area provided for 
patron use but not containing seats. 
One (1) space for every 300 square feet of ground floor area, plus one (1) space for 
every 500 square feet of upper floor area, 
plus one (1) space for each governmental 
vehicle. 
APPROVED 
—0 y
ARTICLE V - PAGE 9.Rec. by _D_Z Date.
City of Barnesville, Georgia 	Zoning Ordinance 
(e) 
Shopping centers Four (4) spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 

(f)
 Furniture stores 	One (1) space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area. 

(g) 
Public utilities, such as tele-A parking area equal to 25 percent of the 
phone exchanges and gross floor area. 
substations, radio and TV 
stations, and electric power 
and gas substations 



5. Industries 
(a) 
Commercial, manufacturing and One (1) space for each three (3) employees 

industrial establishmentsoon the maximum working shift, not catering to the retail trade plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises 

(b) 
Wholesale establishmentsoSame as 5(a) 


510.4 Site Requirements 
All off-street parking shall be lain out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a) 	
Surfacing of Parking Areas. All such parking shall be hard surfaces with concrete or plant bituminous material and shall be maintained in a dust-proof condition. A good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 

(b) 	
Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected 
away from adjacent properties and streets. 


(c) 	
Drainage. The parking area shall be adequately drained. 

(d) 	
Parking Areas Abutting Residential Districts. Along those lot lines of parking area which abut residential districts, a dense planting of trees and shrubs shall be established on a strip of land not less than eight (8) feet in width adjacent to the districts, and provided that such planting is not less than six (6) feet in height, and substantial bumper rail of wood, metal, or concrete shall be installed on the inside of the planting strip. 

(e) 	
Raised Curb. A raised curb of at least six (6) inches and no more than 
twelve (12) inches shall be erected along all required parking areas 
excluding single family and duplexes. 



APPEVID Rec. by: 0 Zo-oyARTICLE V -PAGE 10 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(f) 	
No Signs in Rights-of-Way. No sign, whether permanent or temporary shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 

(g) 	
Landscaping. For parking areas with ten (10) or more parking spaces, at least ten (10) percent of the parking area shall be permanently landscaped, excluding buffers as required in Section 550. Landscaping may consist of trees, shrubs, flowers, or other ornamental plants, provided that all landscaped areas are regularly maintained by the lot owner and that any dead or dying trees of plants are replaced within one (1) month of death or noticeable decay. 

(h) 	
Marking of Parking Spaces. Required parking spaces shall be permanently marked except in single and two-family residences. 

(i) 	
Parking Space Design. No off-street parking space of parking pad shall be designed of constructed so as to require the backing of vehicles into the right-of-way of a public street. 


Section 520 -Off-Street Loading and Unloading Snace 
On every lot on which a business, trade, or industry is hereafter established, off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley as follows: 
(a) 	
Size of Off-Street Loading Spaces. Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of fourteen (14) feet in clearance height, 12 (twelve) feet in width, and fifty-five (55) feet in length. However, upon sufficient demonstration that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by shorter trucks, the Building Official may reduce the minimum length accordingly to as little as there-five (35) feet, provided that at no time shall any vehicle protrude into a sidewalk or public thoroughfare. 

(b) 	
Connection to Street of Alley. Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway that offers satisfactory ingress or egress for trucks. 

(c) 	
Floor Area Over 10,000 Square Feet. There shall be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building, or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, and having a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet, at least one off-street loading space for every 10,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. Such space shall be so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, or alley. 


APPROVED
.Rec. by: ,62-Date: /-12-oy
ARTICLE V - PAGE 11 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(d) 	
Floor Area Less Than 10,000 Square Feet. For each commercial or industrial building requiring the receipt or distribution of materials of merchandise and having a floor area of less than 10,000 square feet, there shall be provide sufficient off-street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by an adjacent establishment). Such loading space shall be located in a manner that will not hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, or alley. 

(e) 	
Location of Off-Street Loading Spaces. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building that they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot where the use is shared with the occupying said adjacent lot. 

Permanent Reservation. Areas reserved for off-street loading in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use that is served is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the Building Official. 

(g) 	
Bus and Trucking Terminals. There shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any one time. 

(h) 	
No Obstiuction of Emergency Vehicles. The arrangement of loading and unloading spaces shall not obstruct Emergency Vehicles from access to the site or its buildings. 


Section 530 -Control of Curb Cuts and Vision Clearance 
530.1 Curb Cuts 
No curb cut shall exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in length, nor shall curb cuts be closer than twenty (20) feet to other curb cuts or closer than thirty feet to an intersection of two 
(2) streets measured along the curb line. 

530.2 Vision Clearance 
In all use districts except C-1, Central Commercial District, no fence, wall shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half (2­1/2) feet and ten (10) feet from the ground level shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or railroad lines, or of a street intersection within a railroad line. 
APPROVED Rec.b1:12zDa, 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 12 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 540 -Storage and Parking of Trailers and Vehicles 
Recreational vehicles (RV), motor homes, commercial vehicles, and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling trailers, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
540.1 Commercial Vehicles 
The storage and parking of commercial vehicles on lots occupied by a dwelling is governed by the following: 
(a).Residential Districts. 
(1) 	
No commercial vehicle as licensed by the State of Georgia with gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 11,000 lbs. shall be parked or stored in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3, or Residential Planned Development Districts. 

(2) 	
One commercial vehicle per dwelling unit is permitted in the above districts where the commercial vehicle does not exceed 11,000 lbs. in gross vehicle weight. 

(3) 	
In no event shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be permitted to be parked or stored. 

(4) 	
No commercial vehicle, licensed by the State shall be allowed to park overnight on the street in a residential district. 

(5) 	
Tractors not attached to a trailer are specifically prohibited. 

(6) 	
Prohibits any commercial vehicles with refrigeration that run continuously. 


. 
(b) 	Non Residential Districts. In non-residential districts, no more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit shall be permitted to be parked or stored; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be permitted to be parked or stored. 

540.2 Recreational Vehicles, Trailers 
(a).Storage and Parking. Recreational vehicles (RV), trailers, and motor homes, are prohibited from parking in the front yard in Residential Districts. In all districts, storage and parking of these vehicles is permitted if parked or stored behind the side yard building line. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE V - PAGE 13 
Rec. by:ZDate: /-/-2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
(b).Occupation of Stored Vehicles. A recreational vehicle or motor home shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a Recreational Vehicle Park authorized under this Ordinance. 




540.3 Inoperative Vehicles; Commercial and Industrial Districts 
No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than fourteen 
(14) days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be in an enclosed garage in residential districts. 
Section 550 -Screening and Lighting 
550.1 Commercial & Industrial Districts 
In any commercial or industrial district, and operation not conducted within a building, such as drive-in businesses, outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance of tight evergreen hedge to less than 6 feet in height to conceal such areas or facilities from a residential district adjoining or facing across a street in the rear or on the side of the principal building or use. Where an evergreen hedge is used for the enclosure, the hedge shall be planted in the setback area and shall consists of evergreen trees and/or shrubs that will normally obtain height of eight (8) feet within five (5) years. 

550.2 Required Screening 
In any district where reference is made requiring adequate screening of a specified operation, such screening shall be a wall or fence of solid appearance of tight evergreen hedge not leis than 6 feet in height. Where an evergreen hedge is used for the enclosure, the hedge shall be planted in the setback area and shall consist of evergreen trees and/or shrubs that will normally obtain a height of eight (8) feet within five (5) years. 

550.3 Required Buffer Strips 
In any district where reference is made requiring a buffer strip, such strip shall consist of a landscaped open space area. The buffer area should be at least ten (10) feet wide and should adequately interrupt vision and impede the transmission of sound. All buffer area requirements are in addition to the area, yard, and height requirements for that District as set forth in Article VII. A landscaping plan identifying all plants to be incorporated into the buffer area must be approved by the Building Official prior to any site construction. 

550.4 Outdoor Lighting 
Outdoor lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all residential dwellings, and shall be so situated as not to reflect directly into any public right-of-way or into oncoming traffic. 
APPROVED 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 14 Rec. by: 02 Date:.-.y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE W - USE PROVISIONS BY DISTRICT 
Section 600 - General 
This article is established to ensure that each district is reserved primarily for its intended use, including public and semi-public uses that are necessary to serve the needs of the district. It is the intent of this article to promote the stability and character of land development, and to promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the Barnesville Comprehensive Plan. 
600.1 Use Prohibited When Not Specified 
If not otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided in this Article shall be prohibited. 
Section 605 - Agricultural (A) 
605.1 Intent and Purpose 
This district is established to provide protection for prime agricultural land; to protect rural areas from the sprawl and inefficient use of land that can result from premature development; to encourage the maintenance of the rural character of the district; to provide rural-oriented, single-family areas with low population densities; and to encourage the development of rural areas in a coordinated and orderly manner. 

605.2 Permitted Uses 
Within the Agricultural District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a) 	
Single-family, detached dwellings. 

(b) 	
General farming, including forestry, commercial horticulture; personal horticulture, home gardening; commercial crop production, but excluding commercial raising of livestock and poultry. 

(c) 	
Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot as the main structure and customarily incidental thereto, including the following: 

(1) 	
Accessory dwelling units consistent with the standards in Article 

(2) 	
One single-family, farm tenant dwelling for farm laborers and their family, when located on the same lot or tract as the principal residence, on the basis of one residence structure per five acres in addition to the minimum lot area required for the principal residence, and subject to all the yard requirements of this district. 


APPROVED ARTICLE VI - PAGE 1.Rec.by: 0 a Dale; 
City.of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(3) 
Home swimming pools, consistent with the standards set forth in Article 

(4) 	
Non-commercial keeping of horses meeting the following standards: One horse shall be allowed per acre of fenced area, said fenced area being located on the same lot as the main dwelling. In no event shall the number of horses allowed per lot exceed four (4). One stable with up to four (4) stalls per lot is permitted provided that each stall shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size. Stables shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 

(5) 	
Non-commercial keeping of cows meeting the following standards: 

-Minimum lot size of five (5) acres 
-cows - one (1) cow per (5) acres 

(d) 	
Churches, and other places of worship. 

(e) 	
Home businesses, consistent with standards in Article VIII, Section 840. 

(f) 	
Day Care Home. 

(g) 	
Signs, as permitted in Article X. 

(h) 	
Unmanned public utility structures and substations, excluding towers, provided that such structures are properly screened in accordance with Section 550 of this Ordinance. 

(i) 	
Produce stands, selling only products grown or produced on site. 



605.3 Conditional Uses 
The following uses are Conditional Uses that require approval from City Council pursuant to Article XE, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Bed and Breakfasts. 

(b) 	
Golf courses and driving ranges, swim, tennis, or Country Clubs. 

(c) 	
Pet Cemeteries. 

(d) 	
Public, private, or parochial schools. 

(e) 	
Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, landfills, 


APPROVED
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 2 	--c)y
Rec.by:_agDate: /-12 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards. 
(f).Cemeteries, meeting the standards in Article 'VIII. 
605.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the Agricultural District: 

(a)  Minimum Lot Area:.  2 acres  
(b)  Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling:.2 acres  
(c)  Minimum Lot Width at Street:. 100 ft  
(d)  Setbacks:  
Front: Highways, Arterials, Collectors.80 ft. Other Streets. 60 ft. Side:. 15 ft.  
Rear:. 30 ft.  
(e)  Minimum square feet per unit:.1200 sq. ft.  
(f)  Maximum height:. 60 ft.  

Section 610— Single-Family Residential, Low Density (R-1A) 
610.1 Intent and Purpose 
This district is intended to accommodate low-density, single-family residential uses and to maintain a large lot's residential character. Additional uses, allowed only as conditional uses include related recreational, religious, and public use facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment. 

610.2 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted within the R-1A district: 
(a) Single-family, detached dwellings. 
(b).Accessory buildings and uses, including: 
.
Home swimming pools, consistent with the standards in Article
(1) 
VIII. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VI -PAGE 3. 
Rec. by: DZ Date: /- /2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(2).Accessory dwelling units consistent with the standards in Article 
(c).Home businesses, consistent with the Standards in Article VIII. 
(d) 	
Unmanned public utility structures and substations, excluding towers, provided that such structures are properly screened in accordance with Section 550.2 of this Ordinance, and further provided that no on-site storage of equipment is permitted. 

(e) 	
Signs, as permitted in Article X. 



610.3 Conditional Uses 
The following uses are Conditional Uses that require approval by the City Council pursuant to Article Xl, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Churches. 

(b) 	
Golf, swimming, tennis, or Country Clubs. 

(c) 	
Public, private, or parochial schools. 

(d) 	
Uses such as house museums, art galleries and historic sites open for tours that are unique to that specific location. 

(e) 	
Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, landfills, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards. 



610.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the R-1A district: 
(a) 	
Minimum Lot Area:. 15,000 sq. ft. 

(b) 	
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling:.15,000 sq. ft. 

(c) 	
Minimum Frontage:. 100 ft. (measured at street) 

(g) 	
Minimum floor area (heated space):.1800 sq. ft. 

(h) 	
Minimum floor area (heated space) for a development .The minimum floor area for any house located in a subdivision is 1800 square feet of heated space. The development plans presented at the time of zoning and at the time of application for the development permit shall show the specific number of houses to be constructed in a development. 

(i) 	
Curb and gutter. Required 


(d)  Minimum Lot Width:. 75 ft. (measured at front building line)  
(e)  Setbacks:  PROVED Rec.by:PLDate:_L-P.- 0 4  
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 4  

City of Barnesville, Georgia.  Zoning Ordinance  
Front:.  Minimum from right of way  
50 ft. Maximum  
Side:.  20 ft.  
Rear:.  30 ft.  
(f)  Maximum height:.  35 ft.  

0).Paved driveway. 	Required 
(k).Sewage system. 	Public sewer 
(1).Water system. 	Public water system required 
(m) 	
Parking garage.Required. A residential parking garage is required for each home in a development and must open from the side or rear. No garage may open to face the street. 

(n) 	
Facades.Within a development developed under these standards, a minimum of 20% of the structures shall be brick on all exterior facades and 20% of the structures shall be stucco, stone, brick, or any combination thereof on all exterior facades. In addition, 30% of the structures shall have a front facade consisting entirely of stucco, stone, brick, or any combination thereof. The remaining 30% of the structures shall consist, in any ratio the Developer chooses, of stone, brick, stucco, hardiplank or other masonry siding, wood, or any other combination thereof. Vinyl or aluminum siding shall not be permitted. 

(o) 	
Sod.Required. Sod must be planted in all areas of the entire front and sides of the home. Also to the rear of the home to a distance of 20 ft. past the rear drip line of the roof of the structure that extends to the farthest part on the lot. 

(p) 	
Sidewalks.Required; on both sides of all streets within any development. Sidewalks must be made of concrete a minimum of four inches (4") in depth and four feet (4') in width and located at a minimum 


ARTICLE VI - PAGE 5. MIDED 
Rek P7 We: (-t2.70-( 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
of at least two feet (2') from the backside of the curb so as to provide a buffer between the street and sidewalk. 
Section 615 - Single-Family Residential, Low Density (R-1B) 
615.1 Intent and Purpose 
The R-1B Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at medium densities as one of a range of residential living styles available in the City. This district is intended to be applied primarily in urban and urbanizing areas. 

615.2 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted within the R-1B district: 
(a).All uses permitted in the R-1A single-family, low density residential district. 

615.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval of the City Council pursuant to Article )CI, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Churches. 

(b) 	
Public, private, or parochial schools. 

(c) 	
Uses such as house museums, art galleries and historic sites open for tours that are unique to that specific location. 

(d) 	
Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, landfills, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards. 



615.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the R-1B district: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area:.  15,000 sq. ft.  
(b)  Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling:.15,000 sq. ft.  
(c)  Minimum Frontage:.  100 ft. (measured at street)  
(d)  Minimum Lot Width at Front of.75 ft.  
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 6.  1PPROB  
RKtef.  

City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Building Line: 
(e).Setbacks: 
Front: Highways, Arterials,.50 ft. 
Collectors and Other Streets 
Side:. 20 ft. 
Rear:. 30 ft. 

(t).Maximum height:. 35 ft. 
(g) 	Minimum floor area (heated space):.1,500 sq. ft. 
(h)  Curb and gutter.  Required  
(i)  Paved driveway.  Required  
(j)  Sewage system.  Public sewer  
(k)  Water system.  Public water system required  

(1).Parking garage.Required. A residential parking garage is required for each home in a development and must open from the side or rear. No garage may open to face the street. 
(m) 	
Facades.At least 65% of any facade facing a public street shall be comprised of brick, stone, or stucco. 

(n) 	
Sod.Required. Sod must be planted in all areas of the entire front and sides of the home. Also to the rear of the home to a distance of 20 ft. past the rear drip line of the roof of the structure that extends to the farthest part on the lot. 


(q).Sidewalks.Required; on both sides of all streets within any development. Sidewalks must be made of concrete a minimum of four inches (4") in depth and four feet (4') in width and located at a minimum of at least two feet (2') from the backside of the curb so as to provide a buffer between the street and sidewalk. 
APPROVED
.
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 7 Rec. by: ©Z.Date: /—/-1 —0 ti 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 617 - Single-Family Residential, High Density (R-10 
617.1 Intent and Purpose 
The R-1C Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at high densities as one of a range of residential living styles available in the City. This district is intended to be applied primarily in urban and urbanizing areas. 
617.2 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted within the R-1C district: 

(a) 	
All uses permitted in the R-1A single-family, low density residential 
district. 


(b) 	
All uses permitted in the R-1B single-family, low density residential 
district 




617.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval of the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Churches. 

(b) 	
Public, private, or parochial schools. 

(c) 	
Uses such as house museums, art galleries and historic sites open for tours that are unique to that specific location. 

(d) 	
Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, landfills, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards. 


617.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the R-1C district: 

(a) 	
Minimum Lot Area:. 7500 sq. ft. 

(b) 	
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling:.7500 sq. ft. 

(c) 	
Minimum Frontage:. 50 ft. (measured at street) 

(d) 	
Minimum Lot Width at Front of.50 ft. 
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 8 



AWED Rec Of 1)-z. Date: /-a-cx.{ 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Building Line: 
(e).Setbacks: 
Front: Highways, Arterials,.35 ft. 
Collectors and Other Streets 
Side:. 10 ft. 

Rear:. 	15 ft. 
(g).Minimum floor area (heated space):.1,200 sq. ft. 
(f).Maximum height:.  35 ft.  
(h)  Curb and gutter.  Required  
(i)  Paved driveway.  Required  
(j)  Sewage system.  Public sewer  
(k).Water system.  Public water system required  

Parking garage.Required. A residential parking garage is required for each home in a development and must open from the side or rear. No garage may open to face the street. 
(m) 	
Facades.At least 65% of any facade facing a public street shall be comprised of brick, stone, or stucco. 

(n) 	
Sod.Required. Sod must be planted in all areas of the entire front and sides of the home. Also to the rear of the home to a distance of 20 ft. past the rear drip line of the roof of the structure that extends to the farthest part on the lot. 

(o) 	
Sidewalks.Required; on both sides of all streets within any development. Sidewalks must be made of concrete a minimum of four inches (4") in depth and four feet (4') in width and located at a minimum of at least two feet (2') from the backside of the curb so as to provide a buffer between the street and sidewalk. 


Section 620 -Multi-Family Residential (R-2) 
620.1 Intent and Purpose 
The intent of the Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for the development, protection, and conservation of multi-family residential dwellings constructed for rental 
ARTICLE W - PAGE 9 
,APPROVED Rec. by: VO Date: /-/2 
City.of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
occupancy or ownership of individual units within a multi-family building; Property zoned and developed as R-2, Multi-Family District, shall provide quality multi-family development with emphasis on open space and access to light and air. The intent of multi-family development is to provide residents the convenience of apartment living and the amenities generally available to low-density residential development. All multi­family developments will be low-rise with open space as required herein. 

620.2 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district: 
(a)  Uses permitted in the R-1A District (Single-Family, Low Density Residential).  
(b)  Two-family units (duplexes).  
(c)  Multi-family residential dwellings.  
(d)  Townhouses.  
(e)  Public, private, or parochial schools.  
(f)  Churches.  
(g)  Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, landfills, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards.  
(h)  Uses such as house museums, art galleries and historic sites open for tours that are unique to a specific location.  
(i)  Day care centers.  
(j)  Unmanned public utility structures and substations, excluding towers, provided that such structure are properly screened in accordance with Section 550.2 of this Ordinance, and further provided that no on-site storage of equipment is permitted.  
(k)  Signs, as permitted in Article X.  

(1).Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 10 
APPROVE Rec. by: 02 Date: k- /2 -oy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
620.3 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the R-2 District: 

(a)  Minimum Lot Area:.  15,000 sq. ft.  
(b)  Minimum Frontage:.  50 ft. measured at street per dwelling unit  
(c)  Minimum Lot Width:.  50 ft. measured at front building line  
(d)  Setbacks:  
Front: Highways, Arterials,.Collectors and other Streets. 40 ft. 30 ft.  
Side:.  10 ft. for duplexes 15 ft. for 3 units or more  
Rear:.  25 ft.  
(e)  Maximum height:.  35 ft.  


620.4 Performance Standards for Multi-Family Development 
The following standards apply to multi-family development within the R-2 District: 
(a) 	
All multi-family development in the R-2 Multi-Family Residential District shall require site plan approval of the Zoning Department, which shall include building placement on the lot and the number of proposed units. The site plan shall include a landscape plan. 

(b) 	
No more than 40 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. 

(c) 	
All parking shall be off-street. Insofar as possible, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interiors of blocks, and no off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet, by the most direct pedestrian route, from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. Parking areas in multi-family developments must be curbed and guttered. 

(d) 	
All multi-family units shall be required to tie into the public water and sanitary sewer system. 


APPROVED ARTICLE VI - PAGE 11. Re by: De Date: /-/..2_-Cy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(e).There shall be no more than 8 dwelling units in any one (1) multi-family 
building. Multi-family buildings must be separated by a minimum of 20 
feet of landscaped open space. 

(f).In the R-2 district each dwelling shall provide at least the following livable 
space per unit: 

(1) 	
1 bedroom unit - 800 square feet 

(2) 	
2 bedroom unit - 1000 square feet 

(3) 	
3 bedroom unit - 1200 square feet 


(g).All streets which serve more than one multi-family complex or other 
principal use shall: 

(1) 	
have a minimum right-of-way of 50 ft.; 

(2) 	
be constructed to comply with city street paving specifications; and 

(3) 	
be dedicated to public uses. 


. 
(h) 	The development shall contain a storm drainage system of sufficient size 
and design as will adequately collect, detain, carry oft and dispose of all 
projected surface water run-off within the development area. 

A minimum of 20 percent of the total acreage of any development of more than 10 dwelling units shall be reserved for open-air recreational uses and other usable open spaces. 
Usable open space is defined as an open area designed and developed for use by the occupants of the development or their guests for recreation (commercial, public or private), courts, gardens, or household service activities such as clothes drying. The space shall be effectively separated from automobile traffic and parking and shall be readily accessible to the occupants of the dwelling units. Open space does not include space devoted to streets or parking, rights-of-way, or utility easements. 
(j).If conveyance of land within the development is intended: 
(1) 	
The developer shall comply with all procedures and requirements of the City subdivision regulations. 

(2) 	
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a condominium project until proof of compliance with the Georgia Condominium Act has been presented in writing. 


ARTICLE W - PAGE 12.,APPROVED 
Rec. by: veDate: 7-.y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 625 - Manufactured Housing Residential District (R-3) 
625.1 Intent and Purpose 
The intent of this district shall be to provide adequate locations and densities for manufactured home parks, individual manufactured homes, and other uses permitted by these regulations within this district. 

625.2 Permitted Uses 
(a).Any use permitted in the R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C district. 
(b).Single-family manufactured homes consistent with the standards in Article 
VIII. 
(c).Manufactured home parks, with site plan review by the Zoning Department and consistent with the standards in Article VIII. 
(d).Public, private, or parochial schools. 
(e).Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, dumps, garages, machine or equipment shops, equipment and material storage yards. 
. 
(f) 	
Service and auxiliary buildings located and specifically designed to serve only the residents of one manufactured home park, not to include automobile or manufactured home repair facilities or repair facilities of any type. Permitted buildings shall be limited to the following uses: 

(1) 	
Manufactured home park management office. 

(2) 	
Storage for maintenance tools, equipment, and supplies. 

(3) 	
Residence for the exclusive use of a watchman, caretaker, owner or manager of a manufactured home park. 

(4) 	
Recreation, assembly, and laundry facilities for the exclusive use of the manufactured home residents and their guests. 


(g).Signs, as permitted in Article X. 
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 13 

City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 

625.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval of the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) 
Churches. 

(b) 
Family personal care homes. 



625.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the R-3 District. Area regulations for manufactured home parks and for manufactured home stands or spaces within manufactured home parks are set forth in Article VIII, Section 860. 
(a) 
Minimum Lot Area:. 5,000 sq. ft. 

(b) 
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling:.5,000 sq. ft. 


(c)  Minimum Frontage:.  50 ft. (measured at street)  
(d)  Minimum Lot Width:.  50 ft. (measured at front building line)  
(e)  Setbacks:  
Front: Highways, Arterials, Collector Other Streets.  .40 ft. 30 ft.  
Side:. 10 ft.  
Rear:.  25 ft.  
(f)  Minimum square feet per unit:. 840 sq. ft.  
(g)  Maximum height:.  35 ft.  
Section 630 -Professional District (P) 


630.1 Intent and Purpose 
The purpose of this district is to provide areas where office, institutional, and residential uses can coexist without the threat of encroachment of more intense commercial or retail uses. Only very specialized sale, wholesale storage, or processing of merchandise are permitted in this district as secondary uses. This district is primarily intended to be located along arterials and collectors where existing structures can accommodate residential, office, and institutional uses and in areas dominated by institutional uses. Its 
ARTICLE VI -PAGE 14 
,APPROVED Rec. by:.Z Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
use is also appropriate when an office development is situated adjacent to an existing residential area and where careful, special site planning and design provisions create a compatible relationship with adjacent residential land uses. No multi-family buildings or apartment complexes are to be permitted in the Professional District. 

630.2 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted in the P-Professional District: 
(a) 	
All uses permitted in the R-1A and R-1B Districts. 

(b) 	
Offices of physicians, lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, dentists, surveyors, and similar professional people who may occupy an entire building or a group of buildings. Veterinarians are specifically excluded for the P-Professional District. 

(c) 	
Businesses which are incidental to the above professional practices, e.g., prescription shops, optical sales, etc. 

(d) 	
Insurance offices, real estate offices, etc., where the nature of the business is primarily one of personal service. 

(e) 	
Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, convalescent homes, excluding sanitariums and mental institutions. 

(f) 	
Day care center and Day care home. 

(g) 	
Residential businesses. 

(h) 	
Public utility structures and buildings, provided that the installation is properly screened and any employment at such a site is intended for maintenance and repairs only. No equipment or materials shall be stored and no office permitted on the site. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area. 

(i) 	
Public, private, and parochial schools. 

(j) 	
Signs, as permitted in Article X. 

(k) 	
Accessory apartments as a mixed use with a professional use and located in the same building as the professional office. 


(1).Banks and financial institutions. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 15 
Rec. by: D? Dale: 7-—0Y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 

630.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval by the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Golf courses, tennis courts and similar recreational uses of a non­commercial nature, excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf courses and similar uses. 

(b) 	
Country Clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations. 

(c) 	
Athletic fields, parks, and recreational areas. 

(d) 	
Ambulance services. 


630.4 Area Regulations 
The following are regulations that apply in the P-Professional District: 

(a) 	
Minimum Lot Area:. 7,000 sq. ft. 

(b) 	
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling:.7.000 sq. ft. 

(c) 	
Minimum Frontage:. 60 ft. (measured at street) 

(d) 	
Minimum Lot Width:. 60 ft. (measured at front building line). 


Y.-
(e) 	Setbacks: 
.

Front: Highway, Arterial, Collector Minimum 30 ft.
.
Other Streets Minimum 30 ft. Side:. 10 ft. Rear:. 20 ft. 
(f) 	
Minimum square feet per unit:.500 sq. ft. 

(g) 	
Maximum height:. 35 ft. 


A APPROVED ARTICLE VI - PAGE 16 Rec. by: V a_ Dale: /-1.2 -oy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 635 -Central Commercial District (C-1) 
635.1 Intent and Purpose 
The Central commercial District is established in order to recognize and protect the present business and commercial uses serving the whole city; to encourage development of this district as the shopping and business center of the City of Barnesville and the surrounding trade area; and to encourage full utilization of existing structures by allowing mixed land uses and shared parking facilities. 

635.2 Permitted Uses 
The following use are permitted in the C-1 Central Commercial District: 
(a) 	
Appliance stores including radio and television service/electronic sales 
and service. 


(b) 	
Art and antique stores. 

(c) 	
Banks/financial institution. 

(d) 	
Barber and beauty shops/tanning/nail shop. 

(e) 	
Bicycles and sporting goods stores. 

(f) 	
Book, stationary stores. 

(g) 	
Bus terminal facilities, taxi stand and dispatchers. 

(h) 	
Cafes, restaurant, grills, and lunch counters. 

(i) 	
Camera or photographic stores. 

(j) 	
Churches and places of worship. 

(k) 	
Commercial parking garages. 
Clothing, shoes, millinery, dry goods and notions. 


(m) 	
Confectionery stores. 

(n) 	
Convenience type grocers, e.g., fruits, vegetables, meat markets, 
delicatessens, catering. 


(o) 	
Drug Stores/medical supplies. 

(p) 	
Dress-making, tailoring shops. 

(q) 	
Electrical supplies. 

(r) 	
Florists/nursery shops/plant and garden center. 

(s) 	
Furniture, including office furniture and home furnishings. 

(t) 	
Hardware and paint stores. 

(u) 	
Heating and plumbing supplies. 

(v) 	
Gift shops. 

(w) 	
Ice cream shops. 

(x) 	
Indoor theaters. 

(y) 	
Jewelry Stores. 

(z) 	
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 


(aa) Libraries, museums and similar government and public uses. 
(bb) Hotels. 

(cc) Newspapers, printing, blueprinting, bookbinding, quick copying, 
lithography and publishing establishments. 

(dd) Loft Apartments. 
(ee) Offices: medical, dental, optical, law, accounting, insurance, and real 

ARTICLE VI - PAGE 17. 
APPROVED 
Re by:./--/2-cy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
estate. 
(ff).Post offices. 
(gg) Private clubs, fraternal lodges. 
(hh) Public utility structures and buildings, including electric and natural gas 
substations, telephone exchanges and excluding towers. 
(ii).Publicly or privately owned utility offices. 
(jj).Radio and television stations, excluding towers. 
(kk) Signs, as permitted in Article X. 

(11).Shoe repair shops. 
(mm) Accessory apartments as a mixed use with a business use and located in 

the same building as the business use and not on the ground floor. (nn) Bakery. (oo) Stone monument company. (pp) Health foods/vitamins. (qq) Building supply. 

635.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval of the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) 
Hospital, clinics, sanitariums, convalescent/nursing homes. 

(b) 
Ambulance services. 



635.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply within the C-1 Central Commercial District: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area:.  none  
(b)  Minimum Frontage:.  30 ft. (measured at street)  
(c)  Minimum Lot Width:.  30 ft. (measured at front building line)  
(d)  Setbacks:  

Front: Highways, Arterials, Collectors.0 local streets Side:. 0 Rear:. 0 
(e) 
Minimum square feet per unit:.None 

(f) 
Maximum height:. 60 ft. 


ARTICLE VI - PAGE 18 APPROVED Rec. by: D.?Date: 112 -0V 
CITY OF BARNESVILLE 
ORDINANCE NO. 469 
APARTMENTS ABOVE COMMERCIAL STOREFRONTS 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF BARNESVII.LE ZONING ORDINANCE BY ADDING SECTION 635.5 TO SECTION 635 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-1) REGARDING APARTMENTS ABOVE COMMERCIAL STORE FRONTS. ALL OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE RESPECTIVE CODE SECTION NOT IN CONFLICT WITH THIS ACT REMAIN IN EFFECT AS ADOPTED. 
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by the authority of same, as follows: 
Section 635.5 Purpose The purpose of allowing residential apartments above commercial storefronts on a limited basis in certain zoning districts is to encourage residential uses within these districts, to create an alternative housing option, to facilitate a housing option that is compatible with street level commercial uses with a minimum of disruption to those uses, and to provide an added security measure by creating a district that is active twenty-four (24) hours a day. 











District Permitted 
Residential apartments above commercial storefronts are permitted by right in the C-1 district only. 

Building Codes 
All such residential units shall comply with all existing building codes and fire codes, NFPA Life Safety Code, and 1991 Edition Southern Building Code Standard Fire Prevention Code with fire walls. 
Restrictions 
A) 	A minimum of 50% of the ground floor must be reserved for commercial use. 
B) 	All window treatments shall be off-white colors with no signs, drawings, or photographs incorporated therein. Nothing shall hang from the outside of windows. 
C) 	No outside mailboxes shall be permitted. Inside mailboxes or mail slots shall be used. 
D) 	No outside radio or television antennas are permitted. Satellite dishes, if used, must not be visible from any public street. 
E) 	No weekly or daily boarding rooms shall be permitted. Only complete dwelling units as defined herein may be established. 
Each dwelling unit shall be furnished with connections for a washer and dryer or be located no more than one hundred (100) feet from a common area accessible to residents.  
G)  Outside building identification numbers shall be provided and not exceed six (6) inches in height.  
H)  No drying of clothes shall be permitted on the outside of any building.  
I)  No A/C units shall be visible from any public street.  
J)  No outdoor cooking shall be permitted.  
K)  No maintenance, washing, or detailing of vehicles is permitted.  
L)  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering, or placement of furniture shall be allowed on the sidewalks adjacent to the building containing the units.  
M)  No garbage, yard, estate, rummage or other similar sales shall be permitted.  
N)  Entry to the unit or to a hallway serving one or more units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside at street level.  

0).Minimum floor area per dwelling units: Efficiency.450 sq. 1 bedroom.600 sq. ft. 2 bedroom.750 sq. ft. 3 bedroom.900 sq. ft. 

Parking 
A).Each resident of such units shall apply for and purchase a permit and numbered decal from the City Clerk providing for the parking of vehicles. The maximum number of permits allowed shall be one (1) for a studio or efficiency and two (2) for all other units. Permits shall be issued upon presentation to the City Clerk of a signed lease agreement. Permits and decals must be displayed on vehicles at all times on the rear window of the vehicle lower left. The permits shall allow the resident to park the registered vehicle(s) on public streets during the hours of 
6:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and Saturday of each week from 
3:00 p.m. Saturday through Sunday until 8:30 a.m. on Monday, except in those areas specifically designated in the Code of Ordinances as "no parking areas". The cost of each permit shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. 
No resident of such unit shall park a privately owned or company vehicle on a 
public right-of-way whether it be an alley or street, for the purpose of using such 
parking space incidental to the residents occupancy of the unit between the hours of 
8:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and from 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
Violations of this requirement shall be prosecuted the same as violations of the two-hour parking restriction set forth in the Code of Ordinances and three (3) such violations may result in the forfeiture of the parking permit for a minimum of six (6) months. 
Residents are allowed to park registered vehicles in designated offstreet public parking lots during all hours as available. 
Storage of vehicles is not permitted. Storage is defined as a registered vehicle remaining parked for more than twenty (24) hours without vacating the parking lot. 
This ordinance shall be effective September 12, 2005. 
rti 
ewaine T. Bell, Mayor 
Wilson, Mayor Pro Tem 
Anne H. Claxton, Councilmember 
A/1e. 110-,/ , Councilmember 
*e D. Shropshire, Jr., Councilmember 
Cecil D. McDaniel, Sr., Councilmember 
ATTEST: 
Carolyn S. P er, City Clerk 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 640 - General Commercial (C-2) 
640.1 Intent and Purpose 
The intent of this district is to provide a commercial district designed to serve the community at-large consisting of a wide variety of sales and service facilities and locations that will be accessible to all shoppers, as well as to motoring public. 
640.2 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted in the C-2 General Business District: 

(a) 	
Any use permitted in the C-1 or P districts, except that no residential uses are permitted in this district. 

(b) 	
Any retail business or service including the incidental manufacturing of products sold at retail establishments on the premises, provided that the manufacturing area does not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the total floor area and does not employ more than five (5) persons. 

(c) 	
Bowling alleys and billiard rooms. 

(d) 	
Milk bottling, distribution centers, ice cream manufacturing. 

(e) 	
Automobile service stations. 

(f) 	
Hospital, clinics, convalescent/nursing homes. 

(g) 	
Automobile accessory stores, including tire, batteries, etc. 

(h) 	
Farm and garden supply stores. 

(i) 	
Bottling works for soft drinks. 

(j) 	
Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot and consistent with standards in Article VII. 

(k) 	
Automobile, travel trailer, farm equipment and implements, and manufactured housing sales which need to be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within a structure that shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet facing a residential district, and provided further that all vehicles on a car sales lot must be in operating condition at all times. 

Trade shops, including sheet metal, roofing, upholstery, electrical,

(1) 


plumbing, Venetian blind, cabinet making, and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning, and sign painting, provided that all operations are conducted 
.
ARTICLE VI — PAGE 19 APPROVED Rec. by: DZ Dale:` 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than 
stationary windows, within 100 feet of any residential district. Outside 
storage is not permitted. 
(m) 	
Undertaking, mortuary establishments. 

(n) 	
Wholesale and storage business, excluding building material yards. 

(o) 	
Ambulance services. 

(p) 	
Radio and television stations. 

(q) 	
Groceries, fruit, vegetable, and meat markets, delicatessen, catering , and supermarkets, but not including produce stands or the selling of produce from vehicles. 

(r) 	
Hotels. 

(s) 	
Commercial parking lots and garages. 

(t) 	
Churches. 

(u) 	
Veterinary clinics provided all kennels and/or pens are enclosed within a building. 

(v) 	
Accessory apartments as mixed use with a business use and located in the same building as the business or professional office. 

Automobile repair garages, mechanical and body, provided all operations

(w) 
are conducted in a building which shall not have any openings, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet facing a residential district and which 

shall not store otherwise maintain any parts or waste materials outside such buildings. 

640.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval of the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) Cemeteries. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 20 
by:LZ_ 	Date: /--/-2 -0 y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
640.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply in the C-2 General Commercial District: 

(a)  Minimum Lot Area:  01••••••¦••••¦  
(b)  Minimum Frontage:  60 ft. (measured at street)  
(c)  Minimum Lot Width:  60 ft. (measured at front  
building line)  
(d) Setbacks:  
Front: (from road right-of-way line,  30 ft.  
front property line)  Off-street parking is  
permitted in the side and rear  
yard only  
Side:  15 feet, and where a C-3  
district, a 10-foot landscaped  
and fenced opaque buffer  
shall be provided  
Rear:.  20 feet, and where a C-3  
district abuts a residential  
district, a 10-foot landscaped  
and fenced opaque buffer  

shall be provided 
(e) 
Minimum square feet per unit:.500 sq. ft. 

(f) 
- Maximum height:. 60 ft. 


Section 645 -Neighborhood Commercial District (C-3) 
645.1 Intent and Purpose 
All businesses, servicing, storage, or processing shall be those whose operations or processes are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, vibration or congestion. Uses are limited to those which will serve as convenience centers to serve the needs of their immediate neighborhoods and maintain economic compatibility. All businesses, servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, e.g., off-street loading..All uses permitted shall be architecturally harmonious with the surrounding area. No multi-family buildings or apartment complexes are to be permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial District. 
APPROVED 
Rec. by: D2Date:.y
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 21 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
645.2 Permitted Uses 
Within the C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District, the following uses are permitted: 

(a) 	
All uses as permitted in the Professional District (P) and General Commercial District (C-2). 

(b) 	
Book, stationary, camera, or photographic stores. 

(c) 	
Confectionery stores. 

(d) 	
Drug stores. 

(e) 	
Ice cream parlors. 

(f) 	
Florist, nursery, and gift shops. 

(g) 	
Convenience type grocers, fruits, vegetable, or meat markets, delicatessens, and catering, but not including produce stands. 

(h) 	
Banks, including drive-through banks. 

(i) 	
Any of the following service businesses: 

(1) 	
Barber and beauty shops. 

(2) 	
Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants. 

(3) 	
Dress-making, drapery, tailoring, and upholstering shops employing six (6) people or fewer. 

(4) 	
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations, and self-service laundries. 

(5) 	
Shoe repair shops. 


Signs as permitted in Article X. 
Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of 
and as the main structure and customarily incidental thereto, provided the 
requirements or Article VII are met. 
Churches and other places of worship. 
Public uses, such as local, state, or federal buildings necessary for the general public welfare, such as community buildings, parks, recreation centers, athletic fields, but excluding such uses as incinerators, dumps, 
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 22 
APPROVED Rec. by: U Z Date:-0Y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
garages, machine or equipment ships, equipment ships, equipment and material storage yards. . 
(n) 	
Unmanned utility substations and other above-ground fixed equipment. . 

(0) 
Accessory apartments as a mixed use with a business use and located in the same building as the business or professional office. 



645.3 Conditional Uses 
The following are Conditional Uses that require approval by the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Veterinarian clinic, provided that all kennels and/or pens are located within an enclosed building. 

(b) 	
Automobile service stations and convenience stores consistent with standards in Article VII. 



645.4 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply in the C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area:  7,000 sq. ft.  
(b)  Minimum Lot Size Per Dwelling:  7,000 sq. ft.  
(c)  Minimum Frontage:  60 ft. (measured at the front  
property line).  
(d)  Minimum Lot Width:  60 feet (measured at the front  
building line)  
(e)  Setbacks:  
Front: (from road right-of-way line,  Minimum 30 ft.  
front property line)  Off-street parking is permitted in the side and rear  
yard only.  
Side:  15 ft.  
Rear:  20 ft.  
(f)  Minimum Floor Area:  1,000 sq. ft.  
(g)  Maximum Height:  35 ft.  

ARFarn 
-0(/
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 23 RedY: .
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 650 - Highway Commercial (C-4) 
650.1 Intent and Purpose 
The district is intended for the development of retail service establishments which are oriented toward highway and highway uses. The district is intended only for arterials and freeway locations and shall be limited to locations with existing highway oriented businesses or future locations which are compatible with the City of Barnesville Comprehensive Plan and which afford the space for adjacent expansion of similar uses. 
650.1 Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted in the C-4 Highway Commercial: 

(a) 	
Uses permitted in the P, C-1, C-2, and C-3 districts, except no residential uses are permitted in this district. 

(b) 	
Any retail business or commercial use in which there is not processing or treatment of materials, goods or products except as provided for, including: 

(1) 	
Automobile service stations and convenience stores consistent with the provisions in Article VIII are met. 

(2) 	
Appliance stores. 


Antique shops. 
Automobile repair garages, mechanical and body, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any openings, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet facing a residential district and which shall not store otherwise maintain any parts or waste materials outside such buildings. 
(5) 	
Bottling works for soft drinks. 

(6) 	
Clothing, shoe, millinery, dry goods, or notion stores. 

(7) 	
Drug stores. 

(8) 	
Hardware and paint stores. 

(9) 	
Furniture and home furnishings, stores including office furniture and equipment stores. 

(10) 	
Florists. 

(11) 	
Grocery stores and supermarkets. 


APPROVED
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 24. 
Rec. by:02 Dale: I - I I --(>1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(12) 	
Jewelry stores. 

(13) 	
Variety or Five and Dime stores. 

(14) 	
Bakeries. 

(15) 	
Building supply stores. 


(c).Any service businesses, including: 
(1) 	
Restaurant, grills, or cafes. 

(2) 	
Motels. 

(3) 	
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 

(4) 	
Self-service laundries and dry cleaning. 

(5) 	
Appliance repairs. 

(6) 	
Shoe repairs. 

(7) 	
Dressmaking, tailoring, drapery, and upholstering shops. 

(8) 	
Barber and beauty salons. 

(9) 	
Automobile car washes, provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third (1/3) of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines. 

(10) 	
Taxi stands and dispatches. 


(d).Uses of a predominately retail nature, including: 
(1) 	
Electrical, heating and plumbing services. 

(2) 	
Dairy products. 

(3) 	
Bakeries. 

(4) 	
Banks and finance companies. 

(5) 	
Farm and garden supplies and equipment. 


ARTICLE VI - PAGE 25. APPROVED Rec. by: bZ 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(6).Insurance and real estate offices. 
(e) 	
Funeral parlors and mortuaries. Commercial recreational activities such as bowling and miniature golf. 

(g) 	
Signs, as permitted in Article X. 

(h) 	
Theaters. Professional offices. 

(j) 	
Accessory uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structures and provided the requirements of Article VIII are met. 

(k) 	
Veterinarian hospitals and kennels provided that open areas in which animals are kept must be enclosed by a fence not less than 7 feet high. 


(I).Mini-warehouse storage facility. 
(m) 	
Recreational vehicle parks - campgrounds consistent with the standards in Article VIII. 

(n) 	
Wrecker/towing services. Any storage of automobiles is clearly incidental to the towing service and the storage area shall be screened from view and behind the primary business structure. Vehicles shall not be stored for more than 30 days. 


650.3 Area 'Regulations 
The following are regulations that apply in the C-4 Highway Commercial District: 

(a)  Minimum Lot Area:.  7,000 sq. ft.  
(b)  Minimum Frontage:.  60 ft. (measured at street)  
(c)  Minimum Lot Width:.  60 ft. (measured at front building line)  
(d)  Setbacks:  
Front: (from road right-of-way line,  60 ft. (arterial or collector  
front property line)  streets) 35 ft. (all other streets)  
Side:.  15 feet and where a C-4  
district abuts a residential  

ARTICLE VI - PAGE 26 
APPROVED Rec. by: Liz Date: (-/ 2-v y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia 	Zoning Ordinance 
zoning district , a 30 ft.  
landscaped and fenced  
(opaque) buffer shall be  
provided.  
Rear:  20 feet and where a C-4  
district abuts a residential  
district which is developed, a  
30 foot landscaped and  
fenced (opaque) buffer/screen  
shall be provided as defined  
in  Section 550.  
(e).Minimum square feet per unit:  500 sq. ft.  
(f).Maximum height:.  35 ft.  
Section 655 -Industrial and Manufacturing District (I) 





655.1 Intent and Purpose 
The Industrial and Manufacturing District is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for industrial uses, including manufacturing, assembling, research and development, processing, wholesaling, and storage, by providing access to major streets and adequate public utilities, by discouraging uses that are incompatible with manufacturing, and by minimizing the negative impacts often associated with industrial uses on business and residential districts. It is further intended that no new residential uses shall be permitted in this district. 

655.2 Permitted Uses 
Uses in this district that are not conducted within a building must be screened pursuant to Section 550. All uses must comply with the standards in Section 655.4 below. The following uses are permitted in the I Industrial and Manufacturing District: 
(a) 	
Printing, publishing, and reproducing establishments. 

(b) 	
Radio and television transmission towers. 

(c) 	
Truck terminals, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 


ARTICLE VI -PAGE 27. APPROVED 
Rec.byl_OZDate: / 2CY 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(d).Wholesale warehouses and mini-warehouses. 
(e).Public works and public utility facilities such as distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission lines and towers, water tanks and towers, pumping stations, telephone exchanges and service or storage yards. 
(f).Establishments for manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing, including: 
(1)  Confectionery manufacturing.  
(2)  Clothing and garment manufacturing.  
(3)  Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis, photographic  
processing.  
(4)  Manufacturing, assembly of scientific, optical and electronic  
equipment.  
(5)  Manufacturing of musical instruments and parts.  
(6)  Manufacturing of toys, or sporting and athletic goods.  
(7)  Manufacture of souvenirs and novelties.  

.
(g) 	Food processing plants, such as bakeries, meat packers, fish and poultry houses that do not involve the slaughtering or cleaning of animal carcasses on the premises. 
(h).Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
(i).Manufacturing activity which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions. 
(j).Wholesale and warehousing operation. 
(k).Building material yard. 
(1).Newspaper or printing plant. 
(m) Cabinet shop. 
tem , ARTICLE VI - PAGE 28 bdiKtete.
Rec 
City of Barnesville, Georgia 	Zoning Ordinance 
(n) 	
Cold storage, ice plant, or freezer locker. 

(o) 	
Cosmetic and pharmaceuticals manufacturing. 

(p) 	
Dairy plant, ice cream manufacturing. 

(q) 	
Distribution of products or merchandise. 

(r) 	
Education or training facility. 

(s) 	
Electrical appliance and equipment sales and repair. 

(t) 	
Electronic manufacturing and assembly. 

(u) 	
Fabricating shop such as woodworking, upholstery, or sheet metal shop. 

(v) 	
Machine shop. 

(w) 	
Plumbing shop, other contractor-including open storage of materials when located in rear yard. 

(x) 	
Printing, publishing, reproducing establishment. 

(y) 	
Sign painting and fabricating shop. 

(z) 
Textile manufacturing plant. 
(aa) - Baking establishment. 
(bb) Heavy agricultural equipment sales and repair and manufacturing. 


(cc)
 Truck terminal. 
(dd) Food processing plant. 
(ee) Ice manufacture, including dry ice plant. 
(ff) Planning or sawmill. 
(gg) Railroad yard. 
(hh) Local, State, or Federal government building. 


(ii)
 Agriculture. 



OPROM
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 29 	/-12-c.>1
Rec-bYl..US—Da 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(jj).Utility substation meeting the following development standards: 
a..Structures must be enclosed by a woven-wire fence at least eight 
(8) feet high with bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
(kk) Wood product manufacturing. 
(11).Automobile manufacturing. 
(mm) Auto equipment manufacturing. 

655.4 Performance Standards 
Every use, activity, process or operation in the Industrial District shall comply with the standards in this Section, and no existing use, activity, process or operation shall be hereafter altered or modified so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, such performance standards. If, as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, the operation of any existing use violates these performance standards, such operations shall not be varied or changed in any way as to increase the degree of such violation. 
(a).Administration and Enforcement 
(1) 	
Investigation of Violations- Whenever, in the opinion of the Zoning Department, there is a reasonable probability that any use or occupancy violates these anti-pollution standards, the Zoning Department is hereby authorized to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform whatever investigators and analyses are necessary to determine whether they are in fact being violated. 

(2) 	
Investigation Fees - In the event that a violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fee of the technicians employed to perform such investigations and analyses. Such fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, in addition to, the fines specified in Section 1100.4 


Deposit- If a complaint is received regarding an alleged violation
(3) of any of the provisions contained herein and the Zoning Department does not believe that there is a reasonable probability that such a violation actually exists, the Zoning Department may require that the complainant post an escrow deposit in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500) to defray the cost of employing a qualified technician or technicians to perform such investigations 
and analyses as may be necessary to determine whether such violations exist. 
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 30. APPROVED 4 Rec.by: DZ Date: / -/-2 -Oy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(A) 	
In the event that the complaint is sustained, the escrow deposit shall be refunded to the depositor, and the reasonable fees associated with the investigation and analyses shall be recovered in the manner provided in the paragraph 655.4 (a)(2) above. 

(B) 	
If the complaint proves unfounded, the investigation fee shall be paid from the he complainant's escrow deposit. Any remainder of such deposit shall be refunded to the complainant upon completion of the investigation. 

(C) 	
Any violations of these performance shall hereby be considered a public nuisance. Therefore, in addition to the enforcement procedures specified herein, the Zoning Department is authorized to pursue other appropriate legal remedies. 


(b) 	Noise - Sound levels shall be measured with the sound level meter and associated band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association, or its successors. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards prescribed herein, provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured, and shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of not more than plus or minus two decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
The sound pressure level of any use, activity, process, or operation, other than background noises, such as the operations of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities, shall not exceed the decibel limits set forth below when measured at the property line of the lot on which it is located: 
Octave Band. 	Maximum 
Frequency in. 	Permitted Sound 
Cycles Per Second. Level in Decibels 
20 to 75 . 72 
75 to 150 . 67 
150 to 300 . 59 
300 to 600 . 52 
600 to 1,200 . 46 
1,200 to 2,400 . 40 
2,400 to 4,800 . 34 
Above 4,800 . 32 

ARTICLE VI - PAGE 31. Retty O PROr. 1-1 -say 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c).Vibration - Any use, process, operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point beyond the boundaries of the lot, earth borne vibrations, other than background vibrations such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities, in excess of the limits set forth in the following table, is prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring system approved by the Zoning Department. 
Frequency in  Displacement  
Cycles Per Second  in Inches  
0 to 10 .  0004  
10 to 20.  0002  
20 to 30.  0001  
30 to 40.  0001  
Over 40.  0001  

Impact vibrations which are discrete pulses that do not exceed one hundred (100) impulses per minute shall be permitted twice the displacements shown above. 
(d) 	
Toxic Matter - No use shall discharge or store any toxic matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare to citizens of Barnesville or to cause injury or damage to property or business. 

(e) 	
Glare and Heat - Any operations producing glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the boudoirs of the lot on which such building is located. 

(f) 	
Radiation Hazards 

(1) 	
The release of radioactive gases and particular matter shall not exceed the maximum allowable concentration permitted the general population of applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations when measured at of beyond the lot line at ground level or habitable elevation. 

(2) 	
No activity involving radiation hazards shall be permitted causes exposure to persons at or beyond the lot lines in excess of the maximum allowable permitted the general populations in applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 


ARRNED
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 32 Rec.hf. tde 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(g) 	Smoke and Particulate Matter - The emission of smoke or dusts by manufacturing plants in an amount sufficient to create a general nuisance to adjoining properties shall be prohibited. 
All smoke and the emission of all other particulate matter in quantities 
sufficient to produce an opacity at any point greater than Ringlemann 3 is 
prohibited. The only exception should be a plume consisting entirely of 
condensed steam. A Ringlemann 1 unit is defined as twenty percent 
(20%) density for one (1) minute. No more than fifteen (15) units of 
Ringlemann smoke shall be permitted per hour and no smoke more intense 
than Ringlemann 2, except that during (1) hour of a twenty-four (24) hour 
day, thirty (30) units of smoke may be emitted, but with no smoke more 
intense than Ringlemann 3. The total quantity or emitted solids shall not 
exceed one (1) point per hour, per acre of lot area. 
(h) 	Odors - No odor resulting from manufacturing processes shall be regularly emitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line abutting any zoning district which allows residential land uses in densities of two (2) Residential units per acre or higher. 

655.5 Prohibited Uses 
The following uses are specifically prohibited in the I Industrial and Manufacturing District: 
(a).No residential structure shall hereafter be erected in the I District 
(b) 	Acid manufacture, including the manufacture of hydrochloric, nitric, 
.
picric, or sulfuric acid. 
Cement, lime, clay, gypsum, or plaster manufacture. 
Production of chlorine or similar noxious gases. 
Distillation of bones. 
Drop forge industries using power hammers. 
Explosives: manufacture or storage. 
Fertilizer manufacture. 
Garbage, offal dead animal reduction, or dumping. 
Glue manufacture. 
Hair manufacture of processing. 
ARTICLE VI -PAGE 33 
APPROVED Rec.bylile„__Date:—/ D, -0 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(1).Petroleum refining or above ground storage of petroleum products. 
(m) 
Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar, or yeast. 

(n) 	
Rendering or refining of fats or oils. 
. 


(0) 
Stockyard or animal feeding pens. 
. 


(13) 
Any other use that is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas, noise, vibration, or similar substances or conditions which in the opinion of the City Council would be detrimental to the community interest. 

(q)
 Junkyards. 



655.6 Area Regulations 
The following area regulations apply in the Industrial and Manufacturing District: 
Minimum Lot Area: 	None 
Minimum Frontage: 	60 ft. (measured at street) 
Minimum Lot Width: 60 ft. (measured at front 60 ft. (measured at front bldg. line) building line) 
Setbacks: 
Front: (from road right-of-way line, 35 ft. (arterial or collector front property line) 25 ft. (all other streets 
Side: 	30 feet and where a I district abuts a residential zoning district, a 50-ft landscaped and fenced (opaque buffer shall be provided) 
Rear: 	30 feet, and where a I district abuts a residential district which is developed and actually is used for residential purposes at the time of application for a building permit, a 50-foot landscaped and fenced (opaque) buffer shall be provided within the 20 foot setback. 
(e).Maximum height: 	N/A 
. APPROVED
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 34 
Rec. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 




660 Reserved 

ARTICLE VI - PAGE 35. APPROVED 
Rec. bye. DE Date:1212,_::0 y 
.
City of Barnesville, Georgia Zoning Ordinance 
665 Reserved 

PROIED 
oy
Rec.by...PY_De&I /—.
ARTICLE VI — PAGE 36.
City of Barnesville Ordinance No. 411 
ARCHI.I ECURAL STANDARDS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF BARNESVILLE ZONING ORDINACE BY ADDING SECTION 665 TO ARTICLE VI. ALL OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE RESPECTIVE CODE SECTION NOT IN CONFLICT WITH THIS ACT REMAIN IN EFFECT AS ADOPTED. 
Be it Ordained, by the City Council of the City of Barnesville, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by the authority of the same, the attached Architectural Standards and Design Guidelines: 
This ordinance adopted this the ./c3 AL. day of., 2006 by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Barnesville. 
yor 
Councilmember 
Councilmember 
Councilmember 
ATTEST: 

Table of Contents 
Site Development Guidelines 
Building Orientation Setbacks Access Points Parking Buffers Landscaping Utilities Sidewallcs/Pedestrian Paths Site Lighting 
General Architecture Guidelines 
Building Design Style Height Roof Requirements Massing Windows Rhythm Spacing Scale Transition Materials Mechanical Equipment 
Residential Architecture Guidelines. 
General Residential Guidelines Single Family Residential Multiple Family Residential Planned Development 
(ommercial Architecture 
General 
A.
Building Design 

B. 
Service Area & Dumpster Downtown Retail Districts Auto Dealership Guidelines Fast Food Restaurant Guidelines Auto Service Station Guidelines Shopping Center Guidelines 


Site Development 6uidelines 
Building Orientation 
Buildings and their principal entry points should be oriented to, and visible from the street. 
Loading docks shall be oriented away from the street right-of-way. When this cannot be accomplished, provide proper vegetative screening. 

Setbacks 
Building setbacks should meet the current code requirements of The City of Barnesville. 
When adjacent structures exist, buildings shall be located at comparable or compatible setbacks. 
When no adjacent structures exist, buildings generally shall be located at the minimum setback in order to define the street/building line. 

Parcd Access 
Entrances and exits shall be designed so that they are easily identifiable by motorists. 
One access point is allowed per each parcel. Parcels located at the corner of two public roads shall be allowed one access point along each road frontage if spacing requirements are met. 
Larger sites (e.g. retail centers, industrial parks, residential developments) will be permitted more than one access point with a minimum spacing of 250' from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
Retail out parcels (e.g. fast food restaurants, banks, etc.) shall share common access with larger retail centers for simplified on-site circulation. 
Buildings with drive through service may be permitted to have two access points depending on site layout and if its necessary to minimize back ups on to public roadways. 
Shared access between adjoining properties shall be strongly encouraged, whenever possible, to minimize access points. 
Access points to be spaced at least 125' from any major intersection, edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
Minimum spacing between access points to be 250', edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
Opposing access points to be offset no less that 125' or directly aligned whenever possible and be consistent with prudent traffic engineering principles. 
Right in/right out only access shall be strongly encouraged when secondary access is necessary. Additional full service access will only be permitted when dictated by prudent traffic engineering principles. 
Appropriate stacking distances shall be required for individual sites. 
The driveway entry "throat" of large shopping center parking areas shall provide at least 25' to 40' clear 
before a turning movement occurs. This shall provide sufficient queuing room for entering cars off the 
street. 
2 
Parking Parking lots shall be designed with adequate landscape areas to avoid a "sea of asphalt" A minimum landscape area of 5 feet to the back of the perimeter curb stop shall be required. 
Shade should be provided for parked cars. As a general rule, trees shall be installed so that a minimum ratio of 1 tree per 10 parking stalls is maintained. Trees which are installed in perimeter landscaping may not count toward the 1:10 ratio, and trees throughout the parking lot is always required. In very large parking lots or where a special design objective is desired, a lower ratio of parking stalls may be required. 
Trees installed in parking lots shall be protected from vehicle damage by concrete curbing which surrounds the landscape pocket. 
Vehicle stall striping shall be provided for all parking areas. 
Buffers All fencing should be designed as an integral part of the site, rather than as a separate fence, i.e. planter wall, continuation of architectural wall, etc. 
All new soundwalls, masonry walls or fences 50 feet in length or longer and 4 feet in height or taller shall be designed to minimize visual monotony through changes in plane, height or material texture or significant landscape massing where appropriate. 
Plant materials shall be selected to blend in form, texture and the design scheme proposed for the site. 
Plant materials shall be used as accent elements at entry ways to provide a definite sense of arrival to the 
proposed development. 
In any district where a screened buffer or screening is required, such screening shall include a wall or fence of solid appearance of tight evergreen hedge not less than 6' in height and that will normally obtain a minimum height of 8' in 5 years. 
Landscaping 
See City of Barnesville Landscape Ordinance. 
Utilities All utility lines shall be placed underground with the following exception: Temporary lines, which are intended to provide immediate service to an area for a period not to exceed 180 days, Major transmission lines which do not provide service to adjoining properties, but are intended to distribute service between substations, 
When an electric distribution line already exists overhead on, adjacent to, or across the street from 
a piece of property, that line may be extended overhead to the property provided the overhead line 
extension is placed underground at the closest feasible point to the property line and does not attach directly 
to any structure on the property. 
Sidewalks/Pedestrian Paths 
1.Sidewalks are required along all public and private road frontages (except alleys) and shall meet all 
applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 

2. Sidewalks and other paths (multi-purpose or pedestrian) shall be illustrated on the site plan submitted at 
the time of application for review of construction plans. 

3.Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
4. Pedestrian paths may be constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk 
materials and shall be clearly identified. 

5.Multi-use paths for bicycles and pedestrians may be substituted for the required sidewalks if approved by the Planning and Zoning Department. 
3 
6.Multi-use paths designed for use by bicyclists and pedestrians shall be 12 feet wide. 
7.Multi-use paths designed with separate paths for bicyclists and pedestrians shall be 15 feet wide, ten feet for bicycles and five feet for pedestrians. 
8.Sidewalks and paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks where applicable. 
9.Sidewalks and paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
10.Sidewalks and paths should be direct and convenient routes between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc). 
11.Pedestrian access should be provided to all entrances including access from rear parking areas. 
12.Inter-parcel connectivity shall be required for multiuse, pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
Site Lighting 
Parking areas and building entries must be lit on all new development projects. 

For general area lighting, including parking areas, cut-off down lighting is required to reduce spillage off of 
the building site. 

Uplighting may be used to illuminate a unique architectural feature, a special landscape element or signage. 
All uplights must be screened with landscaping. 

All lighting fixtures, which are being used for the same purpose within a given development, must be from 
the same or similar manufacturer's type to ensure aesthetic compatibility. 

In parking lots, lighting must be placed in a landscaped island or on a 36' high pole base to protect both 
lights and vehicles from possible damage. 

The color of light fixtures shall be coordinated with parcel architecture. 

I. General Architectural Guidelines Building Design Each building unit shall be an integral element of an overall site design and shall reflect and complement the character of the surrounding area or plans prepared therefore. 
Building facades shall be designed to function as an integral part of the streetscape with attention to 
visibility, safety, lighting and incorporation of public amenities. 
Building design shall reflect the overall sensitivity to existing quality of architecture with regard to building materials, fenestration, height, dimension, color, contrasts, roofs and parapets. 
Building design shall address the public right-of-way, and define and complement the streetscape. 
Architectural design shall be compatible with the developing character of the neighboring area. Design 
compatibility includes complementary building style, form, size, color and materials. 
Multiple buildings on the same site shall be designed to create a cohesive visual relationship between the 
buildings. 
Exterior building design and detail on all elevations shall be coordinated with regard to color, types of 
materials, number of materials, architectural form, and detailing to achieve harmony and continuity of 
design. 
Buildings that are stylized in an attempt to use the building itself as advertising shall generally be 
discouraged, particularly where the proposed architecture is the result of a "corporate" or franchise style. 
Code required elements, such as parapet walls and screen walls shall be treated as an integral part of the 
architecture and these elements shall not visually weaken the design_ 
4 

Permissible roofs are gable, hip, or decorative parapets. No parapet shall be required to be greater than four 
feet above the roofline. Shed roofs are permitted over porches and accessory structures. 

Style 
Designs should complement and reflect the architectural heritage of the City of Barnesville and exemplify 
the unique character of the city. Architectural review is not meant to stifle innovative design or diversity, 
but to safeguard property values and long-term economic assets through quality design and development. 
The City shall review elements of design, including form, mass, scale, proportion, height, texture, color, 
architectural style, individual architectural elements and orientation upon the site. Adjustments to the 
design and site location of proposed structures and reasonable conditions may be attached to an approval. 

Height 
New building, residential and commercial, should maintain the height established by adjacent primary 
structures and the surrounding context. If a building is proposed to be more than one story taller than its 
neighbors, the design must incorporate setbacks at the upper levels. 

Roof Requirements 

Pitched roofs. All one-story buildings less than 10,000 gross square feet must have a pitched roof between 

4:12 and 12:12, as much as possible. If a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of a flat roof and pitched roof is required. A pitched roof shall be provided on the front and side of the building to screen the view of any flat roof Arcades, drive-under canopies, porches and other features with a pitched roof shall be created. Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper or factory finished sheet metaL 
Flat roofs. Flat roofs may be of any material that meets local codes. Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal. If factory finished sheet metal flashing is used, such as standing seam, the color must be subdued to blend with other material or of a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze. All buildings with flat roofs should include parapet articulation on the front facade of such building. There shall be roof articulationsioffsets at a minimum of one per each 125 linear feet of length by a change in the top line of parapet. Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front facade is less than 125 linear feet then a minimum of one roof articulation must occur. 
Other. A drive-under canopy for a gasoline pump may have a flat roof with vertical or factory-formed 
facing of finished material. 
Massing 
A building's mass is defined as the enclosed volume that constitutes a building's exterior. Large projects 
should be divided into a series of smaller elements that are compatible with the scale of surrounding 
structures. 
Windows 
Commercial window requirements: 
1st floor - 60% min glazing 
Upper floor - 30% min per floor 
Upper Floor Window proportions: 1:2 to 1:3 
No colored, reflective or mirrored glazing 
Residential 
30% min per floor 
Window Proportions 1:2 to 1:3 
No colored, reflective or mirrored glazing 

5 
Rhythm Rhythm is the patterned repetition or alteration of formal elements or motifs in a similar modified form. Rhythm is created by the siting, spacing and proportions of buildings, the organization of their of their facades and their architectural details. These patterns or rhythms should be incorporated into designs for new construction. 
Spacing The spacing between a new buildings and existing structures should reflect the pattern of spacing between the other buildings along the block. Spatial relationship between existing buildings will suggest an appropriate width and spacing for new construction. The existing building widths will suggest a model for dividing the facade and massing of large new buildings into a series of smaller visual units. 
Scale Scale is defined as a certain proportionate size or degree that is judged in relation to some standard or point of reference. The size and proportions of doors, windows and decorative elements such as cornices and columns are related to each other and to the spaces between them and the observer. 
Transition Whenever an infill building is proposed, the common horizontal alignment/banding (e.g. cornice line and window height) and proportions established by neighboring structures should identified and the infill design should integrate these existing horizontal lines and proportions. 
Materials Buildings facades with many design elements should have a wall texture that is simple. If the design is simple the wall exterior should consist of a fine texture such as patterned masonry. 
Commercial buildings tend to have a masonry exterior with residential building having wood or brick. The exterior should have one dominant veneer on the first level and one or two additional materials as accents. No building shall have more than two veneer materials in addition to glass. 
Highly reflective or metallic wall surfaces are not permitted. 
Exposed concrete block is not allowed, even if it is painted. 
Exterior materials shall be durable and of high quality. Nondurable materials such as thin layer synthetic stucco products shall not be used within 8 feet of ground level unless specially reinforced or located away from pedestrian accessible areas. 
All vents, gutters, downspouts, flashing, electrical conduits, etc., shall be painted to match the color of the 
adjacent surface, unless being used expressly as a trim or accent element. 

Soffits and other architectural elements visible to the public but not detailed on the plans shall be finished 
in a material compatible with other exterior materials. 

The use mill-finish (non-colored) aluminum metal windows or doorframes are prohibited. 
Material or color changes generally should occur at a change of plane. Material or color changes at the 
outside corners of structures which give the impression of "thinness" and artificiality of the material are 
discouraged. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in material should be avoided. 

Mechanical equipment Any external mechanical equipment (including any rooftop equipment, satellite dishes, as well as ground mounted mechanical equipment) shall be totally screened from view with materials that are similar to or the same as those used on the majority of the building. The screening of the mechanical equipment shall be coordinated with the rest of the architecture to avoid being seen as an "add-on". Such equipment may also be screened with landscaping of 100% opacity. 
6 
The visibility of rooftop equipment should be minimized by grouping all plumbing vents, ducts and rooftop mechanical equipment away from the public view. This guideline is primarily focused upon commercial and multiple family residential projects. 
IL Residential Architecture 
A. General Residential Guidelines 
1.In areas where there are changes in land use or residential density, new residential development shall be designed to provide a transition between uses (through the use of setbacks, site plan, building massing, driveways locations, etc.). 
2.infill development within existing neighborhoods shall be sensitively designed to respect existing residential patterns and development, and reinforce the character and functional relationships of existing neighborhoods. 
3.
All mechanical equipment, including gas and electric meters, shall be architecturally screened from view. 

B. 
Single Family Residential 


1.Houses with identical or similar building elevations and/or floor plans shall not be located on adjacent lots or directly across the street from each other. Where a single house design is used repeatedly, materials and detailing of major facade elements shall be varied. 
2.Building facades should be articulated by using color, arrangement, or change in materials to emphasize the facade elements. The planes of the exterior walls may be varied in height, depth or direction. Design elements and detailing shall be continued completely around the structure. Such design elements shall include window treatments, trim detailing, and exterior wall materials. 
3.The location of the house on the lot, windows, orientation, building height, and location of on-site open spaces shall consider preservation of the privacy of adjacent development. 
4.Two-story dwelling units shall include a substantial single story element adjacent to major collector or arterial streets or on corner lots to give a lower, more human scale at the edge of the street and corners. Special design attention shall be directed to two-story facades. 
5.Compatible (not duplicate) color schemes shall be provided for homes on adjacent lots. 
6.Variation shall be provided to avoid visual monotony on long, straight portions of the street through the manipulation of the building elements and massing. 
7.New housing development shall avoid front elevations which mainly consist of rows of garage doors 
("tail pipe architecture") see City of Barnesville Zoning Code. 

8.All doors and windows, etc., shall be detailed to add visual interest to the facade unless such treatment would be incompatible with the architectural style of the building. 
9.All vents, gutters, downspouts, flashings, electrical conduits, etc., shall be painted to match the color of the adjacent surface. Downspouts or rainwater leaders shall be located on the inside corners of the structure. 
10.
Residential air conditioning units should be located to have the minimum visual and noise impacts on adjacent residential neighbors. 

C.
 Multiple Family Residential 


1. New multiple family residential developments shall respect the scale and character of the adjacent residential neighborhood through attention to views, building scale and orientation, proximity to adjacent 
7 
uses, location of driveways, noise, lighting and landscape. 
2.Building facades should be articulated by using color, arrangement, or change in materials to emphasize 
the facade elements. The planes of the exterior walls may be varied in height, depth or direction. Extremely 
long facades shall be designed with sufficient building articulation, reveals and, in some cases, landscaping 
to avoid a monotonous or overpowering institutional appearance. 

3.Exterior site design and landscaping shall provide functional recreational spaces and/or community site 
amenities. Exterior spaces shall be designed to enhance the overall appearance and compatibility of such 
development by providing privacy, buffering and daylight, and to provide a pleasant transition to the street. 

4.Materials selected for multi-family projects shall be very durable and require low maintenance. 

5.All trash enclosures shall be constructed of sturdy, opaque materials (with trash receptacles screened 
from view) which are in harmony with the architecture and materials of the main buildings. 

6.The exterior wall materials of multi-family residential buildings shall consist of the following: brick, 
stone, cement stucco, clapboard siding, or cement based siding designed to closely resemble wood. 

7. For large commercial/retail and multi-family buildings variations in facade, roofline, and depth shall be 
provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. All building plans submitted shall clearly 
indicate all of the proposed materials and colors of each facade. The plans shall clearly show the location 
and calculate the amount/percentage of all building materials per facade. 

8.The spacing of architectural bays and openings, and solid- to- void ratios (wall to window), should 
conform to general proportions characteristic of traditional buildings. Facades greater than 100 feet in 
length shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses thereby creating bays, said bays forming a 
different plane by at least one foot. No uninterrupted length of facade shall exceed one hundred feet. 
Building facades should include a repeating pattern that shall include a change in color, texture and 
material. Brick, stone, stucco, wood or cement hardboard planks are acceptable. Aluminum, metal or vinyl 
siding is not permitted. 

9.
New multi-family residential development shall require a 30' landscape area where any property line 
abuts a single-family residential district. The landscape area shall include a buffer of a wall or fence of 
solid appearance of tight evergreen hedge not less than 6' in height that will normally obtain a minimum 
height of 8' in 5 years. 


D.
 Planned Development (Small Lot Single Family Infill Developments) 
Using Planned Development (PD) zoning, these infill projects are not subject to the standard single family 
°multiple family zoning standards. Without some minimum development standards or guidelines, this can 
result in a project which provides "uncomfortable" side, front or rear yard areas. 



The following design guidelines have been created for Planned Developments 
1.The main entry feature (which shall not be the garage door) must be prominently placed on the elevation facing the street. 
2.The distance between driveway curb cuts shall be designed to provide a reasonably large on-street parking space (generally a minimum of 22 linear feet of clear street frontage per car or multiples of 22'). Alternatively, driveways may be located immediately adjacent to each other to provide longer on-site parking opportunities on the street. Special approval is required. 
3.On and off street visitor parking shall be distributed equally throughout the development to provide all units reasonably accessible guest parking. A sufficient combination of on and off street parking shall be provided to ensure that new development parking areas do not impact the surrounding neighborhood. Special approval is required. 
8 
4.Linear, repetitive streetscape appearance and building facades shall be avoided by providing variations between the front elevations and through the landscaping plans. 
5.Front yard landscaping shall be submitted and approved as part of the Design Review approval process. 
6.The use of zero lot line developments or developments which provide combined side yards may be considered where a better residential design with more usable outdoor areas can be provided. 
7.Fences which occur parallel to the street shall be of an "open" type. Any other fencing above four feet in height shall also be of an "open" design such as lattice, posts, or other visually penetrable designs. 
8.Each home shall be provided with a logical location for the storage of trash receptacles (waste wheelers, etc.) which is screened from public view. 
III.
 Commercial Architecture 

A.
 General Building Design 


1.Locations of proposed commercial buildings shall be compatible with any adjacent residential areas. Building facades shall be complementary to those adjacent in terms of dimension, amenity and appearance. 
2.Commercial buildings should be compatible in scale, mass, and form with adjacent structures and the pattern of the surrounding area. 
3.Awnings, canopies, porticos etc. shall be designed as an integral part of the structure, shall be at least eight foot above grade and shall not project more than seven feet over a public right-of-way. 
4.Building entrances shall provide ease of access, be designed so that pedestrians/patrons have visual access and can easily identify the entrance points. 
5.Efforts to coordinate the actual and apparent height of adjacent structures are encouraged. This is especially applicable where buildings are located very close to each other. It is often possible to adjust the height of a wall, cornice or parapet line to match that of an adjacent building. Similar design linkages can be achieved to adjust apparent height by placing window lines, belt courses, and other horizontal elements in a pattern that reflects the same elements on neighboring buildings. 
6.Rear and side facades, if visible from public streets or neighboring properties, should be carefully 
designed with similar detailing, and should be compatible with the principal facades of the building. All 
elevations of the building will be evaluated in Design Review. 

7.Long or continuous wall planes should be avoided, particularly in the Downtown Retail district, where 
buildings should exhibit more detail and elements appropriate for close range pedestrian view. 

8.Long (30 feet maximum), unbroken facade surfaces should be avoided, especially at storefront level. 
This can be achieved in a number of ways including: dividing the facade into a series of display windows 
with smaller panes of glass, providing traditional recessed entries and providing consistent door and 
window reveals. 

9.Outside the Downtown Retail district, building surfaces over two stories high or 50 feet in length should be relieved with changes of wall plane that provide strong shadow or visual interest. 
10,In a non-residential development with outparcels, buildings located on outparcels shall be constructed of the same primary building material as the principal building with which they are associated. 
9 
11.The exterior wall materials of non-residential buildings shall consist of a minimum 60% (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, cement stucco, clapboard siding, or cement based siding designed to closely resemble wood. 
12.For large commercial/retail and multi-family buildings variations in facade, roofline, and depth shall be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. All building plans submitted shall clearly indicate all of the proposed materials and colors of each facade. The plans shall clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentage of all building materials per facade. 
13.The spacing of architectural bays and openings, and solid- to- void ratios (wall to window), should conform to general proportions characteristic of traditional buildings. Facades greater than 100 feet in length shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses thereby creating bays, said bays forming a different plane by at least one foot. No uninterrupted length of facade shall exceed one hundred feet. Building facades should include a repeating pattern that shall include a change in color, texture and material. Brick, stone, stucco, wood or cement hardboard planks are acceptable. Aluminum, metal or vinyl siding is not permitted. 
14.In all commercial districts, commercial development shall require a 30' landscape area where any property line abuts a single-family residential district. The landscape area shall include a buffer of a wall or fence of solid appearance of tight evergreen hedge not less than 6' in height that will normally obtain a minimum height of 8' in 5 years. 
15.Remodeling of existing structures for adaptive reuse or in rezonings, a review of the entire site is required to ensure that the project is up to date to current design and development standards of the City of Barnesville. This may include requirements to improve and/or expand the existing landscaping, fencing, screened buffers, parking, circulation and other design issues. 
Service Area and Dumpster 
1.Access for service vehicles, trash collection and storage areas should be located on alleys where alleys exist. When no alley exists, the access should be provided on the street with the least traffic volume. 
2.Building equipment shall be located, designed, and/or screened to minimize visual impact on public streets, large surface parking fields and neighboring properties. 
3.When feasible in larger commercial developments, service and loading areas should be separated from main circulation and parking areas and away from public streets. Loading and unloading activities shall not require circulation onto public streets. 
4.
Utility meters should be located in screened areas. 

B.
 Downtown Retail Districts The design objective in Downtown Retail Districts is to create a high quality, pedestrian scale and walkable areas with a traditional Downtown atmosphere. Site and building design should address pedestrian needs and develop creative approaches to improving pedestrian interest, access and enjoyment. 


1.The sequence of continuous pedestrian activity shall not be interrupted. Blank walls and other "dead" or dull spaces at the street level shall be avoided. Visually interesting activities at the sidewalk edge shall be maintained and/or established to engage pedestrian interest. 
2.Frontage design and signage locations shall be coordinated with streetscape landscaping and street trees. 
3.Building frontages should be active, with large non-reflective minimally tinted window openings at 
ground level. 

4.In the traditional Downtown Retail District the ground level front elevation of the building, outdoor eating, and activity areas shall be placed on or near the front property line to maintain the continuity of the 
10 

street edge, or in alignment with adjacent property frontage. 
5.Frequent street-facing pedestrian entrances shall be provided. 
6.Pedestrian open spaces such as covered walkways, courtyards and plans are encouraged, as well as the development of open and attractive passageways between buildings and blocks. 
7.Outdoor seating and dining areas that face onto the street are encouraged. 
8.In the traditional Downtown area, spatial gaps created in the street wall by parking or other non-pedestrian areas shall be minimized or eliminated. 
9.In the traditional Downtown area, parking facilities, particularly surface parking lots, shall be located in the interior of the block wherever possible, to encourage continuity of the street frontage. -Where alley access exists, ingress and egress from the property should be through the alley. 
When alley access is not possible, driveway openings along public streets should be minimized and should be located on the street with the least traffic volume. 
10.The existing scale and rhythm of storefronts shall be preserved. Buildings over two stories high should "scale down" their street-facing facades to reduce apparent height. The building wall at the street should be no more than 35 feet tall. The upper story above 35' shall be stepped back a distance equal to the height of the building story immediately below. 
11.New building forms and elevations should be detailed and articulated to create interesting roof lines, and strong patterns of shade and shadow. 
12.Large structures should be designed to reduce their perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller-scale components. 
13.A 10-foot public sidewalk space with street trees planted in a rhythmic pattern shall be provided. 
14.
The rear of existing buildings shall be enhanced, where appropriate, to improve public access from parking lots and service alleys. 

C.
 Auto Dealership Guidelines 


1.Special attention shall be directed toward site landscaping which is visible from the street. Trees to provide both shade and visual relief shall be located within the dealership (insofar as it is reasonably practical with auto display) as well as on the site perimeter. The vehicle display parking areas may remain relatively open, if balanced by substantial landscaping and tree planting on other visually prominent areas of the site. 
2.Landscaping, special paving treatments, setbacks, and building orientation shall be used to provide an 
attractive appearance from the front property line. 

3.The architecture of the dealership buildings shall be well designed to provide a strong and unique visual identity for the auto dealership. 
4.The service area and/or service bays shall be screened or sited so they are not visible from the street. 
5.Vehicles under repair shall be kept either inside a structure or in an area which is screened from views from the street. 
6.Service areas shall provide adequate queuing space that does not impede vehicle circulation through the site or result in vehicles stacking into the street. 
7.Perimeter fencing, security fencing, or gateways shall be constructed of attractive materials which are 
11 

compatible with the design and materials used throughout the project. Razor wire or electric fencing shall not be allowed and chain link fencing is strongly discouraged. 
8. Night lighting and security lighting shall be sensitively designed to ensure that no off-site glare is directed to neighboring parcels and that the overall intensity of the site lighting is not excessive. The use of excessive nighttime security lighting is discouraged. Other security measures should instead be considered. 
D. Fast Food Restaurant Guidelines 
1.Franchise or corporate style architecture and/or highly contrasting color schemes are discouraged. A new freestanding restaurant building shall be sited and designed to be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. If the restaurant will occupy a pad within a shopping center, the building shall be designed to be consistent with the "theme" or design of the center. (See G. Shopping Center Guidelines.) 
2.Drive through elements shall generally be discouraged. Where drive though elements are appropriate, they shall be architecturally integrated into the building, rather than appearing to be applied or "stuck-on" to the building. Drive through elements shall not be located on the street side of the building or shall be heavily screened from view. 
3.The site design shall accommodate a logical and safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation pattern through the site. Circulation shall allow for adequate length of queuing lines for drive through elements which do not interfere with the on-site parking for patrons entering the restaurant, nor result in traffic queuing into the street. 
4.Freestanding restaurant buildings shall be designed and detailed consistently on all sides, including the rear and side elevations. 
5.Outdoor seating areas, play equipment, and perimeter fencing shall all be reviewed for compatible and attractive design that is integrated with the main building architecture. 
6.Trash enclosures and other service spaces shall be constructed of materials and finishes which are consistent with the main restaurant building. 
7.Businesses shall not be "over-signed." See City of Barnesville Sign Ordinance. 
8.Excessive illumination of signage, building or site shall be avoided. Roof lighting, down-lighting washing the building walls, or illuminated awnings are all strongly discouraged. 
9.Adequate landscaping, including parking area shade trees throughout the project site shall be provided as required through the City of Barnesville Landscape Ordinance. 
10.Cooking odors shall be eliminated to the extent feasible by installation of best available ventilation 
technology. Project applications shall include information on proposed ventilation systems and odor 
scrubbing technology to be used. 

11.All rooftop mechanical equipment, including antennas, shall be screened visually and acoustically. 
Such screening shall be integral to the architectural design of the building. 

12.Remodeling of existing structures for restaurant uses shall also require a review of the entire site and circulation plan to ensure that the project is updated to current design review standards for the City. This may include requirements to improve and/or expand the existing landscaping, fencing, parking area or other site design issues. 
E. Auto Service Station Guidelines 
1. Site Area minimum of 12,000 square feet; minimum of 15% of site to be landscaped (as specified); maximum of 35% of street frontage devoted to curb cuts with remainder in landscaping; maximum of 18% of site with canopy cover; pump island design with a minimum of two vehicle stacking behind vehicle 
12 

parked at pump closest to exit and/or entrance driveway and other specific requirements. 
2.The site design for projects located at street corners should provide some structural or strong design element to anchor the corner. This can be accomplished using a built element or with strong landscaping features. 
3.The on-site circulation pattern shall include adequate driving space to maneuver vehicles around cars parked at the pumps, with special attention to the circulation of vehicles not involved in the purchase of fuel. 
4.The amount of unrelieved pavement or asphalt area on the site shall be limited through the use of landscaping, contrasting colors and banding or pathways of alternate paver material. Extensive expanses of light grey concrete pavement shall be avoided. 
5.Building architecture shall be designed to provide an attractive appearance which is compatible with the surrounding area. Prefabricated buildings are discouraged. Where allowed, such buildings shall be substantially modified and embellished to create a project which meets the community standards. All architectural details should be related to an overall architectural theme. 
6.Separate structures (canopy, carwash, cashiers booth, etc.) on the site shall have consistent architectural -detail and design elements to provide a cohesive project site. 
7.Tall (13'-14') tank vents shall be completely screened or incorporated into the building architecture. 
8.A car wash which is incorporated into the project shall be well integrated into the design. The car wash 
opening shall be sited so that it is not directly visible as the primary view from the street into the project 
site. The site design shall also address the issues of off-site noise exposure, provision of adequate on-site 
underground drainage systems to keep water off public streets and improvements, and circulation/vehicle 
stacking. 

9.Signage shall be limited as defined in the City of Barnesville Sign Ordinance. All signs shall have a consistent character and design details (such as trellis, brick, river stone, etc.) that reflect the design of the project. The amount of price sign square footage required as the state regulated minimum size shall not count towards the signage calculation. If price signs are larger than this minimum, the incremental square footage difference shall be counted as part of the total allowable signage for the station. 
10.Illumination should be concentrated on specific signage. Canopies shall not be illuminated. Light fixtures shall be recessed into the canopy and no glare shall be visible from the fixture. Yard lights shall be oriented downward. 
11.Dumpsters and service areas shall have solid metal doors and the wall materials and building styles 
shall match those used for the station buildings. 

12.
The roof top mechanical equipment screen shall cover all rooftop equipment, including any satellite or other telecommunication equipment. 

F.
 Shopping Center Guidelines 



1.A unified architectural design intention should be incorporated into each commercial center. 
2.The appearance of a "sea of asphalt" parking lot in the front of the center shall be avoided. Both 
perimeter and interior parking lot trees shall be provided for shade and visual relief in the parking area 
while maintaining view corridors to the storefront areas. 

3.On larger commercial sites, a portion of the total building area should be located at the street perimeter, preferably on a corner location. Such siting, together with substantial landscape treatment reinforces and strengthens the streetscape and helps to screen off-street parking areas. 
13 

4.Landscaping trees shall be allowed to achieve their natural form. Pruning to reduce the natural diameter of the trees shall not occur. 
5.The architectural design of freestanding pad buildings shall be consistent with the design of the remainder of the shopping center. Where centers require updating, pad buildings shall be remodeled in conjunction with an upgrade of the entire shopping center. 
6.Shopping center sign programs shall be established and enforced for remodeling of the centers. Monument signs listing all tenant names (tenant identification signs) shall be avoided. 
7.Shopping center remodeling for the "in-line" stores and anchor tenants which include comprehensive upgrades for the entire center, not just the "new tenant," are encouraged. 
8.Truck delivery and circulation routes should be separated from customer circulation through the site. 
9.All rooftop mechanical equipment, antennas, etc. shall be screened from view. Roof top lighting is strongly discouraged. 
10.Textured or colored paving materials are encouraged to identify pedestrian circulation areas, especially within the parking lot. 
11.Shopping cart storage areas shall be incorporated into the building design to provide a visual screen of carts from the parking area. 
12.Outdoor gathering areas and public eating areas are encouraged. 
14 




670 Reserved 

A??ROVED 
ARTICLE VI - PAGE 37. 
Rec by.._D_Z_Date 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
Section 675 -Unclassified Uses and Interpretation of Uses 
675.1 - Interpretation of Use Categories Enumerated in the Zoning Ordinance 
The Zoning Department shall be the City Official charged with the responsibility of interpreting this Ordinance to determine whether a proposed use can be interpreted to fall within a land use category that is permitted or conditionally permitted in the district in which the project is proposed. 
(a).Appeal of Zoning Department's Decision - An aggrieved party may appeal the Zoning Department's interpretation made in accordance with this section to the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1100.3 (Appeals of Zoning Department's Decisions). 

675.2 - Unclassified Uses 
Proposed uses that are determined to be unclassified (i.e., don't fall within any established use category) may be approved upon application for a Special Use Permit in accordance with Article XI, Section 1135 (Special Use Permits). 

675.3 - Zoning Ordinance Amendments 
As an alternative to the Special Use Permit procedure set forth in Section 675.2 above, the applicant may apply for an amendment to the zoning ordinance in accordance with Article XI, Section 1120 to add the proposed unclassified use to the list of permitted or conditionally permitted uses for the zoning district within which the applicant's property is located. 
APPIM
.
ARTICLE VI -PAGE 38 
Rey by: 1.)Z,Vt_ 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE VIE - DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS 
Section 700 - Charts of Dimensional Requirements 
This article is established to show the minimum size, floor area, width, and height requirements for the land uses within each designated district. The minimum lot sizes cited in this Article shall be raised in all individual situations where the county sanitation requires a larger lot size for proper septic tank operation. 
700.1 - Minimum Lot Size  
(Minimum Lot Size)  (Lot Coverage)  
DISTRICT.LOT AREA IN  LOT SIZE.LOT WIDTH  MAXIMUM  
SQ. FT.  PER.IN FEET  LOT  
DWELLING  COVERAGE  
(SQ. FT.)  
A R-1 A  2 acresI 15,000  2 acres 15,000  100 75  35% 35%  
R-1 B  15,000  15,000  75  35%  
R-1 C R-2  7,500 15,000  7,500 7,500  50 50  35% 35%  
R-3  5,000 (3)  5,000 (3)  50  35%  
P (4)  7,000  10,000  60  35%  
C-1.(4)  N/A  N/A  60  35%  
C-2 (4)  7,000  7,000  60  35%  
C-3 C-4  N/A N/A  N/A N/A  60 60  35% 35%  
I  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  

(1) 	
Lot width measured at the street. 

(2) 	
Includes area for parking. 

(3) 	
Area requirements for manufactured home parks and individual manufactured home spaces within parks are set forth in Article VIII, Section 860. 

(4) 	
Minimum lot size for single family homes shall comply with the requirements in the R-IB District. 


MOVED

.Re 07 Dziej.-i2L-aki
ARTICLE VII -PAGE 1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
700.2 - Minimum Yard and Area Requirements and Maximum Building Height 
Note that areas required for parking in accordance with this Ordinance may not be used 
to satisfy any yard requirements. 

DISTRICT FRONT (SETBACK FROM MINIMUM MINIMUM REAR MAXIMUM MINIMUM MAXIMUM FRONT LOT LINE) SIDE YARD YARD HEIGHT FLOOR LOT OF AREA COVERAGE BUILDING 
ARTERIALS/.LOCAL/ r COLLECTORS.MINOR STREETS A 80 60 15 30 35 1,500 35% R-1A 50 (1) 30 20 30 35 1,800 35% R-1B 50 (1) 30 20 30 35 1,500 35% R-1C 35(1) 30 10 15 35 1,200 35% R-2 40, 30 10 (2) 25 35 -3 35% R-3,(4) 40 30 10 25 35 N/A 35% P 25 30 10 20 35 500 35% C-1 (5) N/A N/A N/A N/A 60 N/A 35% C-2 (5) 25 30 15 20 35 500 35% C-3 (5) 40 30 15 20 35 1,000 35% C-4 (5) 60 35 N/A N/A 35 N/A 35% I 35 30 30 (6) 30 (6) N/A N/A 35% 
(1) 	
Front building line shall conform to the average building line in a developed block, but in any event, no less than the indicated distance. 

(2) 	
Setback for duplexes; Buildings with three or more units must be set back 15 feet. 

(3) 	
1 bedroom - 800 sq. ft.; 2 bedrooms - 1,000 sq. ft.; 3 bedroom - 1,200 sq. ft. 

(4) 	
Area requirements for manufactured home parks and individual manufactured home spaces within parks are set forth in Article VIII, Section 860. 

(5) 	
On corner lots in a Business District which abuts a R-District, there shall be required a side yard on the side street equal in depth to the required front yard of the R-District. 

(6) 	
When abutting residential districts, a minimum of 50 feet buffer/screen is required. 


Section 710 Exceptions and Modifications 
710.1 - Existing Lots 
Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or such owner's successors in title thereto does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable the owner to conform to the required dimensions of the Ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site if yards are established in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance as applied to the district in which the lot is located. 
ARTICLE VII - PAGE 2.tiettl.,1717(-11-0y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
710.2 - Front Yard Setback for Dwelling The front yard setback requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setbacks of that district. In such cases, the front yard setback may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the adjacent developed lots. 


710.3 - Height Limits 
The height limits listed in this Article shall not apply to structures not intended for human occupancy such as church spires, flagpoles, chimneys, monuments, radio or television towers or aerials, water towers, or similar structures. The height limits shall apply to signs. The heights of telecommunications towers and antennas are governed by the provisions of Article IX. 

710.4 - Corner Lots 
The side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front yard requirements for adjoining lots on the same street. 

710.5 - Front Yards on a Through Lot 
At each end of a lot that lies between and abuts two parallel streets, there shall be a front yard of the depth required by this Ordinance for the zone in which each street frontage is located, provided that one of the front yards may serve as a rear yard. If a lot located on a through lot has frontage on a third street one yard must be declared the rear yard and any primary or accessory structures shall be set behind the rear yard setback line. 

710.6 - Adjoining and Vacant Lots of Record 
If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance, and those lots individually are less than 50 ft. in width, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the permitted size, and lot or lots in one (1) ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use or when a lot is divided between the two adjacent lots so that the divided lot becomes part of the adjacent standard size lots. 
APPROM
ARTICLE VII - PAGE 3 
Rec. by:_&Dg: - /2 -0 y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 

ARTICLE VIII - SUPPLEMENTARY STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 
Section 800 - Accessory and Temporary Buildings 
800.1 Accessory Buildings 
(a) 	
Attached Accessory Building - Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building, or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore meet requirements applicable to the main building. 

(b) 	
Detached Accessory Building 


1. 	
Location - Detached accessory buildings are permitted in the side or rear yard only. 

2. 	
Height and Bulk - A detached accessory building shall not be more than two (2) stories in height and shall not be constructed on more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. 

3. 	
Setbacks - Detached accessory buildings shall be no less than five 


(5) feet from any lot line. Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet from the main building. 

800.2 Accessory Swimming Pools 
Accessory swimming pools shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any property line. Accessory swimming pools shall be enclosed by a wall of fence at least four (4) feet in height. Accessory swimming pools shall obtain approval from the Lamar County Health Department and be permitted by the City of Barnesville. 

800.3 Temporary Buildings 
(a).Construction Site - Temporary buildings used only in conjunction with construction work may be permitted in any district, provided that no temporary building shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(b).Temporary Structures - Tents and similar structures shall be authorized for temporary use for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for special purposes related to the primary use of the main building or principal use of the lot. A permit issued by the Building Official shall be required for all such structures prior to the erection or use of such structures, provided that no permit shall be required for the use of such structure when used in 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 1 
Rec.by:_DZ_Date: /-/2-0Y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
connection with a funeral. The Building Official shall not issue more than two permits for such structures during a calendar year for any lot. 
(c).Temporary Structures in Parking Lots - Where any such tent or structure is planned to be erected in the parking area that is intended to provide parking for the primary use of the lot such that in the opinion of the Building Official, adequate parking would not be continuously provided for use of the property, the Building Official may deny the issuance of the permit. 
Section 810 -Accessory Dwelling Units 
810.1 Definitions 
(a) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit - A subordinate dwelling unit incorporated within or adjacent to a single family structure. Accessory dwelling units may not be subdivided or otherwise segregated in ownership from the primary residence structure. 

(b) 	
Existing Single-family Dwelling - Single-family dwelling units for which permits for construction of the principal dwelling were finalized (occupancy approved) at least three years prior to application for accessory dwelling unit. 

(c) 	
Owner Occupancy - A site which a property owner, as reflected in title records, makes his or her legal residence, as evidenced by voter registration, vehicle registration, or similar means, and actually resides at the site more than six months out of any given year, and at no time receives rent for the owner-occupied unit. 



810.2 Requirements 
In the Historic Preservation Overlay District (H-P), one accessory dwelling unit is permitted as subordinate to an existing single-family dwelling provided the following criteria are met: 
(a) 	
Location - Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in structures detached from the primary residence, including but not limited to guest cottages, detached garages, or workshops; 

(b) 	
Occupancy by Property Owner - Either the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit must be occupied by an owner; 

(c) 	
Number of Occupants - The total number of occupants in both the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit combined may not exceed the maximum number established by the definition of family in Article II; 


APPROVED ARTICLE VIE - PAGE 2 Rec. by: 62 Date: — /2 0y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(d) 	Size of the Unit - The accessory dwelling unit shall contain not less than 300 square feet and not more than 800 square feet, excluding any related garage area; provided, if the accessory unit is completely located on a single floor, the Building Official may allow increased size in order to efficiently use all floor area, so long as all other standards set forth in this section are met; 
(1).The square footage of the accessory dwelling unit, excluding any garage area, shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total square footage of the primary residence and accessory dwelling unit combined, excluding any garage area. 
(e) 	
Parking - There shall be one off-street parking space provided for the accessory dwelling unit, which is in addition to any off-street spaces required for the primary residence. 

(f) 	
Entrance to the Unit - The construction of a second entry door facing on a street front for entrance into an accessory unit is prohibited; new entrances not facing on a street front are permitted on the sides and rear of a house, or on a front side facing on a street where no other door exists; provided that existing single family structures with two or more entry doors facing on a street shall not be prohibited from using one of those doors to access the accessory unit. 

(g) 	
Building Codes - The accessory dwelling unit shall meet all building code standards including building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code requirements. 

(h) 	
Prohibition on Home Occupations - A lot may not contain both an accessory dwelling unit and a home occupation. 


810.3 Inspection and Registration 
(a) 	
Registration - Any property owner seeking to establish an accessory dwelling unit shall apply to register the unit with the Zoning Department. The property owner shall file a completed registration application form affirming that at least one owner will occupy the primary residence or the accessory unit and agreeing to the limits on total number of residents and other standards as provided above. 

(b) 	
Inspection - After receipt of a complete application form and prior to approval of any accessory dwelling unit, the City shall inspect the property to confirm that minimum and maximum size limits are met, required parking is provided, design limitations regarding front entrances are met, and building code standards are met. 


APPROVED.Rec. by:.Dale: J -0 y
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 3 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c) 	
Filing of Registration - The registration form or other form as required by the Zoning Department shall be filed as a deed restriction with the Lamar County Department Tax Assessor to provide notice of the presence of the accessory dwelling unit, the requirement of owner occupancy, and other standards for maintaining the unit as described above. 

(d) 	
Report to the City Council - The Zoning Department shall report annually on accessory dwelling unit registration, number of units and distribution throughout the city, average size of units, and number and type of complaint and enforcement related actions. 

(e) 	
Cancellation of Registration - Cancellation of the accessory unit's registration may be accomplished by the property owner filing a certificate with the Zoning Department for recording at the Lamar County Tax Assessor or may occur as a result of enforcement action. The cancellation certificate will confirm that the residence has reverted to use as a single dwelling. 


Section 820 -Automobile Service Stations & Convenience Stores 
820.1 Location 
The building in which an automobile service station or convenience store is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, day care center, or personal care home. 

820.2 Site Requirements 
An automobile service station or convenience store shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 120 feet and a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines, and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines. 

820.3 Access to Site 
Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station: 
(a) 	
Shall not be provided with more than two (2) curb cuts for the first 120 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 

Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more

(b) 
than 40 feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and 
shall not be located less than 20 feet from a street intersection or closer than 10 feet from the adjoining property. 

(c) 	
Shall not have any two (2) driveways, or curb cuts, any less than 20 feet apart at both the right-of-way line and the curb of edge of the pavement 


ARTICLE VIII -PAGE 4. APPROVED ReC. by: 0a Date: H2 —°‘1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
along a single street. 




820.4 Gasoline Pump Islands 
All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line; and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line; However, the pumps shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the centerline of an arterial street, fifty-five (55) feet from the centerline of a collector street, and forty-five (45) feet from the centerline of other streets. 

820.5 Off-Street Parking 
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 

820.6 Other Site Improvements 
In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
(a) 	
A raised curb of at least 6 inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 

(b) 	
A solid fence or wall 6 feet in height shall be erected along all property lines abutting any adjacent residential lot. 

(c) 	
Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away form 
adjacent properties and streets. 


(d) 	
Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 

(e) 	
All drives, parking storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 


Section 830 - Cemeteries 
Cemeteries shall comply with the following requirements: 
The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development
(a) 
of a system of collector of larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In 
addition such site shall have direct access to a publicly dedicated street. 
(b) 	Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres. 
APPROB 
ARTICLE VIII -PAGE 5 	Rec.VI:LE_Date: ( (11-e>4. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c) 	
All structures shall be set back no less than 35 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 35 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line. 

(e) 	
The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 

(f) 	
A public hearing shall be held by the City of Barnesville prior to approval of any new cemetery. 


Section 840 -Home Occupations 
840.1 Intent 
Regulations for home occupations are intended to provide categories of use such that permitted home occupations can be better matched to the character of the zoning district in which they are allowed. The term home occupation is understood to mean all categories of home occupations, including home businesses and residential businesses. 
(a) 	
Home occupations shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. In districts where a home occupation requires Conditional Use approval by the City Council, the applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the City that these conditions have been met. 

(b) 	
- The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed home occupation demonstrating that it will comply with each of the conditions applicable for the specific type of occupation. 

(c) 	
The business must be owned by the owner of the property on which the home occupation is located. 

(d) 	
The home occupation and dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes. 


Home occupations, as defined, may be established in a dwelling in any residential district if approved as being appropriate with regard to transportation and access, water supply, waste disposal, fire, and police protection, and other public facilities; as not causing undue traffic congestion or creating a traffic hazard; as not being bothersome, noisy or producing undue odor; and as being in harmony with the orderly nature of the neighborhood and not interfering with the integrity and peace of the residential district. The following requirements shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements of this ordinance for the residential district in which such uses are located: 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 6 
Rec. by:.Data:.y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. B) No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. C) Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. D) No machinery that causes noises or other interferences in radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
E) 	No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used primarily for commercial purposes. 
F) Instruction in music, dance, arts, and crafts, and similar subjects shall be limited to six (6) students at one time. G) Not more than twenty-five (25) per cent of the total floor area of any dwelling is 
to be used for such home occupations. 
There shall be no storage or sale of merchandise, stock-in-trade, or commodities 
on the premises. 

I).Home occupations shall register and pay all applicable fees. The business must be owned by the owner of the property on which the home occupation is located. The business owner must be the primary resident of the 
location. K) The business shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles. L) No one other than family members who reside on the premises may be employed 
in the business. M) The business or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling. N) Existing home occupations that are in violation are considered nonconforming 
and are allowed to continue with the following limitations: a) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. b) Enlarged or expanded beyond current capacity. c) Reestablished after discontinuance for ninety (90) days. 
MOM
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 7 
Rec by _O_DA.L.L2_,T 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 850 Manufactured Homes 


850.1 Permitted Zones for Manufactured Homes 
Manufactured homes are permitted only in R-3 zoning districts. 

850.1 General Standards - Applicable to All Manufactured Homes 
The following standards shall apply to all types of manufactured home located in the City of Barnesville after adoption of this Ordinance: 
(a) 	
Compliance with Applicable Laws - All manufactured homes must be installed in compliance with RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES, Chapter 120-3-7, including Appendix "A," and any amendments thereto, made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in O.C.G.A. Sec. 8-2-132, 8-2-133, 8-2-135, 8-2-137(b), 8-2-161, 8-2-165, 8-2-168, and 25­2-1 et seq. All manufactured homes shall comply with City of Barnesville ordinances and regulations, including the building, gas, plumbing, electric codes as adopted by the City of Barnesville. 

(b) 	
Minimum Construction Standards - Each newly installed mobile home/manufactured home in the City of Barnesville shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development, as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C., Section 5401, et seq., before that mobile home/manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said mobile home/manufactured home. It is the intent of this Section to prohibit moving mobile homes/manufactured homes into Barnesville that do not conform to the applicable Housing and Urban Development Construction Standards, as expressed in 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no mobile home/manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this city unless that mobile home/manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the 


U.S. Housing and Urban Development, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanently affixed label or tag certifying the compliance as required by 42 U.S.C. Section 5415. Mobile homes/manufactured homes that do not display the certification required by 42 U.S.C. Section 5415 shall not be eligible for a city building or occupancy permit; provided, however, that any mobile home that legally exists in Barnesville at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall not require said certification. 
(c).Permit Requirement - Any owner of a mobile/manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said mobile home/manufactured home shall obtain a permit from the Building Official indicating compliance with all 
.
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 8 
APPROVED Rec. by: D Z Da;.-oY 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed mobile/manufactured home. 
(d) 	
Location Disclosure and Decal Requirement - Every person holding title to or possessing a mobile home/manufactured home that is placed or located within the limits of the City of Barnesville, shall report the location to and obtain a location decal for such mobile/manufactured home from the Tax Commissioner of Lamar County annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designed in such a manner and affixed to the mobile/manufactured home as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 

(e) 	
Removal of Tongue, etc. - Any tongue, wheels, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus shall be removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 

(f) 	
Landing Area - A porch or landing of a width and length greater than or equal to the width of the entrance shall be provided at each entrance door. The landing area shall be a minimum of 4'x 4' with railing and steps. 

(g) 	
Foundation - All manufactured homes shall be completely underpinned and skirted with masonry, or other manufacturer's underpinning kits. Such skirting/underpinning shall completely enclosed the undercarriage. 

(h) 	
Exterior Siding - The exterior siding shall not have a high-gloss finish and shall have the appearance of wood or other siding in common residential use. No metallic siding is permitted. 

(i) 	
Roof - The roof materials shall be of wood shakes, asphalt composition, 


-wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials or other materials predominant in site-built residential construction as approved by the Building Official. 
Tie-downs - All manufactured homes must be equipped with tie-down bands and shall be anchored securely and shall be able to withstand winds of one hundred (100) miles per hour. 
Temporary Usage - A single manufactured unit or travel trailer may be used for an office by the developer for a period not to exceed six (6) months, upon written approval from the Building Official. 
Non-conforming Use - A mobile/manufactured home that has been continuously and legally located in Barnesville since the adoption of this Ordinance shall be allowed to remain in its current location if the following conditions are met: 
(1) 	
All advalorem taxes on the unit have been timely paid in full; and 

(2) 	
The Building Official finds that the unit is in compliance with all ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 9. 


APPROVER Ret.byjiaDatt:_-_:° 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
building, gas, electrical, housing, mechanical, and fire prevention codes of the City of Barnesville. 
Section 860 -Manufactured Home Parks 
Manufactured home parks and manufactured homes within such parks are subject to the requirements of this subsection. 
860.1 Permit Requirements 
(a).Park Construction Permit Required - In any district where manufactured home parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit to the Building Official a site plan or the park subject to the conditions of this section. No person shall proceed with the construction of a manufactured housing park or trailer park until an application for the construction of such park has been reviewed by the Building Official, and, upon approval of the application and site plan, a permit to construct the proposed park, hereinafter referred to as the park construction permit, has been issued. The application for a permit to construct a manufactured housing park shall include the following: 
(1) 	
The name and address of the applicant. 

(2) 	
The location and legal description of the property upon which the park is proposed to be placed. 

(3) 	
A complete plan of the proposed park at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one (1) inch and showing the shape, area, and size of the site; street and driveway layout, including distance notations; the location and grouping of manufactured housing lot stands and accessory buildings; the placement and sizes of utilities; all manufactured housing lot boundaries and other data pertinent to the requirement of this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed, or to be constructed, within the manufactured housing park. 

(5) 	
Such further information as may be requested by the Building Official to facilitate the determination of whether the proposed park will comply with all legal requirements. The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. No park construction permit shall be issued except in accordance with this Ordinance. 


(b).Pei.mit Expiration - If no substantial construction progress has been made 
APPROVED ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 10.Rec.b D2 Date,":1:2Lo 
within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the park construction 
permit, the permit becomes invalid and must be renewed. For the purpose 
of this section, "substantial construction" includes final site grading and 
the installation of utilities and is considered to be approximately forty 
percent (40%) of total site improvements. 
(c) 	
Building Permit Required - No person shall park a manufactured home on an individual lot until a building permit therefore has been issued by the Building Official. No manufactured housing building permit shall be issued expect in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(d) 	
Certificate of Occupancy Required - A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Official is required in advance of the use or occupancy of manufactured homes on manufactured home lots in approved manufactured home parks. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot of building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a propriety or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 




860.2 General Standards 
Manufactured home parks must meet the following standards: 
(a) 	
Compliance with Other Laws - No manufactured home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws and regulations of the city. 

(b) 	
Minimum Rental Period - No space shall be rented for residential use of a manufactured home in any such park except for periods of thirty (30) days or more. 

(c) 	
Initial Occupancy of Park - The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be thirty (30) spaces. 

(d) 	
Site Requirements - The park shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to insure drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, the possibility of insect or rodent infestation or other adverse influences. 

(e) 	
Water Supply - An adequate supply of pure, potable water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and manufactured housing lots within the park. Each manufactured housing stand shall be provided with an approved cold water connection and a tap (hydrant), constructed in accordance with the plumbing standards adopted by the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 


APPROIED ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 11.Rec.byl__OZ,Daie:12 
(g).Sanitation - Each park shall provide at a minimum the following sanitation facilities and services: 
(1) 	
Refuse Collection Station - One refuse collection station shall be provided for each twenty (20) families or fraction thereof If individual refuse containers are used on the manufactured home site, they shall be inconspicuously located. 

(2) 	
Environmental Control - The area around and underneath each manufactured home shall be kept clean and free from collections of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly material. 

(3) 	
Sewage Disposal - Each manufactured housing stand shall be provided with a sanitary sewer of at least 4 inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive all waste from the manufactured home. The sewer in each manufactured housing stand shall be connected to discharge the waste into a sewer system which meets the health requirements of the State of Georgia and the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(4) 	
Sewage Drain Connections - Manufactured housing drain connections shall be of approved semi-rigid and non-collapsible hose, having smooth interior surfaces and no less than 3 inches outside diameter, nor less in size than the manufactured housing outlet. Drain connections shall be equipped with a standard screw-or clamp-type fitting. While a manufactured housing stand is not occupied or the drain is not used, the sewer opening shall be closed with an approved closure or cap. 


(h).Fire Protection - Every manufactured housing park shall have adequate fire protection system with water pressure and fire hydrants of such type, size, number, and location as to satisfy applicable regulations of the Barnesville Fire Department currently in force, provided further that not open fires or burning or of trash, leaves, or other refuse shall be permitted within the boundaries of any manufactured housing park without a permit from the Barnesville Fire Department. 
860.3 Park Service Facilities 
Manufactured home parks are permitted to have an office and storage facilities. 

860.4 Buffers and Landscaping 
(a).Buffers - A buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet wide shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the manufactured home park. Such buffer strips shall not be included within any individual manufactured home lot. This buffer strip shall be increased to a width of thirty-five (35) feet when the park is located adjacent to property that is 
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 12 
PRON5 
..0__L_Da‘/_-_-_/.2.,_:(9kir
Rec 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
improved with a permanent residential dwelling or a property zoned for a single family residence. This strip must be densely planted with fast growing evergreen shrubs. 
. 
(b) 	Landscaping - Each manufactured home park shall be landscaped with shade trees and exterior screen planting of at least twenty-five (25) trees per acre and fifty (50) plants per acre. 


860.5 Streets 
Manufactured home parks shall comply with the following street standards: 
(a).Internal Streets 
(1) 	
The system of streets in manufactured home parks shall extend continuously from the existing improved street system providing access to the site. This system shall provide suitable access to all manufactured home spaces and other important facilities on the property, adequate connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the property, and convenient circulation for vehicles. 

(2) 	
All interior streets shall be shown by name, width of easement, and type of surfacing on the development plan or plat of each manufactured housing park; provided that street pavement widths for manufactured housing parks shall be governed by Sections 


860.6 (b) and 860.6 (c) below. 
. 

(b) 	Ingress and Egress Streets - The streets connecting a manufactured housing park with and serving as ingress and egress systems to adjoining thoroughfares, shall be shown by width of easement and type of surfacing on the development plan or plat of each park; provided that the pavement width of such streets will be a minimum of 20 feet for streets providing two-way traffic or 14 feet for one-way traffic, and provided further that there shall be at least two (2) such ingress and egress streets connecting any new manufactured housing park with adjoining public streets. 
(c).Interior Driveways - All manufactured housing lots shall abut upon an interior driveway with a pavement width of at least 20 feet for streets providing two-way traffic or 14 feet for streets providing one-way traffic. 

860.6 Parking Spaces 
The following minimum standards shall apply to parking spaces in manufactured home parks: 
(a).Car parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the needs of the property and their guests without interference with normal 
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 13 

Ret..tri.Ote:_h 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
movement of traffic. Such facilities should be provided at the rate of at 
least one car space for each manufactured home lot plus an additional car 
space for each four (4) lots to provide for guest parking, for two-car 
tenants, and for delivery and service vehicles. 
(b).Required car parking spaces should be located for convenient access to the manufactured home stands. Usually one car space should be located on each lot and the remainder located in adjacent parking bays. 
860.7 Area Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks The following area regulations apply to manufactured home parks: 
(a) 	
Minimum acreage per park - 5 acres. 

(b) 	
Maximum acreage per park - 25 acres. 

(c) 	
Minimum lot width for portion of lot used for park entrance and exit - 50 ft. 

(d) 	
Setbacks - No manufactured home shall be located less than 20 feet from any road of street within the park, nor less than 40 feet from the right-of­way line of any street adjacent to the park. In no case shall any manufactured home be in the right of way. 


860.8 Area Regulations for Manufactured Home Space or Stand Within Manufactured Home Parks. 
(a) 	
Minimum space size: 5,000 sq. ft. 

(b) 	
Minimum frontage: 40 ft (measured at front property line) 

(c) 	
Minimum width: 40 ft. (measured at the front building line) 

(d) 	
Minimum side yard: 8 ft. 

(e) 	
Minimum front yard: 20 ft. 
Minimum rear yard: 10 ft.


(f) 


860.9 Non-conforming Manufactured Housing Parks 
The expansion of enlargement shall be allowed to a Non-conforming manufactured 
housing park except with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
The expansion shall not cause the total area to exceed 25 acres. 

(b) 	
Each new manufactured housing lot shall meet or exceed the minimum PROVED , 


y
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 14 	Rec _a_Z_Date /—/-2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
dimensional standards for lots and yards prescribed by Section 860.9 above. 
Section 870 -Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds 
In any district where recreational vehicle parks are permitted, the applicant must submit a site plan for approval by the Building Official complying with the following standards: 
(a).Access to Public Streets - No recreational vehicle park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state, or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
. 
(b) 	Minimum Lot Size - The minimum lot area per recreational vehicle park shall be 3 acres, with a maximum density of 10 spaces per acre and with all sanitary facilities provided. 
(c).Setbacks for Vehicle Spaces - No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 100 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, arterial or major collector street, or within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any minor collector or local street. 
(d).Park Facilities - Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided: 
(1) 	Such establishments and the parking area related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent (10 %) of the 
park. 
(2) 	Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of 
the park. 
Such establishments shall meet the screening requirements set
(3) 
forth in section 550 of this Ordinance and shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract 
customers other than the occupants of the park. 
.
Health Department Certificate Required - In addition to meeting the above
(e) 
requirements, the recreational vehicle park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of the Lamar County Health Department. 
ARTICI.E VIlI - PAGE 15 APPROVED Rec. by: 02 Dale: f-/-2.--c9 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
. 
(f) 	Rental Time Limit - Spaces in recreational vehicle parks may be rented and used by recreational vehicles provided that they meet any additional laws and ordinances of the City Council and shall be rented by the day or week only; an occupant of such space shall remain in the same recreational vehicle park for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
Rec. by: l)? 
ARTICLE VIII -PAGE 16 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 



ARTICLE VIII - SUPPLEMENTARY STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 
Section 800 - Accessory and Temporary Buildings 
800.1 Accessory Buildings 
(a) 	
Attached Accessory Building - Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building, or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore meet requirements applicable to the main building. 

(b) 	
Detached Accessory Building 


1. 	
Location - Detached accessory buildings are permitted in the side or rear yard only. 

2. 	
Height and Bulk - A detached accessory building shall not be more than two (2) stories in height and shall not be constructed on more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. 

3. 	
Setbacks - Detached accessory buildings shall be no less than five 


(5) feet from any lot line. Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet from the main building. 

800.2 Accessory Swimming Pools 
Accessory swimming pools shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any property line. Accessory swimming pools shall be enclosed by a wall of fence at least four (4) feet in height. Accessory swimming pools shall obtain approval from the Lamar County Health Department and be permitted by the City of Barnesville. 

800.3 Temporary Buildings 
(a).Construction Site - Temporary buildings used only in conjunction with construction work may be permitted in any district, provided that no temporary building shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(b).Temporary Structures - Tents and similar structures shall be authorized for temporary use for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for special purposes related to the primary use of the main building or principal use of the lot. A permit issued by the Building Official shall be required for all such structures prior to the erection or use of such structures, provided that no permit shall be required for the use of such structure when used in 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 1 
Rec.by:_DZ_Date: /-/2-0Y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
connection with a funeral. The Building Official shall not issue more than two permits for such structures during a calendar year for any lot. 
(c).Temporary Structures in Parking Lots - Where any such tent or structure is planned to be erected in the parking area that is intended to provide parking for the primary use of the lot such that in the opinion of the Building Official, adequate parking would not be continuously provided for use of the property, the Building Official may deny the issuance of the permit. 
Section 810 -Accessory Dwelling Units 
810.1 Definitions 
(a) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit - A subordinate dwelling unit incorporated within or adjacent to a single family structure. Accessory dwelling units may not be subdivided or otherwise segregated in ownership from the primary residence structure. 

(b) 	
Existing Single-family Dwelling - Single-family dwelling units for which permits for construction of the principal dwelling were finalized (occupancy approved) at least three years prior to application for accessory dwelling unit. 

(c) 	
Owner Occupancy - A site which a property owner, as reflected in title records, makes his or her legal residence, as evidenced by voter registration, vehicle registration, or similar means, and actually resides at the site more than six months out of any given year, and at no time receives rent for the owner-occupied unit. 



810.2 Requirements 
In the Historic Preservation Overlay District (H-P), one accessory dwelling unit is permitted as subordinate to an existing single-family dwelling provided the following criteria are met: 
(a) 	
Location - Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in structures detached from the primary residence, including but not limited to guest cottages, detached garages, or workshops; 

(b) 	
Occupancy by Property Owner - Either the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit must be occupied by an owner; 

(c) 	
Number of Occupants - The total number of occupants in both the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit combined may not exceed the maximum number established by the definition of family in Article II; 


APPROVED ARTICLE VIE - PAGE 2 Rec. by: 62 Date: — /2 0y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(d) 	Size of the Unit - The accessory dwelling unit shall contain not less than 300 square feet and not more than 800 square feet, excluding any related garage area; provided, if the accessory unit is completely located on a single floor, the Building Official may allow increased size in order to efficiently use all floor area, so long as all other standards set forth in this section are met; 
(1).The square footage of the accessory dwelling unit, excluding any garage area, shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total square footage of the primary residence and accessory dwelling unit combined, excluding any garage area. 
(e) 	
Parking - There shall be one off-street parking space provided for the accessory dwelling unit, which is in addition to any off-street spaces required for the primary residence. 

(f) 	
Entrance to the Unit - The construction of a second entry door facing on a street front for entrance into an accessory unit is prohibited; new entrances not facing on a street front are permitted on the sides and rear of a house, or on a front side facing on a street where no other door exists; provided that existing single family structures with two or more entry doors facing on a street shall not be prohibited from using one of those doors to access the accessory unit. 

(g) 	
Building Codes - The accessory dwelling unit shall meet all building code standards including building, electrical, fire, and plumbing code requirements. 

(h) 	
Prohibition on Home Occupations - A lot may not contain both an accessory dwelling unit and a home occupation. 


810.3 Inspection and Registration 
(a) 	
Registration - Any property owner seeking to establish an accessory dwelling unit shall apply to register the unit with the Zoning Department. The property owner shall file a completed registration application form affirming that at least one owner will occupy the primary residence or the accessory unit and agreeing to the limits on total number of residents and other standards as provided above. 

(b) 	
Inspection - After receipt of a complete application form and prior to approval of any accessory dwelling unit, the City shall inspect the property to confirm that minimum and maximum size limits are met, required parking is provided, design limitations regarding front entrances are met, and building code standards are met. 


APPROVED.Rec. by:.Dale: J -0 y
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 3 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c) 	
Filing of Registration - The registration form or other form as required by the Zoning Department shall be filed as a deed restriction with the Lamar County Department Tax Assessor to provide notice of the presence of the accessory dwelling unit, the requirement of owner occupancy, and other standards for maintaining the unit as described above. 

(d) 	
Report to the City Council - The Zoning Department shall report annually on accessory dwelling unit registration, number of units and distribution throughout the city, average size of units, and number and type of complaint and enforcement related actions. 

(e) 	
Cancellation of Registration - Cancellation of the accessory unit's registration may be accomplished by the property owner filing a certificate with the Zoning Department for recording at the Lamar County Tax Assessor or may occur as a result of enforcement action. The cancellation certificate will confirm that the residence has reverted to use as a single dwelling. 


Section 820 -Automobile Service Stations & Convenience Stores 
820.1 Location 
The building in which an automobile service station or convenience store is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, day care center, or personal care home. 

820.2 Site Requirements 
An automobile service station or convenience store shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 120 feet and a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines, and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines. 

820.3 Access to Site 
Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station: 
(a) 	
Shall not be provided with more than two (2) curb cuts for the first 120 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 

Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more

(b) 
than 40 feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and 
shall not be located less than 20 feet from a street intersection or closer than 10 feet from the adjoining property. 

(c) 	
Shall not have any two (2) driveways, or curb cuts, any less than 20 feet apart at both the right-of-way line and the curb of edge of the pavement 


ARTICLE VIII -PAGE 4. APPROVED ReC. by: 0a Date: H2 —°‘1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
along a single street. 




820.4 Gasoline Pump Islands 
All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line; and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line; However, the pumps shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the centerline of an arterial street, fifty-five (55) feet from the centerline of a collector street, and forty-five (45) feet from the centerline of other streets. 

820.5 Off-Street Parking 
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 

820.6 Other Site Improvements 
In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
(a) 	
A raised curb of at least 6 inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 

(b) 	
A solid fence or wall 6 feet in height shall be erected along all property lines abutting any adjacent residential lot. 

(c) 	
Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away form 
adjacent properties and streets. 


(d) 	
Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 

(e) 	
All drives, parking storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 


Section 830 - Cemeteries 
Cemeteries shall comply with the following requirements: 
The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development
(a) 
of a system of collector of larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In 
addition such site shall have direct access to a publicly dedicated street. 
(b) 	Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres. 
APPROB 
ARTICLE VIII -PAGE 5 	Rec.VI:LE_Date: ( (11-e>4. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c) 	
All structures shall be set back no less than 35 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 35 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line. 

(e) 	
The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 

(f) 	
A public hearing shall be held by the City of Barnesville prior to approval of any new cemetery. 


Section 840 -Home Occupations 
840.1 Intent 
Regulations for home occupations are intended to provide categories of use such that permitted home occupations can be better matched to the character of the zoning district in which they are allowed. The term home occupation is understood to mean all categories of home occupations, including home businesses and residential businesses. 
(a) 	
Home occupations shall be subject to the conditions set forth below. In districts where a home occupation requires Conditional Use approval by the City Council, the applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the City that these conditions have been met. 

(b) 	
- The applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed home occupation demonstrating that it will comply with each of the conditions applicable for the specific type of occupation. 

(c) 	
The business must be owned by the owner of the property on which the home occupation is located. 

(d) 	
The home occupation and dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes. 


Home occupations, as defined, may be established in a dwelling in any residential district if approved as being appropriate with regard to transportation and access, water supply, waste disposal, fire, and police protection, and other public facilities; as not causing undue traffic congestion or creating a traffic hazard; as not being bothersome, noisy or producing undue odor; and as being in harmony with the orderly nature of the neighborhood and not interfering with the integrity and peace of the residential district. The following requirements shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements of this ordinance for the residential district in which such uses are located: 
APPROVED
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 6 
Rec. by:.Data:.y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. B) No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. C) Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. D) No machinery that causes noises or other interferences in radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
E) 	No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used primarily for commercial purposes. 
F) Instruction in music, dance, arts, and crafts, and similar subjects shall be limited to six (6) students at one time. G) Not more than twenty-five (25) per cent of the total floor area of any dwelling is 
to be used for such home occupations. 
There shall be no storage or sale of merchandise, stock-in-trade, or commodities 
on the premises. 

I).Home occupations shall register and pay all applicable fees. The business must be owned by the owner of the property on which the home occupation is located. The business owner must be the primary resident of the 
location. K) The business shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles. L) No one other than family members who reside on the premises may be employed 
in the business. M) The business or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling. N) Existing home occupations that are in violation are considered nonconforming 
and are allowed to continue with the following limitations: a) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. b) Enlarged or expanded beyond current capacity. c) Reestablished after discontinuance for ninety (90) days. 
MOM
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 7 
Rec by _O_DA.L.L2_,T 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 850 Manufactured Homes 


850.1 Permitted Zones for Manufactured Homes 
Manufactured homes are permitted only in R-3 zoning districts. 

850.1 General Standards - Applicable to All Manufactured Homes 
The following standards shall apply to all types of manufactured home located in the City of Barnesville after adoption of this Ordinance: 
(a) 	
Compliance with Applicable Laws - All manufactured homes must be installed in compliance with RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES, Chapter 120-3-7, including Appendix "A," and any amendments thereto, made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in O.C.G.A. Sec. 8-2-132, 8-2-133, 8-2-135, 8-2-137(b), 8-2-161, 8-2-165, 8-2-168, and 25­2-1 et seq. All manufactured homes shall comply with City of Barnesville ordinances and regulations, including the building, gas, plumbing, electric codes as adopted by the City of Barnesville. 

(b) 	
Minimum Construction Standards - Each newly installed mobile home/manufactured home in the City of Barnesville shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development, as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C., Section 5401, et seq., before that mobile home/manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said mobile home/manufactured home. It is the intent of this Section to prohibit moving mobile homes/manufactured homes into Barnesville that do not conform to the applicable Housing and Urban Development Construction Standards, as expressed in 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no mobile home/manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this city unless that mobile home/manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the 


U.S. Housing and Urban Development, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanently affixed label or tag certifying the compliance as required by 42 U.S.C. Section 5415. Mobile homes/manufactured homes that do not display the certification required by 42 U.S.C. Section 5415 shall not be eligible for a city building or occupancy permit; provided, however, that any mobile home that legally exists in Barnesville at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall not require said certification. 
(c).Permit Requirement - Any owner of a mobile/manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said mobile home/manufactured home shall obtain a permit from the Building Official indicating compliance with all 
.
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 8 
APPROVED Rec. by: D Z Da;.-oY 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed mobile/manufactured home. 
(d) 	
Location Disclosure and Decal Requirement - Every person holding title to or possessing a mobile home/manufactured home that is placed or located within the limits of the City of Barnesville, shall report the location to and obtain a location decal for such mobile/manufactured home from the Tax Commissioner of Lamar County annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designed in such a manner and affixed to the mobile/manufactured home as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 

(e) 	
Removal of Tongue, etc. - Any tongue, wheels, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus shall be removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 

(f) 	
Landing Area - A porch or landing of a width and length greater than or equal to the width of the entrance shall be provided at each entrance door. The landing area shall be a minimum of 4'x 4' with railing and steps. 

(g) 	
Foundation - All manufactured homes shall be completely underpinned and skirted with masonry, or other manufacturer's underpinning kits. Such skirting/underpinning shall completely enclosed the undercarriage. 

(h) 	
Exterior Siding - The exterior siding shall not have a high-gloss finish and shall have the appearance of wood or other siding in common residential use. No metallic siding is permitted. 

(i) 	
Roof - The roof materials shall be of wood shakes, asphalt composition, 


-wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials or other materials predominant in site-built residential construction as approved by the Building Official. 
Tie-downs - All manufactured homes must be equipped with tie-down bands and shall be anchored securely and shall be able to withstand winds of one hundred (100) miles per hour. 
Temporary Usage - A single manufactured unit or travel trailer may be used for an office by the developer for a period not to exceed six (6) months, upon written approval from the Building Official. 
Non-conforming Use - A mobile/manufactured home that has been continuously and legally located in Barnesville since the adoption of this Ordinance shall be allowed to remain in its current location if the following conditions are met: 
(1) 	
All advalorem taxes on the unit have been timely paid in full; and 

(2) 	
The Building Official finds that the unit is in compliance with all ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 9. 


APPROVER Ret.byjiaDatt:_-_:° 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
building, gas, electrical, housing, mechanical, and fire prevention codes of the City of Barnesville. 
Section 860 -Manufactured Home Parks 
Manufactured home parks and manufactured homes within such parks are subject to the requirements of this subsection. 
860.1 Permit Requirements 
(a).Park Construction Permit Required - In any district where manufactured home parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit to the Building Official a site plan or the park subject to the conditions of this section. No person shall proceed with the construction of a manufactured housing park or trailer park until an application for the construction of such park has been reviewed by the Building Official, and, upon approval of the application and site plan, a permit to construct the proposed park, hereinafter referred to as the park construction permit, has been issued. The application for a permit to construct a manufactured housing park shall include the following: 
(1) 	
The name and address of the applicant. 

(2) 	
The location and legal description of the property upon which the park is proposed to be placed. 

(3) 	
A complete plan of the proposed park at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one (1) inch and showing the shape, area, and size of the site; street and driveway layout, including distance notations; the location and grouping of manufactured housing lot stands and accessory buildings; the placement and sizes of utilities; all manufactured housing lot boundaries and other data pertinent to the requirement of this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed, or to be constructed, within the manufactured housing park. 

(5) 	
Such further information as may be requested by the Building Official to facilitate the determination of whether the proposed park will comply with all legal requirements. The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. No park construction permit shall be issued except in accordance with this Ordinance. 


(b).Pei.mit Expiration - If no substantial construction progress has been made 
APPROVED ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 10.Rec.b D2 Date,":1:2Lo 
within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the park construction 
permit, the permit becomes invalid and must be renewed. For the purpose 
of this section, "substantial construction" includes final site grading and 
the installation of utilities and is considered to be approximately forty 
percent (40%) of total site improvements. 
(c) 	
Building Permit Required - No person shall park a manufactured home on an individual lot until a building permit therefore has been issued by the Building Official. No manufactured housing building permit shall be issued expect in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(d) 	
Certificate of Occupancy Required - A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Official is required in advance of the use or occupancy of manufactured homes on manufactured home lots in approved manufactured home parks. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot of building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a propriety or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 




860.2 General Standards 
Manufactured home parks must meet the following standards: 
(a) 	
Compliance with Other Laws - No manufactured home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws and regulations of the city. 

(b) 	
Minimum Rental Period - No space shall be rented for residential use of a manufactured home in any such park except for periods of thirty (30) days or more. 

(c) 	
Initial Occupancy of Park - The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be thirty (30) spaces. 

(d) 	
Site Requirements - The park shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to insure drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, the possibility of insect or rodent infestation or other adverse influences. 

(e) 	
Water Supply - An adequate supply of pure, potable water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and manufactured housing lots within the park. Each manufactured housing stand shall be provided with an approved cold water connection and a tap (hydrant), constructed in accordance with the plumbing standards adopted by the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 


APPROIED ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 11.Rec.byl__OZ,Daie:12 
(g).Sanitation - Each park shall provide at a minimum the following sanitation facilities and services: 
(1) 	
Refuse Collection Station - One refuse collection station shall be provided for each twenty (20) families or fraction thereof If individual refuse containers are used on the manufactured home site, they shall be inconspicuously located. 

(2) 	
Environmental Control - The area around and underneath each manufactured home shall be kept clean and free from collections of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly material. 

(3) 	
Sewage Disposal - Each manufactured housing stand shall be provided with a sanitary sewer of at least 4 inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive all waste from the manufactured home. The sewer in each manufactured housing stand shall be connected to discharge the waste into a sewer system which meets the health requirements of the State of Georgia and the City of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(4) 	
Sewage Drain Connections - Manufactured housing drain connections shall be of approved semi-rigid and non-collapsible hose, having smooth interior surfaces and no less than 3 inches outside diameter, nor less in size than the manufactured housing outlet. Drain connections shall be equipped with a standard screw-or clamp-type fitting. While a manufactured housing stand is not occupied or the drain is not used, the sewer opening shall be closed with an approved closure or cap. 


(h).Fire Protection - Every manufactured housing park shall have adequate fire protection system with water pressure and fire hydrants of such type, size, number, and location as to satisfy applicable regulations of the Barnesville Fire Department currently in force, provided further that not open fires or burning or of trash, leaves, or other refuse shall be permitted within the boundaries of any manufactured housing park without a permit from the Barnesville Fire Department. 
860.3 Park Service Facilities 
Manufactured home parks are permitted to have an office and storage facilities. 

860.4 Buffers and Landscaping 
(a).Buffers - A buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet wide shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the manufactured home park. Such buffer strips shall not be included within any individual manufactured home lot. This buffer strip shall be increased to a width of thirty-five (35) feet when the park is located adjacent to property that is 
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 12 
PRON5 
..0__L_Da‘/_-_-_/.2.,_:(9kir
Rec 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
improved with a permanent residential dwelling or a property zoned for a single family residence. This strip must be densely planted with fast growing evergreen shrubs. 
. 
(b) 	Landscaping - Each manufactured home park shall be landscaped with shade trees and exterior screen planting of at least twenty-five (25) trees per acre and fifty (50) plants per acre. 


860.5 Streets 
Manufactured home parks shall comply with the following street standards: 
(a).Internal Streets 
(1) 	
The system of streets in manufactured home parks shall extend continuously from the existing improved street system providing access to the site. This system shall provide suitable access to all manufactured home spaces and other important facilities on the property, adequate connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the property, and convenient circulation for vehicles. 

(2) 	
All interior streets shall be shown by name, width of easement, and type of surfacing on the development plan or plat of each manufactured housing park; provided that street pavement widths for manufactured housing parks shall be governed by Sections 


860.6 (b) and 860.6 (c) below. 
. 

(b) 	Ingress and Egress Streets - The streets connecting a manufactured housing park with and serving as ingress and egress systems to adjoining thoroughfares, shall be shown by width of easement and type of surfacing on the development plan or plat of each park; provided that the pavement width of such streets will be a minimum of 20 feet for streets providing two-way traffic or 14 feet for one-way traffic, and provided further that there shall be at least two (2) such ingress and egress streets connecting any new manufactured housing park with adjoining public streets. 
(c).Interior Driveways - All manufactured housing lots shall abut upon an interior driveway with a pavement width of at least 20 feet for streets providing two-way traffic or 14 feet for streets providing one-way traffic. 

860.6 Parking Spaces 
The following minimum standards shall apply to parking spaces in manufactured home parks: 
(a).Car parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the needs of the property and their guests without interference with normal 
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 13 

Ret..tri.Ote:_h 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
movement of traffic. Such facilities should be provided at the rate of at 
least one car space for each manufactured home lot plus an additional car 
space for each four (4) lots to provide for guest parking, for two-car 
tenants, and for delivery and service vehicles. 
(b).Required car parking spaces should be located for convenient access to the manufactured home stands. Usually one car space should be located on each lot and the remainder located in adjacent parking bays. 
860.7 Area Regulations for Manufactured Home Parks The following area regulations apply to manufactured home parks: 
(a) 	
Minimum acreage per park - 5 acres. 

(b) 	
Maximum acreage per park - 25 acres. 

(c) 	
Minimum lot width for portion of lot used for park entrance and exit - 50 ft. 

(d) 	
Setbacks - No manufactured home shall be located less than 20 feet from any road of street within the park, nor less than 40 feet from the right-of­way line of any street adjacent to the park. In no case shall any manufactured home be in the right of way. 


860.8 Area Regulations for Manufactured Home Space or Stand Within Manufactured Home Parks. 
(a) 	
Minimum space size: 5,000 sq. ft. 

(b) 	
Minimum frontage: 40 ft (measured at front property line) 

(c) 	
Minimum width: 40 ft. (measured at the front building line) 

(d) 	
Minimum side yard: 8 ft. 

(e) 	
Minimum front yard: 20 ft. 
Minimum rear yard: 10 ft.


(f) 


860.9 Non-conforming Manufactured Housing Parks 
The expansion of enlargement shall be allowed to a Non-conforming manufactured 
housing park except with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
The expansion shall not cause the total area to exceed 25 acres. 

(b) 	
Each new manufactured housing lot shall meet or exceed the minimum PROVED , 


y
ARTICLE VIII - PAGE 14 	Rec _a_Z_Date /—/-2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
dimensional standards for lots and yards prescribed by Section 860.9 above. 
Section 870 -Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds 
In any district where recreational vehicle parks are permitted, the applicant must submit a site plan for approval by the Building Official complying with the following standards: 
(a).Access to Public Streets - No recreational vehicle park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state, or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
. 
(b) 	Minimum Lot Size - The minimum lot area per recreational vehicle park shall be 3 acres, with a maximum density of 10 spaces per acre and with all sanitary facilities provided. 
(c).Setbacks for Vehicle Spaces - No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 100 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, arterial or major collector street, or within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any minor collector or local street. 
(d).Park Facilities - Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided: 
(1) 	Such establishments and the parking area related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent (10 %) of the 
park. 
(2) 	Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of 
the park. 
Such establishments shall meet the screening requirements set
(3) 
forth in section 550 of this Ordinance and shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract 
customers other than the occupants of the park. 
.
Health Department Certificate Required - In addition to meeting the above
(e) 
requirements, the recreational vehicle park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of the Lamar County Health Department. 
ARTICI.E VIlI - PAGE 15 APPROVED Rec. by: 02 Dale: f-/-2.--c9 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
. 
(f) 	Rental Time Limit - Spaces in recreational vehicle parks may be rented and used by recreational vehicles provided that they meet any additional laws and ordinances of the City Council and shall be rented by the day or week only; an occupant of such space shall remain in the same recreational vehicle park for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
Rec. by: l)? 
ARTICLE VIII -PAGE 16 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE IX - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 




Section 900 - Intent 
The intent and purpose of this Article is to establish general guidelines for the sitting of commercial telecommunications towers and antennas. The goals of this Article are to: 
(i) encourage the location of such telecommunication towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community, (ii) encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites, (iii) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal, (iv) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas, and (v) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, and efficiently. 
Section 910 - Applicability 
910.1 District Height Limitations 
The requirements set forth in this Article shall govern the location of telecommunication towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to telecommunications towers and antennas. 

910.2 Public Property 
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Barnesville shall be exempt from the requirements of the Article, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the City of Barnesville. 

910.3 Amateur Radio­, Receive-Only Antennas 
This Article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 

910.4 Pre-Existing Towers and Antennas 
Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Article, other than the requirements of Sections 920.6 and 920.7 below. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this Ordinance as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas". 
APPROVED
ARTICLE a-PAGE 1 
Rec.by:DZ..-01k( 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 

920 -General Standards 
920.1 Principal or Accessory Use 
Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to set-back requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a Non-conforming use of structure. 

920.2 Setbacks and Separation 
The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance: 
(a) 	
Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 

(b) 	
Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirement. 

(c) 	
Towers over ninety (90) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing tower that is over ninety (90) feet in height. 



920.3 Security Fencing 
Towers and any equipment buildings and support equipment (tower compound) shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 

920.4 Screening and Landscaping 
The following requirement shall govern the screening and landscaping surrounding tower compounds: 
(a) 	The tower compound shall be screened with a tight evergreen hedge not less than 6 feet in height. The hedge shall be planted around the perimeter of the compound and shall consist of evergreen trees and/or shrubs that will normally obtain a height of eight (8) feet within five (5) years. 
In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the
(b) 
landscaping requirement may be reduced by the Code Enforcement Official.. 
APPROVED ARTICLE IX - PAGE 2. 7Dale. j2 -0 y
Rec.1* 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c).Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient screening. 
920.5 Aesthetics; Lighting 
The lighting and appearance of telecommunication towers and antennas shall comply with the following standards; provided, however, that the City Council may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this ordinance are better served thereby. 
(a) 	
Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 

(b) 	
At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 

(c) 	
If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 

(d) 	
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 



920.6 Federal Requirements 
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such federal standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations. 

920.7 Building Codes: Safety Standards 
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in the city Building Code and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Building Official 
APPROVED 
ARTICLE IX - PAGE 3.Rec. by: 02 Date: j- r2 -oy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the City Council may remove such tower at the owners expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. Sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 

920.8 Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the City Council notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said (90) days, the City Council may, in the manner provided in Sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 of the Official Code of Georgia, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
Section 930 - Permitted Uses 
The following telecommunications facilities are permitted uses in the I and C-4 Districts: 
(a) 	
Installing an antenna on an existing non-residential structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free­standing nonresidential structure) that is fifty (50) feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure; and 

(b) 	
Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a preexisting tower, provided, however, that such specific permitted use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. 


Section 940 -Uses Requiring Administrative Approval 
940.1 Uses Covered 
The following telecommunications facilities are permitted in the I and C-4 Districts upon receipt of administrative approval by the Building Official after conducting an administrative review: 
APPROVED 
R. by: 62 Date: 1 --a-0y ARTICLE IX - PAGE 4 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(a) 	
Installing an antenna on an existing non-residential structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free­standing nonresidential structure) that is fifty (50) feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure; 

(b) 	
Installing an antenna on any preexisting tower, or on an existing tower of any height that requires the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure; 





940.2 Administrative Approval Process 
The Building Official may administratively approve the uses listed in Section 940.1 above based on the following procedures: 
(a) 	
Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Building Official, providing the information set forth in Sections 960.1 and 960.2 below. 

(b) 	
The Building Official shall respond to each such application within thirty 

(30)
 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the Building Official fails to respond to the applicant within said thirty 

(30)
 days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved. 


Section 950 -Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit 
The following conditional uses that require approval by the City Council pursuant to Article XI, Section 1125: 
(a) 	
Locating a tower, including the placement of equipment buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower, in the I or C-4 zoning districts: provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance equal to the height of the tower. Towers are prohibited in districts other than I and C-4 after the effective date of this Ordinance. 

(b) 	
Locating any alternatives tower structure in an I or C-4 zoning district. Alternative tower structures are prohibited in districts other than I and C-4 after the effective date of this Ordinance. 

(c) 	
In any zone other than the I and C-4 districts, installing an antenna on an existing non-residential structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing nonresidential structure), regardless of height so long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure. 


APPROVED 
Rec. by: 0 Z Da l --/2-6 y
ARTICLE DC - PAGE 5 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 960 -Application Contents 
960.1 General 
Each applicant requesting a Conditional Use Permit or administrative approval under this Article shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the Building Official to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 

960.2 Inventory of Existing Sites 
Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide to the Building Official an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdictional boundary of the City of Barnesville or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The Building Official may share such information with other applicants applying for land use approvals and permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the corporate limits of the City of Barnesville, provided, however that the Building Official is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable, 
970 -Permit Approval 
970.1 Availability of Suitable Existing Towers or Structures 
No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Building Official that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower of structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(a) 	
No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 

Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet

(b) 

applicant's engineering requirements. 

(c) 	
Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 


nAPPROVED Rec. by: tJZ Date: /- / 2-0 y ARTICLE IX — PAGE 6 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(d) 	
The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interconference interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 

(e) 	
The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an exiting tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 

(f) 	
The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 





970.2 Factors Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits 
The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a Conditional Use Permit for telecommunication facility: 
(a) 	
Height of the proposed tower; 

(b) 	
Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 

(c) 	
Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 

(d) 	
Surrounding topography; 

(e) 	
Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 

(f) 	
Proposed ingress and egress; 

(g) 	
Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in Section 970.1 above; and 

(h) 	
Whether the tower is designed to accommodate antennas of additional future users. 





AWED 
Rec. by:k2Datej.:11-`0(k 
ARTICLE IX - PAGE 7 

City of Barnesville, Georgia Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE X -SIGNS 

Section 1000 – Purpose 
The purpose of this Article is to permit signs that will not by reason of size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals, confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, and welfare of the community; and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to protect the significant natural visual assets of the community, create orderly, uncluttered, commercial corridors and commercial districts, and otherwise support and complement the land use objectives set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance. The regulations set forth below shall apply to and govern the maintenance of existing and erection of future signs in all zoning districts in the City of Barnesville. 
Section 1010 – Definitions 
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms have the meanings set forth below: 
1. 	
Area of Sign -the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which is placed. The sign area of painted or affixed wall signs when composed of letters only is the sum of the areas of the smallest contiguous rectangles each capable of containing one such letter. 

2. 	
Banner -a sign with or without characters, letter, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. 

3. 	
Business Sign -any notice of advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, that directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 

4. 	
Changeable Copy Sign -A sign that is erected so that characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or arranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. 

5. 	
Construction Sign -a sign erected and maintained on premises announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building(s) or project. 

6. 	
Display Surface -the area of the sign structure used for the purpose of displaying a message, also known as the "sign face". 

7. 	
Double-faced Sign -a sign that has two (2) display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees of less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 

8. 	
Event Sign -a sign that directs patrons, members, or audiences to temporary exhibits, shows, or events. 

9. 
Façade – An exterior side of a building. The Principal Facade is the exterior wall where the primary entrance is located. 


1| Page 
10. 	
Fascia Sign – Is a wall sign that is affixed to or painted onto a flat horizontal space of a building facade which does not encroach upon or diminish any architectural element of the building. 

11. 	
Flashing Sign -a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. Illumination signs that indicate only the time, temperature, or date shall not be considered as flashing signs. 

12. 	
Freestanding Sign -a sign attached to, erected on, or supported by a structure whose primary purpose is to support a sign and which is not itself an integral part of a building or other structure. A freestanding sign shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. 

13. 	
Frontage, Building -the width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a building. 

14. 	
Frontage, Lot -the width in linear feet of a lot where it adjoins a street. 

15. 	
Ground, Sign -a free-standing sign attached to a contiguous structural base or planter box, which base or box shall be of the same width as, or greater width that, the message portion of the sign, and is permanently affixed to the ground. Ground signs do not include free-standing signs supported by poles. A ground sign shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. 

16. 	
Height of Sign -the distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the-sign face in accordance with Section 1060.2 below. 

17. 	
Illuminated Sign, Direct -a sign designed to emit light. 

18. 	
Illuminated Sign, Indirect -a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 

19. 	
Off-Premises Sign -a sign that is not located upon the premises of the business or entity indicated or advertised by said sign. This includes products advertising in conjunction with a business entity. 

20. 	
Non-Illuminated Sign -a sign that is not directly or indirectly illuminated. 

21. 	
Off-Premises Directional Light -a sign that is not located upon the premises of the business or entity indicated on the sign and only for the purpose of directing traffic to business establishments, real-estate developments, public and private clubs, schools and other facilities. The advertising of products and/or services shall not be allowed on the sign structure. 

22. 	
On-Premises Sign -a sign that directs attention to anything on the same lot as the sign. 

23. 	
Plague -sign attached to a store front at approximately eye level, the size and shape thereof being dictated by the store front's pattern of architectural features and fenestration. 

24. 	
Portable Sign -a sign that is not permanently affixed, including but not limited to signs mounted or painted on vehicles that are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of an advertising device. 

25. 	
Political Sign -a sign identifying or urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 


2| Page 
26. 	
Projecting Sign -a sign attached to and supported by a building and extending beyond the building to which it is attached at an angle. 

27. 	
Real Estate Sign -a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or for sale. 

28. 	
Roof Signs -a sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof; or over the ridge of a gable, hip or gamble roof, and supported by or attached to said roof. 

29. 	
Sign -a device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 

30. 	
Sign Face -that part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 

31. 	
Temporary Sign -a sign of a non-permanent nature. All such signs shall be removed within two 

(2) days after the purpose for which the sign is intended to advertise has been accomplished. 

32. 	
Wall Sign -a sign attached to or painted on a wall or building, with the exposed display surface of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall to which it is attached or painted, and including signs affixed to or otherwise on or through a facade window. Wall signs include fascia signs and signs on canopies and awnings. 


Section 1020 -Permitting Requirements 
1020.1 Sign Permit Required 
Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this Article, a sign permit shall be required prior to the erection, alteration, reconstruction, or display of any sign within the City of Barnesville. Said permit shall be issued by the Building Official in accordance with these regulations and shall be issued by the Building Official only when the plans, specifications and intended use of the sign conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this Article and the City Building Code as certified by the Building Official. 

1020.2 Application Contents 
Sign applications shall include detailed plans, specifications, estimated cost of construction, statement of proposed use, and any other information required by this and all other provisions of this Article. Completed standard applications approved by the Building Official shall fulfill this requirement. At a minimum, all applications shall include a scale drawing specifying dimensions, materials, illumination, letter sizes, colors, support systems, and location on land or buildings, with all relevant measurements. 
(a) 	Indemnification Required -All sign applications shall contain an agreement, the form of which has been approved by the City Attorney, wherein the applicant shall indemnify the City against all damages, demands or expenses of any kind caused by the sign or sign structure. 
3| Page 

1020.3 Sign Fees 
No permit shall be issued until the exact dimensions, area and estimated cost of construction of the sign have been filed with the Building Official and fees have been paid as established by resolution by the Barnesville City Council. 

1020.4 Expiration of Permit for Uncompleted Sign 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within three (3) months after the date of issuance. 

1020.5 Identification Labels 
Every sign for which a permit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittee, and shall have the number of the permit affixed on the framework of the sign in the lower right hand area so that it is easily seen. 
Section 1030 Signs for Which a Permit is Not Required 
The signs enumerated in this section are exempt from sign permit requirements under this Article provided that such signs comply with the provisions of Section 1060 (General Requirements) below, and further provided that all signs using electrical wiring and connections shall require an electrical permit: 
(a) 	
Official signs of a non-commercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or on the order of a government or a public officer, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, and special events sanctioned or sponsored by the local government. 

(b) 	
Signs bearing only property identification numbers and names, post office box numbers, names of occupants of the premises on which the signs are located, or other identification or premises not of a commercial nature, provided such signs are not illuminated and do not exceed two (2) signs per zoning lot or two (2) square feet in area. 

(c) 	
Temporary non-illuminated real estate signs pertaining only to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises on which said signs are located, provided such signs do not exceed one sign per street frontage. Said sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per display surface for property zoned residential and shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per display surface for property zoned non-residential. Such signs shall not be located on any public right-of-way and shall be removed within the ten (10) days after the subject lot or building is rented, leased, or sold. 

(d) 	
Construction site identification signs whose message is limited to project name, identification of architects, engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, the name of the building, the intended purpose of the building, and the expected completion date, provided such signs do not exceed one sign per construction site and sixteen (16) square feet in area per display surface and further provided that such signs are not erected prior to issuance of a Building Permit, and are removed within seven (7) days of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 


4| Page 
(e) 	
Legal notices and official notices issued by any court, public agency, or officer. 

(f) 	
On-site directional signs on private property establishing safe and convenient ingress, egress and internal circulation for traffic and parking, provided there are no more than 8 such signs per site; that are not illuminated or are indirectly illuminated; that such signs are no more than 3 feet in height, with no more than four (4) square feet in area per display surface. Such signs shall not advertise any business, service or product and shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. 

(g) 	
Before any political sign is erected, the permission of the owner and/or agent of the owner of the property upon which the sign is proposed to be erected shall be obtained. Political signs shall not be permitted or allowed on public property or right of ways. 

(h) 	
Signs announcing yard or garage sales, provided such signs do not exceed one (1) sign per site of such sale. Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and may be posted two (2) days prior to sale and shall be removed the day after the sale. Signs announcing yard or garage sales shall not be permitted on public property or right of ways. 

(i) 	
Commemorative signs including tablets, plaques, cornerstones and incised names and construction dates of buildings. 

(j) 	
Temporary signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organizations provided such signs are posted not more than three (3) days before said event and removed the day after the event. These signs shall not be permitted on public property or right of ways 

(k) 	
Off-premises non-illuminated school, hospital, or other quasi-public signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area; provided that no such sign shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 

(l) 	
Signs stating that a business other than a home occupation is open, provided that there is no more than one such sign per business establishment, and provided that such sign does not exceed two (2) square feet in display area. Direct illuminated “OPEN” signs are authorized in all commercial districts. 

(m) 	
On-premises signs attached to the outside wall of any business establishment, in a commercial district, which are designed to identify services rendered, products sold, or activities conducted on the premises, provided that such signs shall be limited to one wall on the business establishment and further provided that the total of such signs shall not exceed one percent (1%) of the total area of the wall on which they are affixed. 

(n) 	
On-premises no trespassing, no hunting, and similar public notice type signs less than six 

(6) 
square feet in area, provided no such signs shall be allowed on any public right-of­way. 

(o) 	
Non-illuminating signs for Residential Business when affixed to the front wall of a residential structure announcing the operation of a permitted or approved Residential Business, provided that there shall be no more than (1) sign per Residential Business, and further provided that such sign shall not exceed 1 square foot in area per display surface 


5| Page 
with a maximum of two (2) sign surfaces, and a maximum height not to exceed the lintel of the primary entrance of the residence. 

Section 1040 -Temporary Sign Permits 
Temporary event and promotional signs are allowed only in commercial districts: 
(a) 	
Event Signs -Promotional -An on premises event or promotional sign to be attached to a building or beneath a canopy and that directs patrons, members, or audiences to temporary exhibits, shows, events, or promotions provided such sign shall not be posted any earlier than seven (7) days before the event, and shall be removed within two (2) days after the event. Commercial promotional event signs are restricted to 4 events per year per business and applicant must have current City of Barnesville business license. A promotional event permit is good for a maximum of ten (days). 

(b) 	
Event Signs -Initial Opening or Final Closing of Businesses -On-premises temporary signs relating to the initial opening or final closing of a business of service in commercial and industrial districts only, provided that such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the pavement of any street or on any public right-of-way. Such signs shall be approved for a maximum period of two 

(2) 
weeks for initial opening signs and four (4) weeks for final closing signs, after which they shall be removed. 


Section 1050 -Prohibited Signs 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(a) 	
Signs Imitating Warning Signal -No sign shall display intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop", "danger", or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that might mislead or confuse any automobile or other vehicular driver. 

(b) 	
Private Signs Within Public Street or Highway Right-of-Way or Other Public Property ­No sign whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic signs and signals and information signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way or on public property. No sign shall be placed so it will cause danger, either by obscuring a view, or otherwise. 

(c) 	
Flashing Signs -No signs that flash, blink, rotate, revolve have moving parts or visible bulbs may be erected. No signs containing reflective elements that sparkle or twinkle in the sunlight and no signs that contain luminous paint that glows in the dark may be erected. Signs indicating the current time and/or temperature are permitted provided they meet all other provisions of this Article. 

(d) 	
Obstructions -No advertising structure shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, or any window, or door, or openings used as a means of ingress and/or egress for firefighting purposes, or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; no sign shall be attached in any form, shape, or manner to a fire escape or be so placed as to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation. 

(e) 	
Certain Attached and Painted Signs -Signs shall not be painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, light standard, telephone, telegraph or other utility poles, or rocks or other natural features. 

(f) 	
Obscene Signs -Obscene signs are prohibited. 

(g) 	
Portable Signs -Portable signs, designed to be transported periodically from place to place, shall not be permitted in any district. 

(h) 	
Signs on the Property of Another -No sign shall be posted or placed on any property belonging to another without the written consent of the owner thereof. 

(i) 	
Fluttering Ribbons and Banners -Fluttering ribbons, streamers, pennants, banners or other similar devices shall not be constructed, posted or erected in any district. Exceptions include flags and buntings exhibited to commemorate patriotic holidays, and banners announcing charitable or civic events and temporary commercial promotional events for which a permit has been issued. 

(j) 	
Signs Near Intersections -No red, green, or yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of any traffic light. 

(k) 	
Roof Signs -Roof signs including signs painted on roofs are prohibited in all districts. 

(l) 	
Off Premises Signs – Off Premises signs are prohibited in all districts 


6| Page 
Section 1060 -General Requirements 
1060.1 Sign Area 
The area of a signs shall include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with any background, open or enclosed, which is part of the display itself. 
(a) 	
Wall Signs Affixed to Buildings -The area of a sign painted or applied to a building shall include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs or symbols. Wall signs shall consist of individual letters and/or symbols attached or painted on a surface, buildings, wall or window, and the sign area shall be considered to be the smallest rectangle or oval which encompasses all of the letters and symbols. 

(b) 	
Double-face Signs -In computing square footage of a double-face sign, only one side shall be considered, but only if both faces are identical. In "V" type sign structures, if the interior angle exceeds forty five (45) degrees, both sides shall be added in calculating square footage. 



1060.2 Measuring Sign Height 
The height of the sign shall be measured from the average ground level beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign. The ground level shall be the lower of the ground level existing at the time of construction or the ground level existing prior to construction and prior to any earth disturbance at the site. This prior ground level shall be established by any reliable source, including, without limitation, existing topographic maps, aerial photographs, photographs of the site, or affidavits of people who are 
7| Page 
personally familiar with the site. No persons shall artificially increase the maximum height of a sign by altering the grade at the base of the sign by any means. 

1060.3 Construction and Maintenance 
Construction and erecting of signs shall be in accordance with the building code of the City of Barnesville. Signs together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be constructed of durable materials, shall be kept in constant repair and shall not be permitted to become dilapidated. Unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, signs shall be given a protective coating as reasonably necessary. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 

1060.4 Lighting Requirements 
All signs shall adhere to the following lighting requirements: 
(a) 	
No exposed neon tubes -No sign that has exposed neon tubes or other exposed tubes containing luminescent gas shall be used outside a building. Existing neon signs in the C­1 district are grandfathered and allowed as long as they are maintained and functioning. 

(b) 	
No Illumination of Adjacent Properties -The light from illuminated signs shall not illuminate adjacent properties and roadways. 

(c) 	
No Illumination Within 50 ft. of Residential Zone -No illuminated signs are allowed within fifty (50) feet of any residential district or dwelling. 

(d) 	
No Simulation of Traffic Signals -No signs lighting shall simulate an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 

(e) 	
Exposed Wires -No sign may be erected or maintained with exposed electrical wires. 

(f) 	
Strings of Bulbs -Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday celebration. In addition, strings of clear bulbs may be permitted to decorate trees provided that such display does not interfere with neighboring land uses. 

(g) 	
Hours of illumination -No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11 P.M. and 6 


A.M. unless the premises on which it is located is open for business. 
(h) 	No Signs Hazardous to Pedestrians or Vehicles -Illumination devices shall be so placed and so filtered or shielded so that direct rays from the light source will not be cast into the eyes of a driver of a moving vehicle. Any illuminated sign or structure shall be so designed and placed as to prevent the direct light rays from being visible from any range. 

1060.5 Removal of Signs 
Any on-premises sign shall be removed by the owner within thirty (30) days after the owner vacates the premises. Obsolete signs must be removed by the property owner, developer, or former lessee of property upon which the sign is located within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the Code Enforcement Officer. A sign becomes obsolete when it conveys advertising or identification of non-existent services or uses, or when it is allowed to become dilapidated or is not maintained. 
8| Page 
Section 1070 -Signs Permitted in Specific Zoning Districts 
1070.1 Generally 
Except as otherwise provided for under this Article, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section, shall be prohibited in that district. 1070.2 Tables of Permitted Signs The following tables set forth the types of signs that are allowed upon issuance of a sign permit in 
accordance with section 1020 or 1040 above: 
Table 1 Permitted Signs in Residential and Agricultural Districts (A, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3) 
Type of Sign  Number of Signs Allowed  Maximum Display Area Per Sign  Maximum Height  Setback From Right-of-Way  
Identification of a Permitted Non-residential Use (1)  One Wall  1 square foot  6 feet  10 feet  
Real estate Signs six square Feet  One freestanding or Ground per main Entrance  6 square feet  6 feet  10 feet  
Residential development Identification Signs  One freestanding or ground per main entrance  16 square feet  6 feet  10 feet (2)  
Signs identifying Farm products Produced & sold On premises  One freestanding per lot  18 square feet  6 feet  10 feet  

(1)  Non-residential property only. No off-premises advertising signs allowed in these districts.  
(2)  In case a person desires to place a double-faced sign within a median at the entrance of the residential development, there will be no setback requirement if the Building Official determines such sign will not constitute a traffic hazard.  
(3)  Off Premises signs are prohibited in this district.  

9| Page 
Table 2 -Permitted Signs in Downtown Commercial District (C1) 
Type of Sign  Number of Signs Allowed  Maximum Display Area for Signs  Maximum Height  
Fascia Signs  One (1) Fascia sign per facade for each licensed business establishment.  Primary façade -5% of square footage of primary wall facade. (See note #1) Buildings with additional facades (Secondary Facade) – Signage is restricted to 16 square feet in area.  Fascia Signs on multi-story buildings shall be in the lintel space which separates the lower floor from the second floor. See placement restrictions.  
Canopy or Awning Signs  One (1) per facade  40% of front faces of canopy or awning. 60% of side faces.  Minimum 8 feet clearance above street, sidewalk, or ground  
Window Signs  Not specifically restricted  25% of total window area of first floor or 32 square feet per establishment, whichever is greater.  Ground floor windows only.  
Door Signs  2 per establishment  1.5 square feet each. Total 3 square feet maximum  n/a  
Projecting Signs  1 per establishment  9 square feet  Minimum 8 feet clearance above street, sidewalk, or ground.  
Special event signs  
Free Standing  1 per establishment  20 square feet  Height 10 feet  

(1)  In C1 District the maximum display area for signs shall be calculated based upon the square  
footage of the wall façade of the first story of the building.  
(2)  Off Premises signs are prohibited in this district  

SEE SECTION 1070.3 FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION – C-1 District 
10 | Page 
Table 3 -Permitted Signs in C-2, C-3 Commercial Districts, and Professional District (C-2, C-3 & P) 
Type of Sign  Number of Signs Allowed  Maximum Display Area for Signs  Maximum Height  
Fascia Signs  One (1) Fascia sign per facade  for each licensed business establishment.  Primary façade -5% of square footage of primary wall facade. (See note #1) Buildings with additional facades (Secondary Facade) – Signage is restricted to 16 square feet in area.  Fascia Signs on multi-story buildings shall be in the lintel space which separates the lower floor from the second floor. See placement restrictions.   
Canopy or Awning Signs  One (1) per facade  40% of front faces of canopy or awning. 60% of side faces.  Minimum 8 feet clearance above street, sidewalk, or ground  
Window Signs  Not specifically restricted  25% of total window area of first floor or 32 square feet per establishment, whichever is greater.  Ground floor windows only.  
Door Signs  2 per establishment  1.5 square feet each. Total 3 square feet maximum  n/a  
Projecting Signs  1 per establishment  9 square feet  Minimum 8 feet clearance above street, sidewalk, or ground.  
Special event signs  
Free Standing  1 per establishment  20 square feet  10 feet  

(1)  Messages on signs are limited to the name(s) trademark(s) and service mark(s) of the establishment(s) located on the zoning lot. No off-premises advertising signs permitted in these districts.  
(2)  Projecting signs must not project more than six (6) feet from the wall.  
(3)  Wall signs shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from front of building.  
(4)  Plaques shall be in visual harmony with the store front to which they are attached, and the plaque shall not be used in combination with any window surface painted treatment.  
(5)  Must comply with Section 1040 of this Article.  
(6)  Off Premises signs are prohibited in this district.  

11 | Page 
Table 4-Permitted Signs in Highway Commercial Districts (C-4) 
Type of Sign  Number of Signs Allowed  Maximum Display Area for Signs  Maximum Height  
Fascia Signs  One (1) Fascia sign per facade  for each licensed business establishment.  Primary façade -5% of square footage of primary wall facade. (See note #1) Buildings with additional facades (Secondary Facade) – Signage is restricted to 16 square feet in area.  Fascia Signs on multi-story buildings shall be in the lintel space which separates the lower floor from the second floor. See placement restrictions.   
Canopy or Awning Signs  One (1) per facade  40% of front faces of canopy or awning. 60% of side faces.  Minimum 8 feet clearance above street, sidewalk, or ground  
Window Signs  Not specifically restricted  25% of total window area of first floor or 32 square feet per establishment, whichever is greater.  Ground floor windows only.  
Door Signs  2 per establishment  1.5 square feet each. Total 3 square feet maximum  n/a  
Projecting Signs  1 per establishment  9 square feet  Minimum 8 feet clearance above street, sidewalk, or ground.  
Special event signs  
Free Standing  1 per access drive  48 square feet  15 feet  

(1) 	
Messages on signs are limited to the name(s) trademark(s) and service mark(s) of the establishments located on the zoning lot. Gasoline stations may have one additional on-premises sign displaying the brand of gasoline sold at the gasoline station; provided that the sign is no larger than forty-eight (48) square feet in area and no greater than 10 feet in height. Off-premises advertising signs are allowed only in accordance with footnote (4) below. 

(2) 	
Wall signs shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from front of building. 

(3) 	
Must comply with Section 1040 of this Article. 

(4) 	
Off-premises signs are prohibited in this district. 


12 | Page 



Table 5 -Permitted Signs in Industrial & Manufacturing District 
(I) 
Type of Sign  Number of Signs  Maximum  Maximum Height  Setback from  
Allowed  Display Area Per  Right-Of-Way  
Sign  
Development Identification signs (1)  1 ground sign at each access point  By Permit of City Council  By Permit of City Council  By Permit of City Council  
Five percent of the  
Non—Residential  square footage of  
building  One wall sign per  the front of the  No higher than the  
identification signs  building  building up to a  top of the wall  
(2)  maximum of forty  
square feet  
Identification signs  
for individual non­residential  One wall sign per business  15 square feet  No higher than the top of the wall  
establishments (3)  

(1) 	
Messages on signs are limited to the name(s), trademark(s), and service(s) of the establishment(s) located on the zoning lot. Gasoline stations may have one additional on-premises sign displaying the brand of gasoline sold at the gasoline station; provided that the sign is no larger than forty-eight (48) square feet in area and no greater than 10 feet in height. Off-premises advertising signs are allowed only in accordance with footnote (4) below. 

(2) 	
Wall signs shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from front of building. 

(3) 	
Must comply with Section 1040 of this Article. 

(4) 	
Off-premises advertising is allowed only on U.S. or State Routes. 


13 | Page 
1070.3 Downtown Commercial District (C1) 
(a) 
Shape – C1 Signs should typically be square or rectangular; provided, however, this shall not prevent the approval of individual signs that may be circular or some other shape, or shaped like a particular object (e.g., a sign in the shape of a shoe for a shoe store) if relevant. 

(b) 
Illumination of Signs. – C1 

(1) 
Internally illuminated signs (also referred to as “backlighted”and “direct lighted” signs) are not permitted in the C1 District except as authorized by Section 1030 (L). Internally illuminated or backlighted canopies or awnings are not permitted in the C1 District. 

(2) 
Neon lighting is not permitted in the area subject to this ordinance. 

(3) 
No animated, flashing or electronically changeable copy signs shall be permitted. 

(4) 
No colored lights shall be used. 

(5) 
If signs are illuminated, they shall be externally lit. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded or recessed so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or sidewalk. 



(c) 
Fascia Signs – C1 

(1) 
Fascia signs shall be mounted flush against the facade of the building in proximity to the front entryway of the unit. Fascia signs shall be located on flat, unadorned parts of the building façade. In no case shall a fascia sign be allowed to cover any architectural features, details, ornamentation and/or elements. Buildings with more than one frontage or façade shall be limited to sixteen (16) square feet of the total area of signage on each of the secondary building facades or frontages. 

(2) 
Appropriate locations for fascia signage on buildings with more than one story shall be in the lintel space which separates the first floor storefront from the upper floor, and the space above the transom in the first floor storefront, where one exists. Fascia signs shall be located on flat, unadorned parts of the building façade, somewhere above storefront display windows (where they exist) and below second-story windows (where they exist). If the building façade or storefront has a lintel strip or signboard, the wall sign should be placed directly on it. Wall signs should be located centrally on the façade. Sign boards should not exceed two and one half (2.5) feet in height. 

(3) 
No sign shall be permitted that, when mounted flush against the façade of the building, protrudes more than six (6) inches from the façade. 




14 | Page 
(d) 
Canopy and Awning Signs – C1 

Storefront awnings (see figure) should be positioned either above the display window and below the transom window(s), or above both the display and transom windows but below the sign board area, cornice, or spandrel, where these architectural features exist. Signs should be silk-screened or sewn onto the awning fabric, and they should be placed on the valance of the awning. Signs on canopies should be located on the primary face or top edge (or front-angled or sloped part) of canopies. 

(e) 
Window Signs – C1 

(1) 
Window signs may be displayed on or in display windows on the ground floor only. Window signs in upper facade windows are not permitted. 

(3) 
No window advertising sign shall extend from one window to another. 

(4) 
In no case shall any window sign be installed above the level of first floor windows. 

(5) 
Window signs are limited to one sign per window and the total area is as defined in Table 1. 

(6) 
Window signs should be placed approximately three and one-half (3.5) feet to six (6) feet above the sidewalk. 

(7) 
Window signs should not extend within eighteen (18) inches from the top or bottom of the display window glass. 




(f). Projecting Signs – C1 
(1) 
Projecting signs are permissible, but may be restricted if other alternatives (wall, window, door, and awning) signs are also present or proposed. If a projected sign is authorized, it shall meet the specifications of this section. 

(2) 
Projecting signs are typically placed near the entry door. 

(3) 
Projecting signs shall project perpendicularly from the building. 

(4) 
Projecting signs shall be secured in place with a frame mount assembly. 

(5) 
Projecting signs do not necessarily have to be entirely stationary; they may be suspended from an awning or similar type structure or affixed to a bracket-mount to the building or structure in a manner where the sign face sways; such motion shall not make a swinging sign a prohibited animated sign. 

(6) 
All projecting signs shall have a ground clearance of no less than eight (8) feet above the lowest ground elevation. 

(7) 
Such signs shall project no more than forty-eight (48) inches from the building face. 

(8) 
Projecting signs shall be limited to one (1) per business or establishment. 


15 | Page 
(9) 
No projecting sign shall exceed an area of nine (9) square feet per sign face. 

(10) 
Projecting signs shall not be illuminated. 

(11) 
If applicable, projecting signs shall obtain an encroachment permit from the City Council. 


(g). Door Signs – C1 
(1) 
Signs on doors shall be located on or in the glazing of the doors. 

(2) 
There shall be no more than two (2) door signs for any individual business or establishment. 

(3) 
The maximum area for any individual door sign shall be one and one-half (1 ½) square feet. 

(4) 
There shall be a maximum of three (3) square feet total area of door signs allowed for any single business or establishment. 


(i) 
Removal of Signs – C1 

Any on-premises sign shall be removed by the owner within thirty (30) days after the owner vacates the premises. Obsolete signs must be removed by the property owner, developer, or former lessee of property upon which the sign is located within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the Code Enforcement Officer. A sign becomes obsolete when it conveys advertising or identification of non-existent services or uses, or when it is allowed to become dilapidated or is not maintained. All signs not complying with these regulations within the Downtown Commercial District shall be deemed to be nonconforming.  A nonconforming sign shall be removed or brought into conformance with this section when a principal use existing at the time of adoption of this section changes. 

(j) 
Sign Material – C1 


Materials and colors should be selected which are compatible with the architecture of the building and the character of the area. For signs in historic areas consideration shall be given to how materials fit into the surrounding streetscape. Signs of wood, either painted or carved are generally acceptable. 

1070.5 Planned Center Signs 
Planned centers including shopping centers, malls, office parks and other complexes designed as a unified entity shall be permitted the following signs: 
(a) 	
One (1) free-standing sign per street frontage if access is available from that street. Individual businesses within the Planned Center shall not be authorized an individual free-standing sign but are allowed Wall Signs. The size and height of free-standing signs shall be in accordance with the provision of Section 1070.2 -Table of Permitted Signs. 

(b) 	
On-site directional signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area per sign face with a maximum of two sign faces and not more than thirty-six inches in height. A maximum of eight (8) on-site directional signs per Planned Center are permitted. 


16 | Page 
(c) 	
One (1) awning, canopy or wall sign per building occupant. If a business faces more than one street frontage it may have one such sign per street frontage. The size of the awning, canopy or wall sign shall comply with requirements for wall signs as specified in Section 1020.2 -Tables of Permitted Signs. 

(d) 	
One occupant directory sign, either freestanding or as an additional wall sign for each planned center consisting of two or more principal buildings. Each such sign shall be located within the buildable area of the lot, shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area, nor exceed (10) feet in height. 

(e) 	
The signs in a Planned Center may be directly or indirectly illuminated. 


Section 1080 -Non-conforming Signs 
1080.1 Intent 
It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the elimination of signs that exist as of the effective date of this Ordinance which do not conform to the provisions of this Article. Any sign or portion thereof that exists at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance but does not conform to the requirements of this Article may only be continued in compliance with this section. 

1080.2 Unsafe Signs 
Any sign or portion thereof that is declared to be unsafe or dangerous by the Building Official may be 
restored to a safe condition, provided that the requirements of this Article are met. 


1080.3 Changes to Non-conforming Signs 
Any change in a non-conforming sign or portion thereof is subject to the following regulations: 

(a) 	
Improvements -No non-conforming sign or portion thereof can be improved in an amount exceeding fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the structure. Replacement cost is the cost to build an identical non-conforming sign or portion thereof. 

(b) 	
Repair -A non-conforming sign or portion thereof that is damaged or destroyed to an extent requiring repair costs exceeding fifty (50) percent of its reasonable replacement cost at the time of damage shall not be reconstructed or restored to its non-conforming use. 

(c) 	
Abandonment -A non-conforming sign that becomes such due to the adoption of this Ordinance, and which has been discontinued for a continuous period of 30 days, shall not be re-established. Any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Article. 





1080.4 Transfer of Ownership 
If a non-conforming sign is transferred to a new property owner, the non-conforming sign shall be altered to conform to these regulations or removed and replaced with a new sign that conforms to these regulations. 
17 | Page 
ARTICLE XI - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Section 1100 - Enforcement 
1100.1 Zoning Department 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager through the Building and Zoning Department. 

1100.2 Powers and Duties 
The City Manager may authorize and empower on behalf and in the name of the Mayor and Council the necessary staff to administer and enforce the provisions of these regulations including the following powers and duties: 
(a) 	
to receive applications, inspect premises, and issue building permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures which are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance; 

(b) 	
to interpret provisions of this Ordinance, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Ordinance; 

(c) 	
to keep accurate records of all permits and plats issued in accordance with the administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, building permits, certificates of occupancy, variances, conditional use permits, special use permits, and subdivision plats approved in accordance with the City of Barnesville Subdivision Ordinance with notations of all special conditions involved; 

(d) 	
to maintain current the Official Zoning Map of the City of Barnesville, and the approved Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan for Barnesville. The official maps shall be kept at City Hall. 

(e) 	
to keep records of all violations of this Ordinance and enforcement actions taken to enforce this Ordinance. 


The Zoning Department does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances, conditional use permits, special use permits, Non­conforming uses, or other land use approvals that these regulations have reserved for action by the Planning Commission and/or the Mayor and City Council. 
APPROVED 
oL(

Rec.aZ_Date:.
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 1 1100.3 Appeals of Zoning Department's Decisions 
(a) 	
Appeal - Any person aggrieved by any decision made or an action taken by the Zoning Department may appeal such decision or action to the Mayor and City Council. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision or action being appealed. 

(b) 	
Appeal Procedures - Appeals pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Department and with the Mayor and City Council. Such written appeal shall contain a notice of appeal and shall enumerate specific grounds for the appeal. The Zoning Department shall immediately transmit all documents and papers that constitute the record upon which the action or decision appealed from was taken. 

(c) 	
Stay of Proceedings Pending Appeal - An appeal of an action or decision of the Zoning Department stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Department certifies to the Mayor and City Council after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that, based on specific facts in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by an order issued by the Mayor and City Council or by a restraining order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 



1100.4 Violations 
(a) 	
Complaints Regarding Violations - Whenever the Zoning Department receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, he shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing of what actions have been or will be taken. 

(b) 	
Remedies - If any building, structure or land is used, erected, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Department is authorized to petition for an injunction or other appropriate legal remedy. 

(c) 	
Suspension of Permits - In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of this Ordinance, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued under the authorization of this Ordinance, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the Zoning Department is hereby authorized to suspend or invalidate such permits, order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction or deficiencies, issue summonses to any court of competent jurisdiction, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 


APPROVED Rec. by: DE Date: /— /2 —0y 
ARTICLE XI — PAGE 2 
(d) 	
Emergency Measures - Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, whenever the Zoning Department determines that any violation of the Ordinance poses an imminent peril to life or property, he or she may institute, without notice or hearing, any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition. 

(e) 	
Penalties - Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance, the violating person or persons shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 

(f) 	
Fines - Any person or entity convicted of violating this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 for each violation. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance is unlawful and every day such violation continues beyond the time allowed for its correction shall be deemed a separate offense. 


Section 1105 -Required Permits 
In addition to all land use permits required by this Ordinance, the permits enumerated in this section are also required. 
1105.1 - Building Permit 
It shall be unlawful to start any work exceeding a cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of construction, alteration or removal of any building unless a building permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Barnesville Building Code as well as any permits required by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances of the City. 
(a).Contents of Building Permit Application - The application for a building permit shall include the following information: 
(1) 	
a site plan at a suitable scale showing the shape, size, and location of the lot to be built upon; 

(2) 	
the location and footprint of any buildings currently existing on the lot; 

(3) 	
the footprint including the shape, size, height, use and location of the buildings to be erected, altered or moved onto the lot; 

(4) 	
the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 

(5) 	
the setback line of buildings on adjoining lots; 


APPROVED 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 3 
Rec. by:12Z_ Date. 
Ej_a_16: 
(6).any other information reasonably required by the Zoning Department to determining whether the proposal complies with the provisions of this Ordinance as well as with other laws, regulations, and ordinances of the City. 
(b) 	
Standard for Issuance of Building Permit - If the application complies with the provisions of this Ordinance and with all other laws, regulations, and ordinances of the city, the building permit shall be issued by the Building Official upon the payment of the required fee as set forth by the city schedule of rates and fees, which is incorporated herein by reference. 

(c) 	
Posting of Premises During Construction - Each required permit shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described in the permit during the period of construction or reconstruction. 

(d) 	
Renewal, Expiration of Building Permit - If no substantial progress in construction has been made within six (6) months from the date the building permit is issued, the building permit shall become invalid. The Building Official may renew the permit one (1) time for an additional six 

(6)
 months. A renewal fee as set by the latest edition of the city schedule of rates and fees is required to be paid by the applicant before the renewed building permit is issued. 



1105.2 Certificate of Occupancy 
(a).Certificate Required - A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Official is required prior to the use of occupancy of: 
(1) 	
Any lot or change in use of any lot, 

(2) 	
A building erected, or change in use of an existing building, after 


the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto. . 
(b) 	Standard of Issuance - No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official unless the lot or building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance, as well as with all other laws, regulations, and ordinances of the City. The Building Official shall keep a record of all applications for Certificates of Occupancy and all Certificates of Occupancy issued. 
APPROVED Rec.bylS2a.DatelLIOtt ARTICLE XI - PAGE 4 
Section 1110 -Planning Commission 
1110.1 Planning Commission Duties 
The Planning Commission is authorized to review applications, hold public hearings, and make recommendations to Mayor and City Council on applications for the following: 
(a)  Conditional use permits in accordance with Section 1125 below,  
(b)  Special use permits in accordance with Section 1135 below,  
(c)  Variances, in accordance with Section 1130 below,  
(d)  Amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance, in accordance with  
Section 1120 below,  
(e)  Changes to the City's Official Zoning Map, in accordance with Section  
1140 below.  

Public hearings required for the above listed actions shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearing Procedures) and Section 1140 (Notice Provisions) below. 

1110.2 Limits on Powers of the Planning Commission 
The Planning Commission powers and duties are advisory only; the Planning Commission does not have the power to amend this zoning ordinance, to rezone any land, to declare this zoning ordinance or any amendment thereto invalid, to recommend any use not permitted by this zoning ordinance, nor to allow or make any final decision on permits set forth in Section 1120.1 above. 
Section 1115 -City Council 
The Mayor and City Council retains authority for final approval of all zoning actions. The Council may uphold, reverse, add, delete, or modify with conditions any recommendation made by the Planning Commission. 
Section 1120 -Zonin2 Ordinance Amendments 
1120.1 Authority 
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Barnesville may from time to time amend the boundaries of the districts established on the Official Zoning Map and/or the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. Such amendments to the map or text of this Ordinance require a public hearing by the Planning Commission and Mayor and City Council. Such amendments shall follow the procedures set forth in this Article. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 5 -oy
Rec. by: DZ. Date: /-

1120.2 Institution of Zoning Amendments 
An application to amend this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by: 
(a) 	
The Barnesville City Council; 

(b) 	
Any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner of the property involved in petition for amendment, and further provided that the petition is accompanied by a payment of a fee payable to the City of Barnesville to defray the normal cost of processing. 



1120.3 Frequency of Petitions 
An existing property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a map amendment or a text amendment affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every 6 months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the Mayor and City Council. 
The same or any portion of property previously considered in a zoning amendment may not again be considered for rezoning by initiation of the Lamar County Planning Commission or the Mayor and City Council until the expiration of at least 6 months immediately following the final decision rendered on the zoning amendment by the Mayor and City Council. 

1120.4 Application Procedures 
(a).Application Contents — When an amendment is initiated by anyone other than the City Council it shall include the following: 
(1) 	
a legal description of the subject property; 

(2) 	
a survey plat of the subject property, showing abutting property owners; 

(3) 	
a statement or indication on the survey map of the current zoning of the subject property and that of abutting properties; 

(4) 	
a statement of the change in zoning being requested, the proposed use of the subject property, and any special conditions made part of the rezoning request; 

(5) 	
a description of all existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 


ARMED 
Date. (-0-0"MI*.DZ
ARTICLE XI — PAGE 6 
(6) 	
a description of the extent to which the property value of the subject property is diminished by the existing zoning district classification; 

(7) 	
a description of the suitability of the subject property under the proposed zoning classification; 

(8) 	
a description of any suitability of the subject property under the proposed zoning classification of the property; 

(9) 	
a description of any existing use of property, including a description of all structures presently occupying the property; 

(10) 	
the length of time the property has been vacant or unused as currently zoned; 

(11) 	
a site plan of the property at an appropriate scale showing the proposed use, including at a minimum information on proposed improvements, including internal circulation and parking, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, amenities, buildings, buffers (not required for rezonings initiated by the Mayor and Council; 

(12) 	
for any applications for P, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and I districts, in addition to the above information, the site plan shall identify the maximum gross square footage of building area, the minimum square footage of landscaped area, the maximum height of any structure, the minimum square footage of parking and drive areas, and proposed number of parking spaces. 

(13) 	
for any application for the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, and R-3 districts, the site plan shall additionally identify the maximum number of residential dwelling units, the maximum height of any structure, the minimum square footage of landscaped area, the maximum lot coverage of building area, and the proposed number of parking spaces. 

(14) 	
any other information as may be reasonably required by the Zoning Department. 


Note that on all rezoning applications a revised site plan to be approved at a later date by the Mayor and Council may be required. 
(b).Filing Fee - All applications other than those initiated by the Mayor and City Council shall be accompanied by payment of a fee to be established by the City Council to cover administrative and advertising costs. Such fee shall be deposited with the City Clerk. 
ARM
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 7 
Rec. py-QZ Cete:_ 
(c) 	
Campaign Contribution Disclosure Report - Applicants for rezonings who have made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a member of the Lamar County Planning Commission or Barnesville City Council within two years immediately preceding the filing of that application must file a disclosure report within ten (10) days after the application is filed in accordance with Section 1150 (Disclosure of Campaign Contributions) of this Article. 

(d) 	
Withdrawal of Amendment Application - Any petition for an amendment to this Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person of agency initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Department, prior to the public hearing before the Mayor and Council. If the petition is withdrawn prior to submission of the legal advertisement for a public hearing to the local newspaper, the application fee shall be refunded. If the application is withdrawn after the submission of the legal advertisement for a public hearing to the local newspaper, the application fee is forfeited by the petitioner. 



1120.5 Notice Requirements 
(a) 	
Posting of Property — When an amendment is initiated by anyone other than the City Council, no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than 45 days before the public hearing a sign shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the property proposed for the rezoning. 

(b) 	
Published Notice - At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five 

(45)
 days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Planning Commission, the City Clerk shall advertise the Planning Commission's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall advertise the City Council's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 ( Notice Provisions) of this Article. 



1120.6 Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendation 
(a) 	
Planning Commission Hearing - All proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance or Official Zoning Map shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for a recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider the Standards for Zoning Amendment Decisions set forth in Section 1120.8 below prior to making its recommendation. 

(b) 	
Hearing Procedures - The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearings on rezonings in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearing Procedures) in this Article. 


APPROVED 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 8 	12 -Oy
Rec. by: Q Z Date: 1­
(c) 	Planning Commission Recommendations - After completing its hearing on the proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall submit a recommended action to the Mayor and Council. The Planning Commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make a recommendation to the Council, including the following: approval, denial, deferral, withdrawal, reduction of the land area for which the application is made, change or the zoning district requested, or imposition of conditions. If no recommendation is made by the Planning Commission, then it shall report to the Council that it makes no recommendation on the application. The Planning Commission shall also submit to the Mayor and City Council any additional reports it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the Mayor and Council. 
Time Limit to Submit Recommendation - The Planning 
Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the Mayor 
and Council prior to the public hearing held by the Mayor and 
Council. If, however, the Planning Commission fails to submit a 
recommendation prior to the City Council's public hearing, the 
Planning Commission shall be deemed to have recommended 
approval of the proposed amendment. 

1120.7 City Council Hearing and Decision 
(a) 	
Public Hearing Requirement - Before taking action on a rezoning application, the City Council shall hold a hearing in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearings Procedures) of this Article. Notice of such hearing shall be published in accordance with Section 1120.5(b) above. 

(b) 	
City Council Decision - The City Council's decision shall consider the Standards for Zoning Amendment Decisions set forth in Section 1120.8 below in reaching it decision. At conclusion of public hearing, the Council may in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application, defer a decision until a specified meeting date, or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. 


(1).Voting Requirements - The decision of the Council is by a majority of the council members present. The mayor will vote only in the case of a tie vote. In such case, the Mayor votes in order to resolve the question. The vote will be taken in public and announced to those present. 
APPROVED Rec. by: 62 Date: f —/1—Oy 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 9 
(c).Defeat of Proposed Amendment - If the zoning decision of the Mayor and City Council is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to the zoning ordinance to accomplish the rezoning is defeated by the Mayor and Council, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of a least six (6) months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the Mayor and Council. 
(d).Appeal of City Council Decision - Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the Council shall have the right of appeal as provided by law if such appeal is filed within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Council. 

1120.8 Standards for Zoning Amendment Decisions 
The Mayor and Council recognize that proper exercise of its zoning powers requires considering and balancing of the interests in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. To ensure a proper balancing of the such interests, the Planning Commission, in making its recommendation, and the Mayor and Council, in making its decision on any rezoning application shall consider the following standards governing the exercise of zoning power: 
(a) 	
The location of the subject property; 

(b) 	
The present use and zoning classification of the property; 

(c) 	
The proposed use and zoning classification of the subject property; 

(d) 	
The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes as currently zoned; 

(e) 	
The existing land uses and zoning classification of nearby property; 

(f) 	
Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 

(g) 	
Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 

(h) 	
Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 

(i) 	
Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, or police and fire protection; 

(j) 	
Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy intent of the 


adopted Comprehensive Plan; APPROVED 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 10 
_11.-04
Rec. by:112___ Date:-"
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(k).Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
Section 1125 -Conditional Uses 
Certain uses are not generally allowed in a particular zoning district, or in any other zoning districts, because the special characteristics of such uses create impacts on surrounding areas. Such uses may; however, be allowed under special conditions. The granting of a conditional use permit does not constitute a permanent change in zoning or use. The conditional use may be forfeited if it does not meet the criteria provided in the following section. Generally, a conditional use shall be compatible with the applicable zoning district under special conditions. Uses enumerated in the district regulations as conditional uses must receive approval from the City Council after a public hearing by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
1125.1 Application Procedures 
(a).Application Contents - Each application for a Conditional Use Permit shall include the following information: 
(1) 	
Name and address of applicant; 

(2) 	
Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure or use, if different from the applicant; 

(3) 	
Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity proposed, manner of operation, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters; 

(4) 	
Location of the proposed use or structure, and its relationship to existing adjacent uses or structures; 

(5) 	
Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure(s) or use(s); 

(6) 	
Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion control features on the site, including the parking area; 

(7) 	
Height and setbacks of the proposed residential units, if any; 

(8) 	
Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and access way; 

(9) 	
Identification and location of all existing or proposed utilities, whether public or private; and/or 

(10)
 Any pertinent information that the Planning Commission and/or City Council may require. 

(b) 	
Filing Fee - All applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee to be established by the City Council to cover administrative and advertising costs. Such fee shall be deposited with the City Clerk. 

(c) 	
Campaign Contribution Disclosure Report - Applicants for Conditional Use Permits who have made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a member of the Lamar County Planning Commission or Barnesville City Council within two years immediately preceding the filing of that application must file a disclosure report within ten (10) days after the application is filed in accordance with section 1150 (Disclosure of Campaign Contributions) of this Article. 


PPM^ ARTICT.- PAGE 11.Ret' D? Date /-12_7(:)(1 
1125.2 Notice Procedures 
(a) 	
Posting of Property - The applicant for a Conditional Use Permit shall at his expense cause to be erected, no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than 45 days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission, a sign in a conspicuous place on the property proposed for the Conditional Use Permit. Such notice shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 1140.2 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. 

(b) 	
Published Notice - At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five 

(45)
 days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Planning Commission, the City Clerk shall advertise the Planning Commission's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall advertise the City Council's public hearing in accordance with Section 1149.1 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. 


1125.3 Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendation 
(a) 	
Planning Commission Hearing - All proposed Conditional Use Permits shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for a recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider the Conditional Use Standards set forth in Section 1125.5 below prior to making its recommendation. 

(b) 	
Hearing Procedures - The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearings on Conditional Use Permits in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearing Procedures) in Article. 


APPROVED
.
Rec. by: ¦02
ARTICLE XI — PAGE 12 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c) 	Planning Commission Recommendation - After completing its hearing on the proposed Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission shall submit a recommended action to the Mayor and Council. The Planning Commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make a recommendation to the Council, including the following: approval, denial, deferral, withdrawal, reduction of the land area for which the application is made, or imposition of additional conditions. If no recommendation is made by the Planning Commission, then it shall report to the Council that it makes no recommendation on the application. The Planning Commission shall also submit to the Mayor and City Council and additional reports it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the Mayor and Council. 
(1).Time Limit to Submit Recommendation - The Planning Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council prior to the public hearing held by the Mayor and Council. If, however, the Planning Commission fails to submit a recommendation prior to the City Council's public hearing within sixty (60) days after the Planning Commission's hearing, which ever comes first, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed application. 
1125.4 City Council Hearing and Decision 
(a) 	
Public Hearing Requirement - Before taking action on a Conditional Use Permit application, the City Council shall hold a hearing in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearings Procedures) of this Article. Notice of such hearings shall be published in accordance with Section 1125.2(b) above. 

(b) 	
City Council Decision - The City Council's decision shall consider the Conditional Use Standards set forth in Section 1125.5 below in reaching its decision. At conclusion of public hearing, the Council may in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application, defer a decision until a specified meeting date, delete or impose additional conditions, allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. 


(1).Voting Requirements - The decision of the Council is by a majority of the council members present. The mayor will vote only in the case of tie vote. In such case, the Mayor votes in order to resolve the question. The vote will be taken in public and announced to those present. 
APPROVED Rec. by: 1)Z Date: /—.—0 (-( 
ARTICLE XI — PAGE 13 

City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c).Appeal of City Council Decision - Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the Council shall have the right or appeal as provided by law if such appeal is filed within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Council. 
1125.5 Standards for Conditional Use Decisions 
A Conditional Use may be approved where it is determined based on the evidence presented at the public hearing that: 
(a) 	
The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood; 

(b) 	
The proposed use will not have a adverse affect on health, safety, and general welfare of residents or workers in the area; 

(c) 	
The proposed use as designed will minimize impacts on traffic as well as other adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood; 

(d) 	
The standards set forth in Article VIII of this Ordinance for the particular proposed use have been met; 

(e) 	
The proposed use is consistent with the city's adopted Comprehensive Plan; 

A rezoning to a more intensive zoning district, which contains that use as a permitted use by right, would not be appropriate for the property; 

(g) 	
The location and character of the conditional use is compatible with the community development pattern and is consistent with the needs of the neighborhood; 

(h) 	
The proposed conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the natural environment or of the other property in the immediate vicinity, or diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; 

(i) 	
The conditional use will not increase local or state expenditures in relation to the cost of servicing or maintaining neighboring properties. 


Section 1130 - Variances 
The City Council is authorized upon request in specific cases to approve such variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provision of the Ordinance will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The 
ARTICLE XL - PAGE 14.MOVED Rey bY../-1.2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Zoning Ordinance 
existence of a non-conforming use of neighboring land, building, or structures in the same district or of permitted or non-conforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. 
1130.1 Use Variance Prohibited 
No variance may be granted that would permit a use of land, building, or structures, which is not permitted by right or as a conditional use in the district in which the subject property is located. 
1130.2 Application Procedures 
(a).Application Contents - Each application for a variance shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant;  
(2)  Location of structure and/or use for which the variance is sought;  
(3)  Relationship of structure and/or use to existing structures/uses on adjacent lots;  
(4)  Specific sections of this Ordinance containing regulations which would cause hardship;  
(5)  Characteristics of property that prevent compliance with this Ordinance;  
(6)  The particular hardship that would result with strict application of the Ordinance;  
(7)  Any other pertinent information the Zoning Department may require.  

.
Filing Fee - All applications for Variances shall be accompanied by the
(b) payment of a fee to be established by the City Council to cover 
administrative and advertising costs. Such fee shall be deposited with the City Clerk. 
(c).Campaign Contribution Disclosure Report - Applicants for Variances who have made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a member of the Lamar County Planning Commission or Barnesville City Council within two years immediately preceding the filing of that application must file a disclosure report within ten (10) days after the application is filed in accordance with Section 1150 (Disclosure of Campaign Contributions). 
APPROVED 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 15 Rec. by: Da Date: 7-12 -0(1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
1130.3 Notice Procedures 
(a) 	
Posting of Property - The applicant for a variance shall at his expense cause to be erected, no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than 45 days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission, a sign in a conspicuous place on the property proposed for the variance. Such notice shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 1140.2 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. 

(b) 	
Published Notice - At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five 

(45)
 days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Planning Commission, Building Official shall advertise the Planning Commission's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall advertise the City Council's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. 


1130.4 Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendations 
(a) 	
Planning Commission Hearing - All proposed variances shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for a recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider the Standards for Issuance of a Variance set forth in Section 1130.6 below prior to making its recommendation. 

(b) 	
Hearing Procedures - The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearings on requested variances in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearing Procedures) in this Article. 

(c) 	
Planning Commission Recommendation - After completing its hearing on the proposed variance, the Planning Commission shall submit a recommended action to the Mayor and Council. The Planning Commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make a recommendation to the Council including the following: approval, denial, deferral, withdrawal, reduction of the land area for which the application is made. If no recommendation is made by the Planning Commission, then its shall report to the Council that it makes no recommendation on the application. The Planning Commission shall also submit to the Mayor and City Council any additional reports it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the Mayor and Council. 


(1).Time Limit to Submit Recommendation - The Planning Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council prior to the public hearing held by the Mayor and Council. g however, the Planning Commission fails to submit a recommendation prior to the City Council's public hearing or within sixty (60) days after the Planning Commission's 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 16.APPROVED Rec. y: D Z Date: H.?-Oy 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
hearing, which ever comes first, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed application. 
1130.5 City Council Hearing and Decision 
(a) 	
Public Hearing Requirement - Before taking action on a variance application, the City Council shall hold a hearing in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearings Procedures) of this Article. Notice of such hearing shall be published in accordance with Section 1130.3(b) above. 

(b) 	
City Council Decision - The City Council's decision shall consider the Standards for Issuance of a Variance set forth in Section 1130.6 below in reaching its decision. At conclusion of public hearing, the Council may in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application, defer a decision until a specified meeting date, or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. 


(1).Voting Requirements - The decision of the Council is by a majority of the council members present. The mayor will vote only in the case of a tie vote. In such case, the Mayor votes in order to resolve the question. The vote will be taken in public and announced to those present. 
(c) 	Appeal of City Council Decision - Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the Council shall have the right of appeal as provided by law if such appeal is filed within thirty (30) days of the decision for the Council. 
1130.6 Standards for Approval of a Variance 
A variance may be approved where it is determined based on the evidence presented at the public hearing that all of the following conditions exist: 
(a) 	
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property because of size, shape, topography of the subject property; 

(b) 	
The literal application of this Ordinance would create an unnecessary hardship; 

(c) 	
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Ordinance; 

(d) 	
Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privilege that is denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's is located; 


ARTICLE XI - PAGE 17.APPROVED Rec by: 0? Da!e; /-1.2-0y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia 	Zoning Ordinance 
(e) 	
The special circumstances surrounding the request for the variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; 

(f) 	
The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which is not permitted by right or by conditional use in the district; 

(g) 	
The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure. 


Section 1135 -Special Use Permits 
Uses that are determined to be unclassified uses in accordance with Article VI, Section 675 of this Ordinance may apply for a Special Use Permit under the provisions of this Section. 
1135.1 Uses Permitted 
The approval of a Special Use Permit authorizes only the uses specified in the approved Special User Permit to be conducted on the property for which the application is submitted. The use must be conducted in accordance with the conditions approved as part of the Special Use Permit. 
1135.2 Application Procedures 
(a)
 Application Contents - Each application for a variance shall include the following information: 

(1) 	
Name and address of applicant; 

(2) 	
Description of property under consideration for Special Use 


Permit; 
(3) 	
Proposed use of the property; 

(4) 	
Survey plat of property showing abutting property owners; 

(5) 	
Zoning of abutting property; 

(6) 	
Zoning of subject property; 

(7) 	
Any other pertinent information the Zoning Department may require. 


APPROVED Retby:_ALI /—.Y ARTICLE XI - PAGE 18 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(b) 	
Filing Fee - All applications for Special Use Permits shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee to be established by the City Council to cover administrative and advertising costs. Such fee shall be deposited with the City Clerk. 

(c) 	
Campaign Contribution Disclosure Report - Applicants for Special Use Permits who have made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a member of the Lamar County Planning Commission or Barnesville City Council within tow years immediately preceding the filing of that application must file a disclosure reported within ten (10) days after the application is filed in accordance with Section 1150 (Disclosure of Campaign Contributions). 


1135.3 Notice Procedures 
(a) 	Posting of Property - The applicant for a Special Use Permit shall at his expense cause to be erected, no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than 45 days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission, a sign in a conspicuous place on the property proposed for the Special Use Permit. Such notice shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 
140.2 (Notice Provisions) of the Article. 
(b) 
Published Notice - At least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five 

(45)
 days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Planning Commission, the Building Official shall advertise the Planning Commission's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 (Notice Provisions) of this Article. At least fifteen (15) days and no more that forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall advertise the City Council's public hearing in accordance with Section 1140.1 (Notice Provisions) of the Article. 


1135.4 Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendations 
(a) 	Planning Commission Hearing - All proposed Special Use Permits shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for a recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider the Standards for Issuance of a Special User Permit forth in Section 1135.6 below prior to making its recommendation. 
Hearing Procedures - The Planning Commission shall conduct public
(b) hearings on requested Special Use Permits in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearing Procedures) in this Article. 
APPROVED Rea by: a Date.1_-(?:gy 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 19 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Zoning Ordinance 
(c).Planning Commission Recommendation - After completing its hearing on the proposed Special Use Permit, the Planning Commission shall submit a recommended action to the Mayor and Council. The Planning Commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make a recommendation to the Council including following: approval, denial, imposition of conditions on the permit, deferral, withdrawal, reduction of the land area for which the application is made. If no recommendation is made by the Planning Commission, then it shall report to the Council that is makes no recommendation on the application. The Planning Commission shall also submit to the Mayor and City Council any additional reports it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the Mayor and Council. 
(1).Time Limit to Submit Recommendation - The Planning Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council prior to the public hearing held by the Mayor and Council. it however, the Planning Commission fails to submit a recommendation prior to the City Council's public hearing or within sixty (60) days after the Planning Commission's hearing, which ever comes first, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed application. 
1135.5 City Council Hearing and Decision 
(a) 	
Public Hearing Requirement - Before taking action on a Special Use Permit application, the City Council shall hold a hearing in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 1145 (Public Hearings Procedures) of this Article. Notice of such hearing shall be published in accordance with Section 1135.3(b) above. 

(b) 	
City Council Decision - The City Council's decision shall consider the Standards for Issuance of a Special Use Permit set forth in Section 1135.6 below in reaching its decision. At conclusion of public hearing, the Council may in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application, defer a decision until a specified meeting date, impose additional conditions on the application to mitigate adverse impacts, or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. 


Appeal of City Council Decision - Any person, firm or corporation
(c) 
aggrieved by a decision of the Council shall have the right of appeal as provided by law if such appeal is filed within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Council. 
APPROVED Rec. by: ©) Date1112
-
ARTICLE XI -PAGE 20 
1135.6 Standards for Approval of Special Use Permit 
In deciding whether or not to approve a Special Use Permit, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following: 
(a)  buffer areas proposed for the use;  
(b)  fencing and screening proposed for the use by the applicant;  
(c)  the potential for negative impacts such a traffic, noise, erosion, air or water pollutants, and proposed measures designed to mitigate those impacts;  
(d)  any increased potential for accidents or danger to public health, safety, or welfare;  
(e)  the proposed hours of operation;  
(f)  lot area requirements;  
(g)  balancing the benefits and need of the land use with possible negative impacts and depreciating effects or damage to neighboring properties.  

Section 1140 - Notice Provisions 
Whenever a public hearing is required to be held under this Ordinance, posted and published notice is required to be given as provided for in this section. 
1140.1 Published Notice 
(a) 	
Planning Commission Hearing - A Public Notice shall be published in the official paper of the City of Barnesville or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled meeting of the Lamar County Planning Commission, stating that the Planning Commission will hold a hearing and stating the purpose, time and date, and location of the hearing, the location of the property being considered for the zoning action, the present zoning classification of the subject property, and a brief description of the nature of the zoning action proposed for the subject property, including the proposed zoning classification in the case of rezoning applications. 

(b) 	
City Council Hearing - A Public Notice shall be published in the official paper of the City of Barnesville or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled meeting of the Mayor and City Council, stating that the Mayor and Council will hold a hearing and stating the purpose, time and date, and location of the hearing, the location of the property being considered for 


ARTICLE XI - PAGE 21 
A APPROVED Rec. by: /J Z Dale:L0
-.
the zoning action, the present zoning classification of the subject property, and a brief description of the nature of the zoning action proposed for the subject property, including the proposed zoning classification in the case of rezoning applications. 
(c).Notice for Properties to be Annexed - Notice for hearings by the Planning Commission and the City Council regarding the zoning of property to be annexed into the City of Barnesville pursuant to Article III, Section 330 of this Ordinance, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county wherein the property to be annexed is located and shall comply with Section 1140.1(a) and (b) above. 
1140.2 Notice Posted on Property 
Upon the filing of an application for an amendment to this zoning Ordinance, or other zoning approval required by this Ordinance to be based on a hearing. There shall be erected in a conspicuous place on subject property, no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the scheduled hearing, one (1) or more sign, each of which will shall be not less than 9 square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearing before the City Council and Planning Commission. No such public hearing shall take place until said signs have been posted for at least 15 days. At a minimum, the sign shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO PUBLIC 
An application has been filed regarding this property requesting [FILL IN THE ZONING ACTION OR APPROVAL BEING REQUESTED, for example, a rezoning from (insert present zone) to (insert zone requested)]. 
A public hearing will be held by the Lamar County Planning Commission to review and consider a recommendation to the City of Barnesville Council in the Lamar County Courthouse, Thomaston St., Barnesville, Georgia, on (DATE), at (TIME). 
The Barnesville Mayor and City Council will hold a public hearing and a decision will be made at Barnesville Courtroom at 100 Mill St., Barnesville, Georgia, on (DATE), at (TIME). All persons having an interest in this application should be at one or both of these public hearings to voice their interest. 
APPROVED Rec. by: D? Date: (—/ 2 )(/
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 22 
Section 1145 -Public Hearing Procedures 
Whenever a public hearing is required by this Ordinance or by state law to be held by the Planning Commission or City Council prior to proposed zoning amendment or other zoning action or approval, such hearing, whether conducted by the Planning Commission or the City Council, shall be governed by the provisions set forth in this Section, which is adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-66-5(a), as amended. 
1145.1 Administrative Record 
Minutes of the meeting will be taken by secretary to Lamar County Planning Commission or City Clerk. A complete transcript of a public hearing may be requested and will be available at expense of party making request. Copies of the Zoning Department's findings and recommendations as well as the Planning Commission's recommendation and report shall be available upon request to interested members of the public at the hearing held before the Mayor and Council. 
1145.2 Presiding Officer to Call the Meeting to Order 
The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer. 
1145.3 Staff Report 
The Zoning Department, or his designee, shall present on the application, including the following: 
(a) 	
the location of the property that is the subject of the application; 

(b) 	
the present zoning classification of the subject property; 

(c) 	
a description of the requested zoning permit or approval, including the zoning classification proposed for the property if the application is for a rezoning; 

(d) 	
the written record of the report or investigation prepared by the Zoning Department and the recommendations proposed by the Zoning Department; 

(e) 	
for hearings before the Mayor and City Council, the recommendation of the Lamar County Planning Commission and any additional information designated by the Planning Commission to be presented to the Mayor and Council; and 


any additional information considered to be relevant to application by the
(f) 
Zoning Department. 

kPFCS Rec. by: Q 2 ice: --oy
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 23 
1145.4 Applicant's Initial Presentation 
The applicant or applicant's agent shall present and explain his application after the staff report is given in accordance with Section 1145.3 above. The applicant will be allowed a total of 10 minutes within which to make his initial presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
1145,5 Other Interested Parties 
At the conclusion of the applicant's presentation pursuant to Section 1145.4 above, interested parties as recognized by the Mayor shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the Mayor and Council or Planning Commission and stating their name, address, and interest, as well as any comments on the pending application. Interested parties other than the applicant who are proponents of the application are allowed a total of ten (10) minutes as a group to offer data, evidence, and opinion in support of the pending application. Interested parties opposing an application are allowed a total of twenty-five (25) minutes as a group to address their opposition to the application. It is suggested that proponents, other than the applicant, and opponents of the application each obtain one spokesperson to present their views. 
1145.6 Applicant's Summary 
The applicant shall have an opportunity for summary remarks concerning the pending application, with a five (5) minute time limit, at which time the presiding officer shall close the public hearing. 
1145.7 Deliberation by the Planning Commission or City Council 
At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission or City Council shall deliberate on the proposal and take action on the application. 
1145.8 Speakers' Conduct 
During the course of a public hearing on a zoning action, each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the pending application and shall address his remarks only to the. members of the Planning Commission or the Mayor and City Council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the pending application. The presiding officer may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
APPROVED 

RIK by: D a Date: (---(2 .y 
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 24 

Section -1150 Disclosure of Campaign Contributions 
1150.1 Disclosures Required for Applicants 
When any applicant for a rezoning or other zoning action or approval has made, within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of that application, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to an official of the City of Barnesville or to a member of the Lamar County Planning Commission, it shall be the duty of the applicant and any attorney representing the applicant to file a disclosure report with the City within ten (10) days after the application is filed. Such disclosure report shall include the following information: 
(a) 	
The name and official position of the official of the City of Barnesville or Lamar County Planning Commission to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 

(b) 	
The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application and the date of each such contribution. 


1150.2 Disclosures Required for Qpponents of Rezoning Actions 
When any opponent of a rezoning or other zoning action or approval has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the application being opposed campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to official of the City of Barnesville or to a member of the Lamar County Planning Commission, it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure report with the City at least five (5) calendar days prior to the first hearing held by the Planning Commission. Such disclosure report shall include the following information: 
(a) 	
The name and official position of the official of the City of Barnesville or the Lamar County Planning Commission to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 

(b) 	
The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application and the date of each such contribution. 


Section -1155 Conflict of Interest in Zoning Decisions 
1155.1 Definitions 
(a).Applicant - Any person or entity applying for a rezoning action or other zoning approval and any attorney or other person representing or acting on behalf of a person who applies of a rezoning or other zoning action. 
A APPROVED Rec. by. /J z Date: /-/). -Or
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 25 
(b) 	
Business Entity - Any corporation, partnership, limited partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 

(c) 	
Financial Interest - All direct ownership interests of total assets or capital stock of a business entity where such ownership interest is ten percent (10%) or more. 

(d) 	
City Official - The Mayor or any Council Member of the City of Barnesville, Georgia or any member of the Lamar County Planning Commission. 

(e) 	
Member of the Family - The spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of a city official. 

(f) 	
Property Interest - The direct ownership of real property, including any percentage of ownership less than total ownership. 

(g) 	
Real Property - Any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 

(h) 	
Rezoning Action - Action by the City Council of Barnesville, Georgia, adopting an amendment to a zoning ordinance which has the effect of rezoning real property from on zoning classification to another. 


1155.2 Disclosure of Financial Interests 
Any City Official who: 
(a) 	
- Has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action which that city official's local government will have the duty to consider is authorized to vote; or 

(b) 	
Has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action upon which that official's local government will have the duty to consider; or 

(c) 	
Has a member of the family having any interest described in paragraph (a) or (b) of this Section shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the City Council. Such City Official shall disqualify himself from voting on the rezoning action. Disclosures made in accordance with this section shall be a public record and shall be available for public inspection at any time during normal business hours. 


APPROVED
Rec by:.
Date: 1—/ ­
-o
ARTICLE XI - PAGE 26 
ARTICLE XII - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
Section 1200 -Conflict with Other Laws 
When the regulations of this Ordinance impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. When the provisions of any statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Section 1210 -Severability 
If any portion or provision of this Ordinance is found to be unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or void. 
Section 1220 -Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Section 1230 -Effective Date 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. Read and approved this.day of .for a first
, - - - - 3 reading, and on this .day of ., .for a second and final reading after 
a public hearing before the Barnesville City Council on ., . 
APPROVED 
Rec. by: 7 Date: (-/ 2-0V 
ARTICLE XII - PAGE 1 

PREFACE 
PURPOSE 
PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE 
DEFINITIONS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. WATER SYSTEM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. 
1.1 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS . 
1.2 MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION . 
1.2.1.General Material Requirements. 
1.2.2 Pipe. 
1.2.2.1 Ductile Iron Pipe (Required Over 8") . 
1.2.2.2 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe (Maximum 8"). 
1.2.2.3.Steel Casing Pipe. 
1.2.2.4.Service Pipe . 
1.2.2.5 Service Pipe Encasement - See Insert . 
1.2.3.Joints and Gaskets. 
1.2.3.1 Mechanical Joint Ductile Iron Pipe . 
1.2.3.2 Slip Joint Ductile Iron Pipe. 
1.2.3.3 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe . 
1.2.3.4 Polyethylene Service Pipe. 
.1.2.4.Pipe Fittings and Specials. 
1.2.4.1 Specials. 
1.2.5.Valves. 
1.2.5.1 Eighteen (18) Inch and Larger Valves. 
1.2.5.2 Sixteen (16) Inch and Smaller Valves . 
1.2.5.3 Air Release Valves . 
1.2.5.4 Check Valves and Backflow Preventers. 
1.2.5.5 Tapping Sleeves, Crosses and Valves . 
1. 2.6.Valve Boxes . 
1.2.7.Fire Hydrants . 
1.2.8.Service Saddles. 
1.2.9.Service Pipe Couplings. 
1.2.10 Corporation Stops. 
1.2.11 Meter Stops. 
1.2.12 Meter Coupling/Backflow Preventer . 
1.2.13 Service Meters . 
1.2.13.1.House Service Meters. 
1.2.13.2.Commercial and Industrial Meters . 
1.2.14 Meter Boxes and Enclosures. 
Page No. 
1 
1 3 
3 
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 
4 
4 
4 
4 5 5 5 5 
5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 
6 6 
6 
-09
RetkOZDate:.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. 
Pale No. 
1.2.14.1.Residential Meter Boxes . 
6 
1.2.14.2.Commercial and Industrial Meter Enclosures .6 
1.2.15 Manhole Covers, Frames, and Steps. 6 
1.2.16 Concrete Manholes. 
6 
1.2.17 Manhole Joints and Gaskets . 6 
1.2.18 Pressure Regulators. 6 
1.2.19 Valve Markers. 
7 
1.2.20 Underground Electronic Marker System . 7 
1.2.21 Residential Backflow Preventers. 7 
1.2.22 Commercial and Industrial Backflow Preventers. 7 
- 2. SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS . .7 
2.1 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS . 7 
2.1.1.Gravity Flow Systems. 7 
2.1.1.1.Location. 7 
2.1.1.2 Design Factors . 8 
2.1.1.3 Minimum Line Sizes. 8 
2.1.1.4 Depth. 8 
2.1.1.5 Slope. 8 
2.1.1.6.Manholes. 8 
2.1.2.Pump Stations. 8 
2.1.2.1 Location. 8 
2.1.2.2 Design Requirements. 8 
2.1.2.3 Structures. 9 
2.1.2.4 Submersible Pump. 9 
2.1.2.5 Shutoff and Check Valves . 9 
2.1.2.6 Equipment Removal . 9 
2.1.2.7 Electrical Supply and Control . 9 
2.1.2.8 Alarm Systems . 9 
2.1.2.9.Emergency Operation . 9 
2.1.2.10 Ventilation. 9 
2.1.3.Force Mains . 9 
2.1.3.1 Force Main Locations. 9 
9
2.1.3.2 Force Main Identification . 
2.1.3.3 Velocity . 10 
2.1.3.4 Design Volume. 10 
2.1.3.5 Design Pressure. 10 
10
2.1.3.6 Air Release and Vacuum . 
102.1.4.Service Lines. 
10
2.2 MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION . 
2.2.1.General Material Requirements. 10 
2.2.2 Piping. 10 
2.2.2.1 For Gravity Flow Sewers. 10 10
2.2.2.2 For Sewage Force Mains . 10
2.2.2.3.Ductile Iron Pipe . 
OWNED , Date:1:1220
Rec.. bl.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. 
Page No. 
2.2.2.4 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe (Maximum 8"). 10 
2.2.2.5.Steel Casing Pipe. 10 
2.2.3.Pipe Fittings and Specials. 11 
2.2.3.1.Ductile Iron Pipe . 11 
2.2.3.2 Polyvinyl Chloride Fittings. 11 
2.2.4.Joints and Gaskets . 11 
2.2.4.1.Ductile Iron Pipe . 11 
2.2.4.2 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe . 11 
2.2.4.3.Transition Joints . 11 
2.2.5 Manholes. 12 
2.2.5.1 Manhole Frames and Covers. 12 
2.2.5.2 Manhole Steps. 12 
2.2.5.3 Concrete Manhole Joints . 12 
2.2.5.4 Manhole Connections to Pipe . 12 
2.2.5.5 Manhole Bedding . 12 
2.2.5.6 Manhole Brick. 12 
2.2.5.7 Mortar . 12 
2.2.5.8 Drop Manholes . 12 
2.2.5.9 Monitoring Manholes . 12 
2.2.6.Service Lines. 12 
2.2.6.1.Service Line Connections . 12 
2.2.7.Pump Stations. 13 
2.2.7.1 Submersible Pumps . 13 
2.2.7.2 Pump Test. 13 
2.2.7.3 Pump Warranty . 13 
2.2.7.4 Documentation. 13 
2.2.7.5 Access Frame and Cover . 13 
2.2.7.6 Controls. 14 
2.2.7.7 High Water Alarm . 14 
2.2.8 Valves. 14 
2.2.8.1 Air Release Valve. 14 
2.2.8.2 Plug Valves. 15 
2.2.8.3 HDL Ball Check Valve. 15 
2.2.9.Valve Vaults. 15 
3. GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. 15 
3.1 GENERAL . 15 
3.2 EROSION CONTROL AND SEDIMENTATION . 16 
3.2.1 General. 16 
3.3 CLEARING AND GRUBBING . 16 
3.3.1 General. 16 
3.3.2 Clearing. 16 
3.3.3 Grubbing. 16 
3.3.4 Disposal. 16 
3.3.5 Bench Marks and Monuments. 16 
Rectrf DZ Date: I -12 OL( 
TABLE OF CONTENTS. 
Pale No. 
3.4 TRAFFIC CONTROL. 
16 
4. WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS . .16 
4.1 INSTALLATION PROCEDURES . 16 
4.1.2.Trench Construction . 17 
4.1.2.1.Trench Description. 17 
4.1.2.2 Alignment . 17 
4.1.2.3 Excavation . 17 
4.1.2.4 Trenching. 17 
4.1.2.5 Sheathing and Bracing. 18 
4.1.2.6 Stabilization and Bedding . 18 
4.1.2.7 Excavated Material. 18 
4.1.2.8 Limit of Open Trench. 18 
4.1.2.9 Disposition of Water . 18 
4.1.2.10 Excavation Near Roads and Railroads . 19 
4.1.2.11.Subsurface Obstructions . 19 
4.1.2.12 Embankments. 19 
4.1.2.13.Rock Excavation . 19 
4.1.3.Inspection Before Laying of Pipe . 19 
4.1.4.Pipe Installation . 19 
4.1.4.1 Handling . 19 
4.1.4.2 Laying. 19 
4.1.4.3 Joining . 20 
4.1.4.3.1 Mechanical Joints . 20 
4.1.4.3.2 Slip Joints. 20 
4.1.4.3.3 Threaded Pipe . 20 
4.1.4.3.4 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe. 20 
4.1.4.3.5 Polyethylene Pipe . 20 
4.1.4.3.6 Nestable Corrugated Steel Casing Pipe . 20 
4.1.4.3.7 Restrained Joints . 20 
4.1.4.4 Connections to Existing Mains . 21 
4.1.5 Backfilling. 21 
4.1.5.1 Time . 21 
4.1.5.2 In Non-Traffic Areas . 21 
4.1.6 Highway and Railroad Crossings. 21 
4.1.7.Uncased Bores for Driveways. 22 
4.1.8 Asphalt Concrete Paving Replacement (Where Open Cut is Allowed) .22 
4.1.8.1 Removal. 22 
4.1.8.2 Excavation and Backfill . 22 
4.1.8.3 Base. 22 
4.1.8.4 Pavement . 22 
4.1.9.Valves and Fittings . 22 
4.1.9.1 Setting Valve Markers. 22 
4.1.10 Plugging Dead Ends. 22 
4.1.11 Pipe Restraint Requirements. 22 
Rettif.Date112-6 
TABLE OF CONTENTS. 
Page No. 
4.1.12 Fire Hydrants . 
23 
4.1.13 Services . 
23 
4.1.13.1.Service Connections . 23 
4.1.13.2.Service Lines . 
23 
4.1.13.3.Setting Meters and Meter Boxes. 23 
4.1.13.4.Cross Connections. 23 
4.1.14 Cleanup and Property Restoration. 23 
4.1:15 Protection of the Work. 23 
4.2 HYDROSTATIC TESTING . 23 
4.2.1.Expelled Air. 23 
4.2.2.Testing Required. 24 
4.2.3.Allowable Leakage Test . 24 
4.2.4.Water for Testing. 24 
4.3 DISINFECTION OF WATER LINES . 24 
4.3.1 General. 24 
4.3.2.Notification of Testing . 25 
4.3.3 Amount of Disinfecting Agent Used . 25 
4.3.4.Residual Testing . 25 
4.4 INSPECTIONS AND ACCEPTANCE . 25 
4.4.1 General. 25 
4.4.2.Inspection for Approval . 25 
4.4.3.Stop Work Order. 25 
4.4.4 Acceptance . 25 
5. SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. 26 
5.1 TRENCHING AND EXCAVATION . 26 
5.1.1 General. 26 
5.1.2.Trench Construction . 26 
5.1.2.1 Trench Description. 26 
5.1.2.2 Alignment and Grades . 26 
5.1.2.3 Excavation . 26 
5.1.2.4 Trenching. 27 
5.1.2.5 Sheathing and Bracing. 27 
5.1.2.6 Stabilization and Bedding . 27 
5.1.2.7 Bedding Classifications for Ductile Iron Pipe . 27 
5.1.2.8 Bedding Requirements for Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe . 28 28
5.1.2.9.Concrete Encasement . 28
5.1.2.10.Rock Excavation . 
5.1.2.11.Limit of Open Trench . 28 
5.1.2.12.Disposition of Water. 28 29
5.1.2.13.Excavation Near Roads and Railroads . 29
5.1.2.14.Subsurface Obstructions . 29
5.1.2.15 Embankments . 
5.1.3.Inspection Before Laying of Pipe . 29 29
5.1.4.Pipe Installation . 
ARM Rec. tff_0_2,Date:_k 
TABLE OF CONTENTS. Page No. 
5.1.4.1 Handling . 30 
5.1.4.2 Laying. 30 
5.1.4.3 Joining . 30 
5.1.4.3.1.Mechanical Joints . 30 
5.1.4.3.2 Slip Joints. 30 
5.1.4.4 Connections to Existing Manholes. 30 
5.1.5 Backfilling . 30 
5.1.5.1 Time . 30 
5.1.5.2 In Non-Traffic Areas . 31 
5.1.6 Highway and Railroad Crossings. 31 
5.1.7 Asphalt Concrete Paving Replacement (Where Open Cut is Allowed) .31 
5.1.7.1 Removal. 31 
5.1.7.2.Excavation and Bacicfill . 31 
5.1.7.3 Base. 31 
5.1.7.4 Pavement . 31 
5.1.8.Manhole Installation. 31 
5.1.9.Service Lines. 31 
5.1.10 Sewage Pump Stations . 32 
5.2 GRAVITY SEWER TESTING . 32 
5.2.1 General. 32 
5.2.2.Low Pressure Air Tests . 32 
5.2.2.1 Safety. 32 
5.2.2.2 Preparation of the Test Line . 32 
5.2.2.3 Procedure. 32 
5.2.2.4 Calculation of Test Time . 32 
5.2.2.5 Groundwater Conditions . 32 
5.2.2.6 Retest of Test Section . 32 
5.2.3.Measurement of Infiltration . 33 
5.2.4.Mandrel Test. 33 
5.2.5.Velocity Test . 33 
5.3 FORCE MAINS. 33 
5.3.1.Hydrostatic Test. 33 
5.3.2.Leakage Test. 34 
5.4 INSPECTIONS AND ACCEPTANCE . 34 
5.4.1 General. 34 
5.4.2.Inspection for Approval . 34 
5.4.3.Stop Work Order . 34 
5.4.4 Acceptance . 34 




Rec, by:LIZ Datel:Igf 0(1 

LIST OF DETAILS 

Standard Detail # Title 1-1.Typical Utility Placement 1-2.Typical Pavement Cut 1-3.Typical Highway Crossing 1-4.Water Line Valve at Intersection 
1-5.Utility Location 1-6.Water Meter Installation 1-7.Water Meter Location for Subdivision 1-8.Fire Hydrant Installation 1-9.Fire Hydrant Installation 
1-10.Typical Valve Installation 
1-11.Gate Valve Installation 
1-12.Line Abandonment at Valve 
1-13.Thrust Block Detail 

SS-01.Typical Sewer Pipe Bedding SS-02.Typical Section Manhole Frame and Cover SS-03.Typical Section Standard Manhole SS-04.Standard Manhole SS-05.Outside Drop Manhole SS-06.Typical Section Inside Drop Manhole SS-07.Typical Section Standard Shallow Manhole SS-08.Typical Section Manhole Flush with Pavement SS-09.Typical Section Manhole Rising above Grade SS-10.Typical Section Vented Manhole SS-11.Dry Sewer Line Connection 
PROVED Rec. by:.Z Date: I - /.2 -ti 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 100 - Short Title 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of Barnesville, Georgia". 
Section 110 - Purpose and Intent 
These regulations shall apply only in and to the incorporated areas of Barnesville, Georgia and are enacted for the following purposes: 
(1) 	
To project and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the incorporated area of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(2) 	
To encourage economically sound and stable land development. 

(3) 	
To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and service to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of the incorporated areas of Barnesville, Georgia. 

(4) 	
To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 

(5) 	
To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats and plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by the sub­divider, the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville and the Lamar County Health Department. 


Section 120 -Authority and Jurisdiction 
120.1 
These regulations are adopted in accordance with, and under the authority conferred by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia (Revised January 1985) and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements and in accordance with the comprehensive plan; and for other purposes. 
APPROVED
.Rec. by: 2Date:/— /.2
ARTICLE I - PAGE 1 
Section 130 -Interpretation, Conflict and Severability 
130.1 - Interpretation 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
130.2 - Conflict with Public and Private Provisions 
(1) 	
Public Provisions - These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive, or imposes higher standards, shall control. 

(2) 	
Private Provisions - These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 


130.3 - Severability 
If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof or any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered, and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without such part, provision, or application. 
Section 140 -Saving Provision 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any entity. 
Section 150 -Repeal of Existing Regulations 
Upon the adoption of this ordinance, the existing Subdivision Regulations of Barnesville, 
Georgia, as amended, are hereby repealed. 
APPROVED 
ARTICLE I - PAGE 2 Rec. by: DzDale: /-42 -0y 
Section 160 -Amendments 
For the purposes of protecting and providing for the public health, safety, and welfare, the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville may from time to time amend the provisions of these subdivision regulations. Before enacting any amendment to this ordinance, the Barnesville/Lamar County Planning Commission, acting for the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville, shall hold a public hearing. Not less than fifteen 
(15) days, nor more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the said public hearing, the Secretary of the Barnesville/Lamar County Planning Commission shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Lamar County. The Barnesville/Lamar County Planning Commission shall hold said hearing and make a recommendation to the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville. 
Section 165 -Variances 
165.1 General 
Where the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may, approve a variance to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. Before approving any variance to this ordinance the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville, shall hold a public hearing. Not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the said public hearing, the City Clerk shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Lamar County. The Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville shall not approve a variance unless it shall find, based on the evidence presented, that all 
of the following criteria are met: 
(1) 	
The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property. 

(2) 	
The conditions upon which the request for a variance are based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not generally applicable to the other property. 


Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topography of
(3) the specified property, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as 
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations was carried out. 
(4).The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Barnesville Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map, and the Comprehensive Plan. 
APPROVED ARTICLE I - PAGE 3 Rec by: ,0? Dale'. 
165.2 Conditions 
In approving variances, the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
165.3 Procedure 
A plat of survey and a petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the sub­divider for the consideration by the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the request and address the criteria described above in Sections 165. 
Section 170 -Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties 
170.1 General 
(1) 	
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Department to enforce these regulations, and to bring to the attention of the City any violation or lack of compliance herewith. 

(2) 	
No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision, or an existing subdivision meeting the requirements of Article I, Section 1.3 (4), shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Barnesville Zoning Department in accordance with provisions of this ordinance, and filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Lamar County. 

(3) 	
The subdivision of any lot or parcel of land, by the use of a metes and bounds description for the purposes of sale, transfer, or lease shall not be permitted except as provided for in the requirements set forth in these regulations. 

(4) 	
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot site subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations. 


170.2 Civil Enforcement 
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations; to prevent unlawful construction to recover damages; to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the criminal penalties authorized by law. Any action brought hereunder may be brought in the Municipal Court of Barnesville, Georgia. 
APPROVED Rec. by:2 Dale: /—/2—C>kr ARTICLE I - PAGE 4 
Section 180 -Appeals 
(1) 	
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager or his designee shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and Council, if such appeal is filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of rendering of the decision by the City Manager or his designee. 

(2) 	
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Mayor and Council or the City of Barnesville shall have the right of appeal to a court of law if such appeal is filed with the Clerk of Court within thirty (30) days of the rendering of the decision by the Mayor and Council of the City of Barnesville. 


APPROVED 
Rec. by: D 2 Dale: /— /.2-0 ARTICLE I -PAGE 5 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED 
Section 200 - Definitions 
The following words or phrases, when used in these Regulations for the purpose of these Regulations, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1. 	
Applicant - The owner, or his agent of land proposed to be subdivided. 

2. 	
As Built Plans - Plans indicating any changes to subdivision improvements made in the field while under construction that were not indicated on the construction plans. 

3. 	
Block - A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 

4. 	
Buffer Zone - Any area of land set aside for the purpose of reducing the affect of one dissimilar use of land upon another. 

5. 	
Building - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or goods. 

6. 	
Building Official - The individual who is designated as the building official by the City Manager of the City of Bamesville, Georgia. 

7. 	
Building Line - The line established by the zoning ordinance beyond which a building shall not extend as determined by front, side, and rear yards herein. 

8. 	
Building Permit - A written permit issued by the Building Inspector. 

9. 	
Building, Main - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot which it is situated. 

10. 	
City - The City of Barnesville, Georgia. 

11. 	
City Attorney - The attorney so designated by the City of Barnesville. 

12. 	
City Council - The Mayor and Council of Barnesville, Georgia, which is the governing body of Barnesville, Georgia. 

13. 	
Condominium - Individual ownership of units combined with a joint ownership of common areas and/or facilities of the buildings and grounds. 


APPROVED
.
Rec. by: 02 Date: F/2-0 y
ARTICLE II - PAGE 1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
14. 	
Construction Plans - The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance as a condition of the approval of the plat. 

15. 	
County - The Board of Commissioners of Lamar County, Georgia. 

16. 	
County Commission - The chief legislative body of Lamar County. 

17. 	
Double Frontage Lot - A lot having frontage on two (2) streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 

18. 	
Developer - Synonymous with "applicant" and "sub-divider". 

19. 	
Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential occupancy including one-family, two-family, and multi-family but not motels or hotels. 

20. 	
Dwelling, Single Family - A building designed for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 

21. 	
Dwelling, Two Family (duplex) - A building designed for and occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other. 

22. 	
Dwelling Unit - A dwelling or portion thereof providing permanent living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 

23. 	
Easement - A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons. 

24. 	
Engineer - A registered, practicing engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia. 

25. 	
Flood or Flooding - A general and temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 


a. 	
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 

b. 	
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 


27. 	
Flood, Fringe Area - That area of the floodplain lying outside the floodway but still within the area of special flood hazard, i.e., within the one hundred-year floodplain. 

28. 	
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) - An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of specific flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 


APPROVED.,
ARTICLE II - PAGE 2 
Rec. by: CYZ Date: — 1/.y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
29. 	
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 

30. 	
Flood Insurance Study - The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 

31. 	
Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 

32. 	
Frontage Lot - The distance for which the front property line of the lot and the street right-of-way line are coincident. 

33. 	
Frontage Street - All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end street. 

34. 	
Health Department - The Health Department duly authorized to perform health services in the county. 

35. 	
Improvements - Physical changes to the land which are necessary to create building lots including (but not limited to) grading and paving streets, sewer and water facilities, hydrants, sidewalks, monuments, changes to existing utilities, and storm drainage systems. 

36. 	
Landscape Architect - A registered, practicing landscape architect licensed by the State of Georgia. 

37. 	
Lot - The basic development unit, an area with fixed boundaries, used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building and not divided by any public highway or alley. A "zoning lot" must meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must front on a public street. 

38. 	
Model Home - A dwelling used initially for display purposes which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. 

39. 	
Official Street Map - The map approved by the Planning Commission and adopted by the City Council which identifies such existing and proposed roads and streets in the City. 

40. 	
Open Space - A yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 


N APPROVED
ARTICLE II - PAGE 3 	0`-(
Rec. try: ua Date:/_Q--
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
41. 	
Owner - Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commerce and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these Regulations. 

42. 	
Parcel - A general term including all plots of land shown with separate identification on the Official Tax Appraisal Maps. Parcels may or may not be lots, depending upon whether or not such parcels are created as herein provided. 

43. 	
Planned Development - Any planned concentration which provides for innovative concepts in residential, commercial, or industrial development which enables economy in capital expenditures or utilities and streets and in subsequent maintenance. 

44. 	
Planning Commission - The Barnesville/Lamar County Planning Commission. 

45. 	
Plat - A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section, or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries or properties. 

46. 	
Plat, Final - A finished drawing of a subdivision or a phase of its development showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certification necessary for recording which complies with these regulations. 

47. 	
Plat, Preliminary - A drawing which shows the particular boundary, topography, lot arrangements, street layout and other features of a proposed subdivision as specified in these Regulations. 

48. 	
Public Utilities - Water, gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical and communications lines and facilities, and natural or improved drainage facilities. A privately owned and operated business, franchised to use public rights-of-way and whose purpose is to systematically provide energy; power; water; transportation; or liquid, gaseous, or solid commodities to the general public. 

49. 	
Resubdivision - A change in the map of a recorded subdivision plat if such change effects any street layout, area reserved for public use, or any lot line, and includes the further division of platted subdivision lots. 

50. 	
Right-of-Way - Access over or across a particularly described property for a 
specific purpose. 


51. 	
Right-of-Way Line - The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a 
contiguous right-of-way. 


52. 	
Shoulder - That portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved 
surface or the curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground 
surface. 



APPROVED
ARTICLE II - PAGE 4 
Rec.by: IJZ Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
53. 	
Sidewalk - That portion of a street or road available exclusively for pedestrian traffic. 

54. 	
Street - A public way dedicated to and accepted by the city for the use of vehicular or pedestrian traffic by the general public and may be referred to as a street, highway, parkway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, etc. 

55. 	
Street Alley - A platted service way providing secondary means of access to butting property. 

56. 	
Street Abut - A major street designed for continuous movement of all types of traffic with less control over the access points from streets and adjacent property than freeways. 

57. 	
Street, City - A street which is owned or maintained by the City. 

58. 	
Street, Collector - Provides frontage for access to lots and carries traffic to and from local streets. Traffic should have origin or destination in the immediate neighborhood. 

59. 	
Street, Cul-de-sac - A local street with only one (1) outlet, closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 

60. 	
Street, Freeway - A multi-lane, limited access street designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic, with control over access to abutting property. 

61. 	
Street Grade - The grade of the curb or centerline of a street measured at any point along the street. 

62. 	
Street, Half - A street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way widths as set forth in this Ordinance. 

63. 	
Street line - The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 

64. 	
Street Local - The lowest order street, providing frontage for access to private lots, and carrying traffic having destination or origin. 

65. 	
Street, Marginal Access Street - A street which is parallel to and adjacent to an 
arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and 
protection from through traffic. 


66. 	
Street Width - The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of­way of a street. 


67. 	
Structure - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location 
on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 



ARTICLE II - PAGE 5nAPPROVED Rec. by: v2 Da e: -.-0 y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
68..Subdivider - Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined within the confines of Barnesville. 
69..Subdivision - Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and including any division of land involving a new street, or a change in existing streets, and including re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, related to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition. 
a.  the division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more and each having at least one hundred and fifty (150) or more feet of frontage on an existing public road;  
b.  the sale or exchange or parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the modified lots are in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other ordinances of the City.  

70..Subdivision, Major - Any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel regardless of its existing or future use, into more than five (5) lots abutting upon an existing public street, or any division of a lot, tract or parcel involving the dedication of a new public street pursuant to these Regulations. 
71..Subdivision, Minor - Any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel regardless of its existing or future use, into five or fewer lots abutting upon an existing public street and meeting the standards set forth in these regulations. 
72..Surveyor - A registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
73..Zoning Department - Designated by the City Manager to administer and enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
74..Zoning Regulations - The zoning regulations adopted by the City. 
APPROVED 
Rec. by: 
2 Date:12491, 0y 
ARTICLE II - PAGE 6 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
ARTICLE III - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL Section 300 - Plat Approval Authority 
300.1 General Application 
Any person proposing to subdivide land shall submit to the City of Barnesville plats of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to all applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Barnesville. 
300.2 - Fees 
All fees required to accompany the submission of plats for the proposed subdivision shall be established by resolution by the local Mayor and Council. 
300.3 - Preliminary Plat Approval 
The City Council may issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval. No clearing or grading of any proposed streets shall begin prior to approval of the construction development plans. This prohibition shall extend to any other improvements related to the development of the proposed subdivision. Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute approval of any required improvements, development plans, or a final plat and it indicates only approval of the subdivision layout concept. 
300.4 - Construction Plan Approval Required Prior to Construction of Improvements 
No subdivision improvements shall commence prior to the approval of development plans by the City Manager or his designee. 
300.5 - Recording of Final Plat Required Prior to Sale of Lot 
No subdivider shall sell any lot in a proposed subdivision by reference to or exhibition of or by any other use or plat or such subdivision, until such plat has been given final approval by the Mayor and Council, as certified thereon, and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Lamar County. 
300.6 - Submission of "As Built" Plans Prior To Final Acceptance by the Mayor and Council 
Final acceptance of any subdivision improvements which vary substantially from approved construction plans shall not be given by the city prior to the submission and approval of "As Built" plans and any other technical information which may be required. 
300.7 - Legal Status of Public Street Required 
Legal status of public street required. No land dedicated as a public street shall be accepted, opened, or improved, nor shall any utilities or other facilities be installed therein unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a 
ARTICLE III - PAGE 1 
APPROVED Rec. by:.Date: 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
plat approved by the Planning Commission and City Council. Streets which shall have been accepted or opened as a public street, or otherwise have received the legal status of, a public street prior to the adoption of these regulations may be improved, or utilities or other facilities may be installed therein. The Mayor and Council, however, may locate and construct or may accept any other street as they deem necessary. 
300.8 - Access to public street required 
No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot unless such lot has access to a paved street which shall have been accepted or opened, as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of, a public street; provided, however, that private streets and other drive accessways may be approved under the terms of these rules and regulations in planned developments, condominium projects, apartment projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers, or other developments. 
Section 305 - Pre-Application Review 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the City of Barnesville is proposed, the subdivider will consult early and informally with the City Manager or his designee for advice and assistance. Such early contact will prove beneficial to all parties involved. The subdivider will submit sketches and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. If the tract of land is not to be initially subdivided in its entirety, the subdivider should will sketches for the entire tract and indicate the proposed unit divisions of staged development boundaries. 
305.2 
When the subdivider request a pre-application review, the City Manager or his designee shall return the submitted plans as quickly as possible and inform the subdivider where the plans do not comply with the requirements set forth in these regulations. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review and no formal application shall be required. However, in no instance shall the pre-application review be made or accepted in lieu of the required plats and specifications contained herein. 
Section 310 - Procedure For Preliminary Plat Approval 
Prior to the cutting or grading of any street improvements or the installation of utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the City of Barnesville, and receive approval of, a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedure outlined below. However, preliminary plat approval is required for any development that extends public streets and utilities. 
ARTICLE III - PAGE 2. 
AFROS 
Rec. by.Date: 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
310.1 - Application for Preliminary Plat Approval 
Following the pre-application review or at any other time, the subdivider shall submit formal application for preliminary plat approval upon such forms or in such a manner as may be prescribed by the City. Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted along with any other documents required in Section 315. 
310.2 - Health Department Recommendation When Public Sewer and/or Water is Not Available 
In such instances when public sewer and/or water is not available, the subdivider shall submit the proposed preliminary plat to the county health department for recommendation prior to making formal application to the City of Barnesville and shall include as part of the formal application such recommendation. 
310.3 - Review of Preliminary Plat 
The City Manager or his designee shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations set forth in this ordinance. In such instances where public sewer and/or water is not available, the review of the county health department, along with any conditions or modifications required by that agency, shall be on file prior to preliminary plat approval. 
310.4 - Preliminary Plat Approval 
Following the review of the preliminary plat and other related material, the City Council may issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval noting the conditions of such approval on five (5) copies of the preliminary plat with one (1) copy being returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy to the county health department, one (1) copy to the fire chief, and two (2) copies to be added to the records of the City. Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute approval of any required improvements, development plans, or a final plat and it indicates only approval of the subdivision layout concept. 
310.5 - Expiration Time 
Preliminary plat approval shall expire and be of no further effect twelve (12) months 
from the date of the preliminary approval unless the applicant submits a written request 
for time extension to the City of Barnesville clearly stating the need for the extension. 
When such a request has been received, the City may extend the approval for no more 
than an additional twelve (12) months. 

310.6 - Disapproval 
Based on the review of the preliminary plat and other related material, the Planning 
Commission and City Council may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health 
and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans and policies of the City of 
Barnesville which require the disapproval of the preliminary plat. A statement of the 
reasons for disapproval shall be made on five (5) copies of the preliminary plat with one 
.
ARTICLE III - PAGE 3 APPROVED Rec. by:.Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(1) copy being returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy to the county health department, one (1) copy to the fire chief, and two (2) copies being added to the records of the City of Barnesville. The applicant may re-apply for preliminary plat approval in accordance with Section 310 herein. 
Section 315 -Preliminary Plat Specifications 
315.1 Preparations and Specifications 
The preliminary plat shall be prepared by either a registered Georgia professional land surveyor, registered Georgia landscape architect or a registered Georgia professional engineer and all of the following specifications shall be shown. No plat shall be filed or accepted for review which does not meet the minimum specifications contained in these regulations. 
315.2 - Scale 
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
315.3 Sheet Size 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn in ink on suitable permanent reproducible material, on sheets thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map drawn at a reduced scale. 
315.4 Ground Elevations 
The preliminary plat may show ground elevations based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
315.5 Existing Conditions to be Provided on Preliminary Plat. 
(1) 	
Title ("Preliminary"), numerical scale; north arrow, indicating both magnetic and true north; date; inscription stating "Not For Final Recording" 

(2) 	
A vicinity map showing the location of the tract with approximate distance to obvious geographical locations. 

Present tract designation according to official records, title under which

(3) 
proposed subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners of the property to be subdivided, name and address of the subdivision designer, notation stating acreage to be subdivided, bench marks, certification of registered Georgia professional engineer, registered Georgia landscape architect or registered Georgia professional land 

surveyor, date of survey. ARTICLE III - PAGE 4.APPROvED 
RR* L)2 DateLl220y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(4) 	
Zoning district classification of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining properties. 

(5) 	
Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 

(6) 	
Other conditions, including adjacent land character, location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences within one hundred (100) feet. 

(7) 	
Boundary lines, bearings and distances of perimeter boundaries. 

(8) 	
Existing easements, indicating location, width, and purpose. 

(9) 	
Existing streets on, abutting, and adjacent to the tract, including name, right-or-way width, roadway width, surface type and existence of curb and gutter. 

(10) 	
When the subdivision will not be served by public sewer, soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the county health department and so indicated on the plat. 

(11) 	
Existing topographic contours at elevation intervals of not more than ten 

(10)
 feet. For purposes of the preliminary plan approval only, such contour lines may be interpolated from the applicable U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute quadrangle map(s). 

(12) 	
The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain and floodway as mapped by the National Flood Insurance Program, any other known past history of flooding, and other significant environmental features. 

(13) 	
Wetlands, as indicated on the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) Map or the Georgia Wetlands Database Map. 

(14) 	
In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with the proposed changes superimposed thereon. 


315.6 Proposed Improvements to be Provided on Preliminary Plat 
(1) 	
Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and roadway widths. 

(2) 	
Layout of all lots including minimum building setback lines and approximate lot dimensions. 


Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use, together
(3) 
with its purpose and limitations or conditions of such reservations or dedications, if any. 
APPROVED ARTICLE III - PAGE 5.RitkiaaDale:L-L.? 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
(4).Sites (if any) for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other non-public uses, exclusive of single-family dwellings, if located within the proposed subdivision, adjacent to the proposed subdivision, or abutting a collector or arterial needed as a result of the proposed subdivision. 
315.7 Certificate of Preliminary Approval 
A certificate of preliminary approval of the preliminary plat by the City of Barnesville shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled (and with consideration to any conditions noted below), this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Mayor and Council on Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the Construction Plans or the Final Plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall expire in twelve months and be null and void on .." 
Date 
City Manager 
"NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" 
Section 320 - Procedure For Construction Plan Approval 
Prior to the installation of any required improvements or utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the City of Barnesville and receive approval of construction plans in accordance with the procedures specified below. 
320.1 Application for Construction Plan Approval 
Application for construction plan approval must be submitted within twelve (12) months 
of preliminary plat approval. Six (6) copies of the construction plans shall be submitted 
along with any other documents required in Section 325. The construction plans will be 
distributed by the City Manager or his designee to the fire chief, the county health 
department, and any other city or county departments as necessary. 

320.2 Review of Construction Plans 
The City Manager or his designee shall check the construction plans for conformance to 
the rules and regulations set forth in this ordinance and insure that the findings of the 
reviewing departments are noted within thirty (30) days of receiving the plans. 

ARTICLE III - PAGE 6. 
APPROVED 
Rec. by:.Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
320.3 Construction Plan Approval 
Following the city's review of the Construction plans and other related material, the City Manager or his designee may issue a certificate of Construction plan approval noting the conditions of such approval on four (4) copies of the construction plans with the one (1) copy being returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy to the county health department, and one (1) copy to the fire chief and one (1) copy added to the city records. Approval of the construction plans does not constitute approval of the final plat. It authorizes only that work may begin on the construction and installation of all improvements for the proposed layout shown on the preliminary plat and subject to inspection by the City. 
320.4 Expiration Time 
Construction plan approval shall expire and be of no further effect twelve (12) months from the date of the preliminary plat approval, unless the applicant submits a written request for time extension to the City clearly stating the need for the extension. When such a request has been received, the City may extend the approval for no more than an additional twelve (12) months. 
320.5 Disapproval 
Following the review of the construction plans and other related material, the City Manager or his designee, fire chief, county health department or other city departments may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health, and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans and policies of the Mayor and Council, which require the disapproval of the construction plans. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be made on four (4) copies of the Construction plans with one (1) copy being returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy to the county health department, one (1) copy to the fire chief, and one (1) copy kept by the city. The applicant may reapply for construction plan approval in accordance with Section 320 herein or may appeal staff denial to the Mayor and Council at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting. 
Section 325 - Construction Plan Specifications 
325.1 Preparation and Specifications 
The construction plans shall be prepared by either a registered Georgia professional land surveyor, registered Georgia landscape architect or a registered Georgia engineer and shall show all of the following specifications. No plan shall be filed or accepted for review which does not meet the minimum specifications contained in these regulations. 
325.2 Scale 
The construction plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one 
hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. The City may require a smaller Construction plan 
scale if the aforementioned scale is deemed inappropriate during the preliminary plat 
review process. 
.
ARTICLE III - PAGE 7 
AMOS 
Rec. by:.Date: 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
325.3 Sheet Size 
The construction plans shall be drawn in ink on suitable permanent reproducible material, on sheets thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. If the complete plans cannot be shown on one sheet, they may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map drawn at reduced scale. 
325.4 Ground Elevations 
The construction plans shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the 
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, with a contour interval of two (2) feet in the areas of the site that encompasses the streets, sanitary sewers and drainage facilities. 
325.5 Existing Conditions to be Provided on Construction Plans 
(1) 	
Title ("Construction Plans"), numerical scale; north arrow, indicating both magnetic and true north; date, inscription stating "Not For Final Recording". 

(2) 	
A vicinity map showing the location of the tract with approximate distances to obvious geographical locations. 

(3) 	
Present tract designation according to official records, title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners of the property to be subdivided, name and address of subdivision designer, notation stating acreage to be subdivided, bench marks, certification of registered Georgia professional engineer, registered Georgia landscape architect or registered Georgia land surveyor, date of survey. 

(4) 	
Boundary lines, bearings and distances of perimeter boundaries. 

(5) 	
Existing easements, indicating location, width, and purpose. 

(6) 	
Existing streets on, abutting, and adjacent to the tract, including name, right-of-way width, roadway width, surface type and existence of curb and gutter. 


Utilities on, abutting, and adjacent to the tract: location, size, and invert
(7) 
elevation of existing sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles; if mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the street, indicate the direction and distance to and size of nearest ones showing invert elevation of sewers (if use of public sewers is proposed). 
APPROVED
.
Rec. by: V2 Date:_
ARTICLE DI - PAGE 8 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(8) 	
Other conditions on the tract, including wooded areas, tree masses, major rock outcroppings, houses, barns, shacks, all water courses, marshes, swamps the boundaries of the 100-year floodplain and floodway as mapped by the National Flood Insurance Program, land subject to flooding as determined from past history of flooding, and other significant environmental features. 

(9) 	
In case of resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed changes superimposed thereon. 

(10) 	
A complete listing of the deviations from the previously approved preliminary plat. 


325.8 Proposed Improvements to be Provided on Construction Plans 
(1) 	
Layout of streets and sidewalks showing right-of-way and roadway widths, road names or designations, grades and cross-sections. 

(2) 	
Other rights-of-way or easements, indicating location, width, purpose, and ownership. 

(3) 	
Layout of all lots, including minimum building setback lines, approximate lot dimensions, utility easements with width and use on all lots, lot numbers and block numbers, and a listing of lot areas (width may be submitted as a separate document). 

(4) 	
Plans of any sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe sizes, and point of discharge, together with certified copy of all load design factors and computations by a registered Georgia engineer. 


Plans for the storm drainage system with grade, pipe size, and location of
(5) 


outlet, together with certified copy of all drainage areas, design factors, and computations by a registered Georgia engineer. 
(6) 
Plans for water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves, and all appurtenances by a registered Georgia engineer. 

Plans for the street lights including location, style/type, illumination and
(7) 

other necessary for appurtenances. 

Designation of all land to be reserved of dedicated for public use, together
(8) 
with its purpose and limitations or conditions of such reservations or dedications, if any. 
Sites, if any, for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
(9) 
industry or other non-public uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. APPROVD)
ARTICLE III - PAGE 9 
Rec. by: na 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(10) 	
Existing and fmished grades including the clear identification of areas in which substantial grade changes and filing will occur. 

(11) 	
A complete listing of all covenants, deed restrictions, and provisions for maintenance of common open spaces and other common lands. 

(12) 	
Traffic Control plan for all traffic control devices including but not limited to, street signs, stop signs, yield signs, pavement markings in conformance with Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 


325.9 Certificate of Construction Plan Approval 
A certificate of approval of the construction plans shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
Construction Plan Approval "In that all the requirements of Construction Plans have been fulfilled (and with consideration to any conditions noted below), this subdivision plat was given approval by the City Manager on .. The construction plans are hereby approved. This approval does not constitute approval of the Final Plat or acceptance of improvements. This Certificate of Approval shall expire in twelve (12) months and be null and void on . 
Date. City Manager 
.
Date 	Building and Zoning 
"NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" 
325.8 Installation of Site Improvements 
After receiving a certificate of approval of the construction plans by the City, the 
subdivider may then proceed to install any and all improvements required under these 
regulations and any other applicable regulations of the city. In lieu of the completion of 
all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall post a 
performance bond with the City of Barnesville in an amount equal to one hundred 
twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of completing such unfinished improvements. As 
an alternative, the subdivider can tender a negotiable instrument in like amount in favor 
of the city, including but not limited to, a letter of credit or an assignment on a certificate 

.
ARTICLE III - PAGE 10 
APPROVED 
Rec. by:.Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
of deposit. The value of the bond or instrument shall be established by the City Manger or his designee. 
The duration of the bond or negotiable instrument will be established jointly by the subdivider and the City Manager or his designee. Fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of the bond or instrument, the City Attorney will notify the bonding company or financial institution of possible default. If unfinished improvements are not completed by the end of the duration period, the bond or instrument will be deemed to have been forfeited and the bonding company or financial institution will be required to immediately pay all amounts due to the local government. 
Section 330 - Final Plat Procedure 
After completion of physical construction of the subdivision or the posting of a performance bond or negotiable instrument guaranteeing any unfinished or any unacceptable portion of the same, the subdivider shall submit a final plat in accordance with the following procedure: 
330.1 Application for Final Plat Approval 
The subdivider shall submit to the City Manager or his designee, formal application for final plat approval upon such forms or in such a manner as may be prescribed by the City. Ten (10) copies of the final plat shall be submitted along with any other documents required in Section 335. The City Manager or his designee shall then distribute the plat to any city departments as necessary. 
330.2 Health Department Review when Public Sewer and Water is not Available 
In such instance when public sewer and/or water is not proposed, the subdivider shall receive the approval of the county health department prior to making application to the City and such approval shall clearly be noted upon the fmal plat. 
330.3 Review of the Final Plat 
The final plat shall be reviewed for conformance with the approved Preliminary Plat, the approved construction plans, the requirements of these regulations and any special conditions or restrictions imposed by the City. In instances when public sewer and/or water is not available, the approval of the county health department shall be received prior to approval by the City. 
330.4 Final Plat Approval 
The City Manager or his designee may give final approval provided the final plat is 
substantially the same as the approved preliminary plat and approved construction plans 
and that all conditions specified by the City and specified herein have been met; 

ARTICLE III -PAGE 11. ARM Rec. by:.Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
If the final plat substantially conforms to the preliminary plat, the construction plans, and fulfills all special conditions or restrictions imposed by the City in the approval of said preliminary plat and construction plans, and contains every and all of the specifications set forth herein, then City Manager or his designee may approve the final plat and shall sign a Certificate of Final Plat Approval. Recording of the final plat shall be done in accordance with Section 345 herein. 
330.5 Hearing on the Final Plat 
Should the final plat not substantially conform to the preliminary plat and the Construction plans, or not fulfill any and all special conditions or restrictions imposed by the City, or not contain every and all of the specifications set forth herein, or should the City Manager or his designee elect not to give final approval, then the plat is refereed to the Mayor and Council and a hearing shall be held as follows: 
(1) 	
Notice of time and place of hearing shall be sent to the name and address of the subdivider which is on the final plat. This notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to said name and address not less than ten (10) days before the date of hearing. 

(2) 	
The Mayor and Council shall provide a hearing on the final plat at the first regular meeting of the Mayor and Council following submission of the final plat for review. The City Manager or his designee shall present to the Mayor and Council, at the hearing on the final plat, his written findings and recommendations and the written findings of the county health department. 


330.6 Mayor and Council Disapproval 
The Mayor and Council may find the final plat in conflict with the approved preliminary plat or construction plans or with these regulations, requiring the disapproval of the final plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be placed on five (5) copies of the final plat with one (1) copy being returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy to the county health department, one (1) copy to the fire chief, two (2) copies being added to the records of the City. In addition, the minutes of the Mayor and Council shall reflect the reason for denial and record the individual vote of members. No certificate of approval shall be given. The original plat shall be returned to the subdivider. The fmal plat may be resubmitted as a new application for a hearing for final plat approval after the corrections noted by the Mayor and Council are made. 
Section 335 - Final Plat Specifications 
335.1 Conformance with the Preliminary Plat and Construction Plans 
The final plat shall conform to the conditions of the approved preliminary plat and 
construction plans. 

.
ARTICLE III - PAGE 12 	APPROVED 
Rec. by:.Date:. 
City of.Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
335.2 Original Tracing Specifications 
The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale shall be one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch on sheets no larger that twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. If a smaller scale was required for the construction plat, the same scale shall be used for the final plat. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. A reproduction of the original tracing must be submitted. 
335.3 Additional Specifications 
The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1) 	
Primary control points with necessary descriptions and location of such angles, bearings, and similar data necessary for proper. 

(2) 	
Tract boundary lines, rights-of-way lines of streets, easements, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and setback line whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius; length of arc; internal angles, and bearing of the tangents and tangent distances for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest one-one hundredth (1/100) of a foot and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute. 

(3) 	
Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 

(4) 	
Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easements. 

(5) 	
Number or letter to identify each lot and block. 

(6) 	
Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or 
reserved. 


(7) 	
Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 

(8) 	
Location and description of monuments and markers. 

(9) 	
Names and record owners of adjoining unplatted land. 

(10) 	
Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record and name. 

(11) 	
Title, numerical scale, north arrow, and date. 


.
ARTICLE III - PAGE 13 
APPROVED 
Rec. by:.Date:. 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(12)
 Certification by the City Manager or his designee that the developer has complied with one of the following alternatives: 

(a) 	
"All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these subdivision regulations and other applicable regulations" or 

(b) 	
"A performance bond has been approved and accepted by the Mayor and Council in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required improvements in accord with the requirements of the subdivision regulations. 

(13)
 Notation of the necessary certifications shall be placed on the final plat as specified below in Section 335.4 through 335.8 as applicable. 


335.4 Surveyor's Certification 
A signed certification by a registered Georgia land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"In my opinion this plat is correct representative of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law and has been calculated for closure by latitudes and departures and is found to be accurate within one (1) foot in .feet." 
By . 	Registered Georgia 
Professional Land 
Surveyor No.. 
Date. 

335.5 Owner's Certification 
A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, County of Lamar 
The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and 
acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicates to 
public use forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, 
easements, or parks." 

Owner's Name
Date. 
APPROVED 
ARTICLE III - PAGE 14.Rec.._.©y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
335.6 Health Department Certification 
A signed certification of the Lamar County Health Department shall be placed on the final plat in every instance except when the subdivision is developed with a public sanitary sewer system and public water. 
"I certify that the general lot layout shown on this plat has been approved by the Lamar County Health Department for Construction with . Individual lot approval is required for each lot prior to construction. 
Date.Environmental Health Specialist 
Lamar County Health Department 

The blank in the above certification statement shall be completed by the director of the health department, or his representatives, so as to indicate whether approval is based upon the use of individual sewerage systems, individual water supplies, a community sewerage system, a community water supply, or combination thereof. 
335.7 Certificate of Approval by the City Manager 
A signed certification of the City Manager or engineer designated by the city shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify that the owner, or his agent has completed the construction and installation of the streets, drainage, utilities, and other improvements in accordance with the Regulations of Barnesville, Georgia; or has posted a performance bond or other surety to insure completion." 
Date.City Manager 
Section 340 - Requirement For "As Built" Plans and Other Technical Information 
340.1 Preparations and Specifications 
After the preparation of the final plat; and before any improvements are accepted for maintenance by the City of Barnesville; and before the subdivider or his agent are released from any bond requirement specified herein, the city shall receive formal written notice that all improvements have been installed as approved. In instances where said improvements have been installed in such a manner as to substantially vary from the approved construction plans, the City Manager or his designee shall receive a copy of "As Built" construction plans and other technical information which may be needed. 
340.2 Scale 
The "As Built" plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) 

feet to one (1) inch, or the same scale as the final plat. 
ARTICLE III - PAGE 15. 

APPROVED 
Rec. by:.Date: 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
340.3 Sheet Size 
The "As Built" plans shall be drawn in ink on suitable permanent reproducible material, on sheets thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. If the complete plans cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map drawn at a reduced scale. 
340.4 Ground Elevations 
The "As Built" plans shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, with a contour interval of two (2) feet in the areas encompassed by streets, sanitary sewers and drainage facilities. 
340.5 Existing Conditions to be Shown on "As Built" Plans 
In such instances where there have been substantial variations from approved construction plans, the City shall require each of the following, as applicable, or additional information required: 
(1)  Final profiles of grades for streets.  
(2)  Final plan of sanitary sewers with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge.  
(3)  Final plan of storm drainage system with grade, pipe sizes, location of outlets and detention and retention facilities.  

(4) 	
- Final plan of water supply system with pipe sizes, location of hydrants, and valves. 

(5) 	
A complete listing of the divisions from the approved construction plans made by the subdivider. 


340.6 Certification of Improvements Prior to Acceptance by the Mayor and Council 
The City Manager or his designee shall not recommend that any subdivision improvements be accepted for maintenance by the City unless they have been installed in accordance with approved construction plans or approved "As Built" plans and other technical information which may be required. 
APPROVED
. 
Rec. by:ila Dafelz.L2z-Dy
ARTICLE III - PAGE 16 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
Section 345 -Recording of Final Plat 
Upon the approval of a final plat by the City, the owner, or his agent, shall have the final plat recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision. The final plat shall be certified reproducible and meeting the original tracing specifications as provided in Section 335.2. Upon recording of the approval final plat, a copy of any private covenants or deed restrictions shall be provided by the subdivider for the records of the City of Barnesville. 
APPROVED 
Rec. by: E)
Q .Dale: / 0-—0(-/ 
ARTICLE III - PAGE 17 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
ARTICLE IV - GENERAL PRINCIPALS OF SUBDIVISION DESIGN 
Section 400 - Required Design Standards 
All applicable subdivision design and improvement standards set forth in this Article shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the City of Barnesville. 
Section 405 -Suitability of Land 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, and erosion, as determined by the City to be unsuitable for construction shall not be platted for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger of health, safety, life, or property unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
Section 410 -Land in Special Flood Hazard Districts 
The subdivider of any land located within a special flood hazard district shall comply with all the requirements set out in the Flood Hazard Ordinance for such districts. In addition, the following requirements are established: 
(1) 	
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 

(2) 	
All subdivisions proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 

(3) 	
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 

(4) 	
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals. 


Section 415 -Access 
415.1 
Every subdivision, and every lot within, shall be served by a publicly dedicated street, except as herein provided. 
ARTICLE IV - PAGE 1. 
APPROVED Rec. by: 1)2 Date: / 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
415.2 
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. Right-of-way for future access shall be provided. 
415.3 
No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
(1) 	
Where a proposed development will result in the construction of at least 30 dwelling units located more than one thousand (1000) feet from a major collector or arterial highway, (as measured by a straight line from the edge of the highway right-of-way to the nearest point of the dwelling unit) the City shall require the provision of through streets to accommodate potential future traffic circulation needs. 

(2) 	
When street access to adjoining parcels of land is required, each street connection shall be designed to intersect property lines at a ninety (90) degree angle, unless the City determines that a lesser degree is desirable or that a ninety (90) degree angle is technically not feasible. 


Section 420 - Conformance to the Comprehensive Plan and Other Regulations 
420.1 
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, zoning and subdivision regulations, and other development policies in effect at the time of plan submission to the City. 
420.2 
All highways, streets, and other features of the Comprehensive Plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the Comprehensive Plan. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation may be required by the City. 
420.3 
Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land to public use and the City or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required or suitable for public use, the City may either refuse to approve said plat or it may require the rearrangement of lots include such land. 
ARTICLE IV - PAGE 2 
APPROVED Rec. by: Q Z Date: /-/ 2.y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
420.4 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in other official regulations or resolution, the most restrictive as determined by the City Manager of his designee shall apply. 
Section 425 -Planned Developments 
425.1 
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of plan and program for a planned development which is not divided into customary lots, blocks and streets, which, in the judgment of the City, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, provided zoning density standards for the entire tract are not exceeded, and which also provides such covenants or such legal procedures as will assure conformity to an achievement of the plan. 
Section 435 -Name of Subdivision 
The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in Barnesville, except in the case where the subdivision is a section or part of a larger subdivision being developed by the same subdivider in phases, sections, or stages. In this case the name of the overall subdivision can be used for each phase, stage, or section, but the phase or section number must also be included as part or the same. 
ARTICLE IV - PAGE 3 
PPROVED Rec. by: 2.Dale: 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
ARTICLE V - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
Section 505 - Monuments 
Right-of-way and property line monuments shall be placed in each subdivision in accordance with the following: 
505.1 Right-of-way Monuments 
On all streets designated as arterials, a metallic pin imbedded at least two (2) feet into the ground shall be set at street corners, at points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in a street. Such metallic pin shall be at least one-half (1/2) inch in diameter. The top surface of such iron pin shall be approximately level with the ground surface. 
505.2 Property Line Monument 
A metallic pin imbedded at least two (2) feet into the ground shall be required at each lot corner and each point where the property line changes direction. Such metallic pin shall be at least one-half (1/2) inch in diameter. The top surface of such iron pin shall be approximately level with the ground surface. 
Section 510 - Lots 
510.1 
The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
510.2 
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. 
510.3 
The size, shape, and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the City for the type of development and use contemplated. No lot shall be more than six (6) times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the Mayor and Council as provided by Section 330.5 herein. 
nAPPROVED 
Rec. by: V? Date. 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 1 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
510.4 
Every lot shall conform to the minimum dimension and area requirements in City of Barnesville Zoning Ordinance, provided that every lot not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the health department. 
510.5 
Building setback lines shall conform to front, rear, and side yard building setback requirements of City of Barnesville Zoning Ordinance. 
510.6 
Double frontage lots, unless required by the City, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantage of topography, orientation, and property size. A planting screen reservation of at least ten (10) feet, across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
510.7 
Corner lots shall, as required in the City of Barnesville Zoning Ordinance, have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
510.8 
Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
Section 515 -Blocks 
515.1 
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1) 	
Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 

(2) 	
Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions unless a planned unit development or cluster development is contemplated. 

Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street

(3) 

traffic. 


APPROVED 
.Rec. by:.Date: /- 4,2-dr ARTICLE V - PAGE 2 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
(4).Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
515.2 
Residential blocks shall not be greater than one thousand (1,000) feet in length, or less than three hundred (300) feet in length. 
515.3 
Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots, except where fronting on expressways and arterials or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the City may require and/or approve a single tier of lots. 
Section 520 -Installation of Utilities 
520.1 Water 
Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the city water system, or with an alternate water supply approved by the city and the county health department. The lines shall be constructed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plat. The lines shall be installed in conformance with the technical standards as established by the city. 
520.2 Fire Hydrants 
Fire hydrant spacing shall be seven hundred and fifty (750) feet apart or less. Placement of fire hydrants is subject to approval by the city's fire department and utility department. 
520.3 Sewer 
A sanitary sewer system shall be installed and connected to the city's sewer system when any portion of the subdivision is within twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet of an existing trunk or collector sewer line. Where lots are not connected with a sanitary sewer system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields approved by the county health department. All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
520.4 Street Lights 
The subdivider shall install street lights fed with power from underground power lines. The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost of such installation. Street light plans and fixtures shall be approved by the city. 
APPROVED Rec. by: U2 Date:/-1,1LOy 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 3 
.
City of Barnesville, Georgia Subdivision Regulations 
Section 525 -Classification of Streets 
525.1 
Streets shall be classified into a street hierarchy system as shown in the City's Major Thorough Plan. Street design standards shall be based on road function and projected average daily traffic (ADT), calculated with trip generation rates published in the most recent edition of Trip Generation by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Street classes and their corresponding ADT thresholds are: 
Local Street. 250 ADT 
Collector. 5000 ADT 
Arterial. more than 10,000 ADT 
525.2 
Each street shall be classified and designed to that classification for its entire length. The applicant shall demonstrate that the distribution of traffic to the proposed street system shall not exceed the ADT thresholds for any of the proposed street classifications. 
525.3 
If and when a development plan indicates the construction of streets and utilities on private property, the owner shall indicate planned means for the maintenance of such street utilities. The construction specifications for such streets shall be approved by the city and access shall be provided over such streets to a public street having right-of-way of not less than thirty (30) feet. In addition, the owner shall state, through an agreement prepared or approved by the city attorney, that the City of Barnesville and the Mayor and Council shall be relieved of any responsibility for the maintenance of said improvements. Such agreements shall conform to the Georgia Condominium Act as applicable, and shall receive such approval prior to the final review by the Mayor and Council. 
Section 530 -Street Design Standards 
530.1 
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the City of Barnesville standards. Streets shall be considered in their relationship to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
530.2 
Where such is not shown in the City's street plans, the arrangement of streets in subdivision shall either: 
. PROVED 

Rec. ty: AP
ARTICLE V - PAGE 4 Datelilazo: y City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in  
surrounding areas at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the  
required minimum width.  
(2)  Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the City of  
Barnesville to meet a particular situation.  
530.3  

Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
530.4 
Where a subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City may require marginal access streets, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service drives, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
530.5 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the City may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or industrial purpose in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
530.6 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than seventy-five (75) degrees. Detailed design of intersections may be required. 
530.7 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than two hundred (200) feet shall not be permitted, except in cases involving only local streets, where the minimum permitted offset is one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
530.8 
Alleys or service drives may be required on any lots to be used for multiple family, commercial, or industrial developments, and may be used in residential areas. 
APPROVED Rec. by: D2 Date: /-0.—pc(
ARTICLE V -PAGE 5 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
530.9 
In commercial or industrial subdivisions, local streets are not permitted. All streets shall be constructed to the standards for a collector or higher level street. 
530.10 
Half-streets shall be prohibited. Any new streets required shall be paved for their entire width and the full right-of-way dedicated. 
530.11 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, or public grounds shall not be permitted unless approved by the City Manager or his designee as being in accordance with the provisions of Section 530.5. 
APPROVED 
.Rec. by:_aZ [de: /--oyARTICLE V - PAGE 6 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
530.12 Minimum Street Design Standards 
Arterial' 
Minimum Right of-way, in Feet  100  
Minimum Pavement Width Feet2  48  

Maximum Grade 6% 
Mini um Stopping 550 Slight ID istance, in Feet 
Desi! Speed, in 55 MPH 
Minim m 885 Center ine Radius, in Fee 
Minim m Length 300 of Tan ent Betw n ReVerse Curve in Feet 
Pavem nt Radius 25 at Inte sections, in Feet 
Minim m Finished.0.5% 
Collector 
60 26 
12% 300 
30 380 
100 
15 
0.5% 
Local Street 	Marginal Alleys Access and Street Drives 
60 	60 30 
22 	26 20 
123 12% 12% 12% 200 200 50 
25 	25 10 
165 	100 50 
100 
10 	15 10 
0.5%.• 	0.5% 0.5% 
1 Geometric design standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall 
represent minimum requirements for arterial street design and construction. 
2 Pavement width does not include curb and gutter. 

APPROVED 
3 One-Way Street 
Rec. by: OZ Date: /^/2,©y
ARTICLE V - PAGE 7.
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
530.13 
A proposed subdivision that includes a platted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of these regulations shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said street so that minimum right-of-way required by these regulations can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts upon only one side of said street, then a minimum of one-half of the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated or reserved by such subdivision. 
530.14 
Where the angle of street intersection is less than ninety (90) degrees, the City may require a greater pavement edge radius. 
530.15 
A ten (10) foot right-of-way miter shall be provided at all street intersections. 
530.16 
Crown height shall be three sixteenths (3/16) of an inch per foot on arterial streets, and one quarter (1/4) inch per foot on all other streets. 
530.17 
Cul-de-sac streets shall only be constructed as a local street and constructed to the standards of that classification. In addition, the following standards shall apply: 
(1) 	
Cul-de-sac shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, including circular turn-around. 

(2) 	
The turn-around right-of-way diameter shall be ninety (90) feet cul-de­sacs. 

(3) 	
The turn-around pavement diameter shall be sixty (60) feet. 


530.18 
Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, the City Manager 
or his designee may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicle turn-around 
within the right-of-way, when such a turn-around may be necessary for effective traffic 
circulation. Such a temporary turn-around shall be maintained for a period not to exceed 
twenty-four (24) months. The City may allow a dead-end street without provision of a 
cul-de-sac, if the following conditions are satisfied: 

(1).The proposed dead-end street will serve fewer than three properties with no potential for future resubdivision in accordance with the applicable zoning requirements. 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 8. 
IPMNE0 Dite: ot-\
Rec.
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
(2).The dead-end street has been provided with the right of way to allow street access to an adjoining property in accordance with Section 415.3. 
530.19 
Street names shall comply with the master street name and numbering system for the City of Barnesville. Streets obviously in alignment with streets already in existence shall be given the name of the existing street. The City of Barnesville/Lamar County 911 officials shall review the preliminary plat and provide comments. 
APPROVED ARTICLE V - PAGE 9.Rec. by: 0 Z Date: (2-07 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
INSERT ROADWAY SECTIONS 

APPROVED 
Rec by: DiDate K2-0y 
ARTICLE V — PAGE 10 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
Section 535 - Basic Construction Requirements For All Classes Of Streets 
535.1 General 
All streets, roads, and alleys shall be constructed to provide the necessary paving, roadway, drainage, and safety requirements as required herein and by other specifications of the Mayor and Council. 
535.2 Grading, Clearing and Grubbing 
All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width so that pavement, shoulders and sidewalks, where required or proposed for future installation, can be constructed on a level plane. No grading, clearing or grubbing shall take place prior to the Approval of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. 
535.3 Storm Drainage 
An adequate system based upon at least a 25-year storm event shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water originating in or affecting the subdivision. 
(1) 	
The drainage system shall conform to any local government storm drainage master plan which may be adopted and shall include necessary curbing, pipes, culverts, head walls, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches, or any other type of drainage facility need to control the flow of water in, around, or through the subdivision. 

(2) 	
Pipe size will be determined by utilizing the Rational Method or the Soil Conservation Method to compute peak runoff A 25-year storm event will be used to determine pipe sizes where the contributing area is 100 acres or 


-less. Where the contributing area is greater, a 50-year storm event will be used to determine pipe size. All cross drains under roadways shall be sized based on a 50-year storm event. All proposed piping within a FEMA identified floodplain shall be sized to adequately convey the 100­year frequency storm event. 
(3) 	
Manning's equation shall be used to evaluate hydraulic capacity and velocity of flow within the storm drainage system. Required storm pipes shall be designed to maintain a water flow velocity greater than or equal to three (3) feet per second. The hydraulic analysis of culverts shall be based on sound engineering practice and take into account the inlet geometry, slope, size, roughness and approach or tailwater conditions. 

(4) 	
Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every culvert and piped discharge system. The size and type of energy dissipation device to be used shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering practices and Section 545 of this ordinance. 


APPROVED Re:. by: a Date: /— (.7-0YARTICLE V - PAGE 11 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(5) 	The maximum distance between curb drainage inlets shall be six hundred 
(600) feet on center. 
(6) 	Additional requirements for storm water management are outlined in Section 545 of this ordinance. 
535.4 Installation of Utilities 
After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities (water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, and all service connections related thereto) shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the street, located as specified in the utility placement detail. All water system lines shall be pressure tested to withstand 150 pounds per square inch for a period of at least twelve 
(12) hours. 
535.5 Required Base and Pavement Thickness 
Arterial  Collector  Local  Marginal  Alleys  
Streets  Access  and  
Street  Drives  

8.,
Graded 6" 6" 6" 4" Aggregate Base 
Binder 	2-1/2" 2" 2" 2" 2" Type B Type B Type B Type B Type B 
Surface 	1-1/2" 1-1/2" 1-1/2" 2" 2" Type E Type E Type E Type F Type F 
535.7 Base Load Testing 
All base will be load tested with an 18 ton tandem dump trunk, or an equivalent. The test should cover the base thoroughly by lapping the tires one width each pass to assure a minimum tolerance of one-half (1/2) inch settling and no cracking or pumping, prior to any paving. This test shall be witnessed by the City Manager of his designee. 
535.8 Pavement Breaks for Utility Connections 
After the streets have been paved, utilities and drainage facilities shall be installed by boring under the street. When it is necessary for a subdivider, or any utility company, to break existing pavement for the installation of utilities, drainage facilities, or any other purpose, the subdivider, or utility company, shall be financially responsible for the repair of the pavement. The pavement shall be repaired with a Class "A" patch, and in accordance with all other specifications required herein for construction of streets. 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 12. APPROVED 
y
Rec. by: ve Date:.
City of Barnesville, Georgia. Subdivision Regulations 
535.9 "Curbs and Gutters 
Regular six-inch concrete curbs and gutters with a minimum overall width of twenty-four (24) inches shall be constructed on all arterial, collector local streets. Concrete valley gutter shall be permitted across local streets at street intersections only when no storm sewers are available as determined by the city. Valley gutters shall be at least six 
(6) feet in width. 
535.10 Curb Markings for Utility Connections 
Where utilities enter under the street pavement, a brass plaque identifying the particular utility (W—Water, S—Sewer, G--Gas) shall be affixed into the curb. 
535.11 Grassed Medians 
Regular six-inch concrete curb and gutter shall be required for any grassed median on residential streets. Such medians shall be designed to slope towards the outside curb of a street or contain an adequate drainage system within the median. 
Section 540 -Sidewalks and Street Signs 
540.1 Sidewalks 
Sidewalks shall be four inches (4") thick with a minimum width of four feet (4') on all streets. A minimum of a two foot (2') grass planting strip shall be provided between the back of the curb and the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall slope one-forth inch to the foot toward the pavement. 
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of each street in subdivisions in all zoning classifications. 
540.3 Street Signs 
All streets shall be designated by name on a street sign post, with such post having nameplates of set one above the other with a clearance of seven (7) feet. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At cross-street intersections, two (2) sign posts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. Only one street sign post shall be required at T-street intersections. All signs shall conform to the guidelines contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of street signs. 
APPROVED 
'0(1
Rec.by:DZ_Date..
ARTICLE V - PAGE 13 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
Section 545 - Storm Water Management 
545.1 Application Procedure 
(1) 	
All persons proposing development and/or construction in The City of Barnesville shall submit a storm water management plan to the City Manager of his designee for approval. This plan shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 545.2 below. 

(2) 	
The City shall require that the plan be certified by a state registered civil engineer or state registered landscape architect to ensure compliance with all regulations. 


545.2 Standards for Storm Water Management 
(1) 	
A combination of storage and controlled release of storm water runoff (on-site detention or retention) shall be required when the proposed development shall increase the peak rate of runoff by more than one (1) percent for a ten year frequency storm. The Rational Method or the Soil Conservation Method shall be used to determine the runoff rate in accordance with sound engineering practice and shall be acceptable to the local government engineer. Developments may be exempt from this provision if the design professional can demonstrate that the runoff can be adequately transmitted through existing downstream storm drain structures and will not result in increased flood heights or additional threats to public 

safety, and will not adversely affect downstream properties. 

(2) 	
Should on-site retention or detention be required, the outlet device(s) of the retention/detention facility shall be designed to limit post-development runoff rates to less than or equal to the pre-development rates for all storm events up to and including the 25-year frequency storm event. 

(3) 	
The retention or detention storage volume to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall, as published by the National Weather Service for the affected site. The retention or detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of the 25-year rainfall event less that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rates as specified above. However, the design calculations shall include the routing of the 100 year frequency storm event through the retention/detention facility. Said calculations shall indicate that the 100 year frequency storm event can be safely routed through the facility. 

(4) 	
The storm drainage system shall be designed in accordance with Section 


535.3 of these regulations. At a minimum, the storm drainage system shall be sized to adequately convey the runoff from the 25-year frequency storm event to the retention/detention facility. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE V - PAGE 14 
Rec. by:.Date: /-1-2--6 y 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(5) 	
Any required retention and/or detention areas shall not be developed with other uses. Appropriate vegetation shall be planted in all retention and/or detention areas. Any required retention and/or detention areas shall be incorporated into the common areas of the residential development or incorporated into individual lots with access easements. 

(6) 	
Maintenance - Detention ponds and fencing are required to be maintained by the property owner or by a homeowners association or developer and established by agreement with the respective owner. The City of Barnesville shall insure that the agreement for the maintenance of these facilities is duly executed prior to issue of building permits, certificates of occupancy and/or final approval. Sediment shall be periodically removed to maintain the storage capacity, safety, and functionally of the detention pond. The bottom and sides shall be stabilized to prevent erosion. Grass in ponds must be periodically cut for pest control and standing water must be eliminated to prevent mosquito breeding and snake habitation. Fences must be maintained in good structural condition, including periodic repairs and painting or sealing if necessary. Inlet and outlet structures shall be maintained and repaired as necessary. Inlet and outlet structures shall be maintained and repaired as necessary to function as designed. Detention ponds shall not be used for material storage or solid waste dumping. 

(7) 	
Fences a minimum of five (5) feet in height with a minimum eight (8) foot wide gate will be required on all detention ponds where: 


(a).The sides of the pond have a slope of three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical or-greater.. 
(b) 	The depth of water in the pond is greater than two (2) feet at one hour after the duration of the storm event. 
Normally dry headwater pools are exempt from the fencing requirements. 
(8) 	
Drainage easement requirements 

(a) 	
The minimum easement width for open ditch where pipe is feeding into the ditch will be determined as follows: 


Pipe Size.Easement 
15" to 30".20 feet 
36" to 66".30 feet 
72" and greater.40 feet 
APPROVED 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 15 
by: 02 Dale:Pi-2-ov 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(b) 	
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or stream, there shall be a drainage and access easement conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose of drainage and maintenance, taking into account possible future development of higher land in the same drainage area. 

(c) 	
If the drainage way is totally piped, a minimum twenty (20) foot 


easement is required. 
. 

(9) Enforcement - Citations for violation of this ordinance may be issued by the City Manager or designee or a Police Officer of the City. The Citation shall be returnable to and tried before the Municipal Court of the City. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty violating this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined up to one thousand dollars. Each day such violation remains unresolved to the satisfaction of the City shall be deemed a separate offense. 
545.3 Permit 
A storm water management plan approved by the City Manager or his designee shall constitute a permit that will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
Section 550 -Administrative Procedures 
The administrative procedures for installing the subdivision improvements required herein shall be as follows: 
550.1 When Construction May Begin 
Construction and installation of any required public improvements as described herein shall not begin until the Planning Commission and City Council has given preliminary plat and construction plan approval for the new subdivision. The subdivider shall then confer with the City Manager or his designee to determine the method and estimated cost of the construction and installation of the required improvements. 
APPROVED Rec. by: 02 Date: /- /2'-e) y 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 16 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
550.2 Inspections and Approval 
During the construction and installation of the required public improvements, the City Manager or his designee shall, from time to time conduct official and unofficial inspections. 
(1).The City of Barnesville shall require the subdivision work activities be divided into four (4) basic phrases: 
Phase 1: 
a. 	
Installation of necessary erosion control structures. 

b. 	
Street layout and grading. 

c. 	
Installation of utilities. After certification by developer's surveyor of rough grade within +/- 1 foot of finished elevation of street centerline and shoulders. 

d. 	
Installation of street drainage facilities. 

e. 	
Begin installation of off-street drainage facilities 


Phase 2: 
a. 	
Continue installation of off-street drainage facilities. 

b. 	
Installation of curbs and gutters. 

c. 	
Continue erosion control activities in accordance with the land disturbance plan. 


Phrase 3: 
a. 	
Complete installation of off-street drainage facilities. 

b. 	
Street base and pavement. 

c. 	
Continue erosion control activities. 


Phrase 4: 
a. 	
Correction of deficiencies. 

b. 	
Implement total erosion control plan. 

c. 	
Final clean-up. 


(2).An official city inspection shall be requested after each phase of work is completed. Subsequent phases shall not begin until permission for new work is extended by the city. 
.
(3) After all subdivision work has been performed satisfactorily, the City Manager or his designee shall provide a written conditional approval to the subdivider and recommend to the Mayor and Council that the subdivision improvements be officially accepted. His recommendations shall be based upon the results of his own inspections, and input provided by the city departments. 
APPROVED RE by: V Z Date: (—/.2 —0/ARTICLE V - PAGE 17 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
(4).Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed as an unlawful structure, and the City Manager or his designee may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated and/or removed. 
550.3 Official Acceptance by the City of Barnesville 
The Mayor and Council may officially accept the completed work on the construction and installation of required public improvements at any time after the date of the written conditional approval by the City Manager of his designee but not before approval of the final plat and/or any "As Built" plans which may be required. 
550.4 Maintenance of Completed Work 
The subdivider shall maintain his completed work until the approval by the City as described above. The subdivider shall then be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the City for two (2) year period. A maintenance bond is to be posted by the subdivider in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the construction cost. During the maintenance period, the City Manager or his designee shall make periodic inspections and notify the subdivider of necessary corrections. At the end of the maintenance period, he shall make a final inspection and report his findings to the Mayor and Council. Necessary corrections not made by the subdivider will be completed by the City. The cost of making such corrections shall be collected from the subdivider and the bonding company. If the work is acceptable at the end of the maintenance period, the maintenance bond shall expire and/or any remaining funds shall be released to the subdivider. Said corrections shall not include vandalism and other damage beyond control of the developer. 
550.5 Subdivider's Responsibility 
The subdivider shall incur the cost of design, construction and installation of all required public improvements based on the following: 
(1) 	
Streets and drainage - Incur the cost for the construction of all pavement, curbs and gutters, and storm sewers required herein. 

(2) 	
Water and Sanitary Sewer Systems - Incur the cost for the installation of all water and sanitary sewer systems which are required to serve the new subdivision and tie in with existing water and sanitary sewer systems, based on the specifications set forth herein. 


Sidewalks. Entire cost. 
Monuments. Entire cost. 
Street name and regulatory signs. Entire cost. 
APPROVED 
Rec. by: t)2 Dale:/-/)-Dy
Street lights. Entire cost. 
ARTICLE V - PAGE 18 

City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
550.6 City's Responsibility 
The City shall partially participate in sharing the cost of construction and installation of required public improvements for the following conditions: 
(1) 	
Streets - Incur cost for any additional pavement which may be required in excess of the minimum requirements contained herein and any additional grading and paving related thereto. 

(2) 	
Water and Sewer Systems - Incur the cost for any difference in the cost of oversized pipe and out fall systems which may be needed in excess of the required water and sewer facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision. 

(3) 	
Storm Water Detention Facilities - Incur the cost for any storm water detention facilities required to be built in excess of the facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision. 


550.7 Estimated Cost for Construction and Installation 
The current unit prices in effect at the time of submission of plans shall be used in determining the total estimated cost for construction and installation of required public improvements in new subdivisions. 
550.8 Approval Required Prior to Sale or Transfer of Property 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the local government who transfers or sells, or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the City Manager or his designee and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Lamar County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by official Code of Georgia Annotated [Section] 17-10-3. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer by other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The City, through its attorney or other official designated by the Mayor and Council, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
550.9 Approval and Endorsement Required Prior To Recording 
No plat of plan of subdivision within the City shall be filed or recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Lamar County until it has been approved by the City and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the City Manager. The Clerk of the Superior Court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision which does not have the approval of the City. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the City of Barnesville is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by Official Code of Georgia Annotated [Section] 17-10-3. 
APPROVED
ARTICLE V - PAGE 19 
Rec. DzDatel-C8 
City of Barnesville, Georgia. 	Subdivision Regulations 
550.10 Issuance of Building Permits Prior to Approval 
No building permit shall be issued for, and no building or other structure shall be erected on, any lot within the City of Barnesville except when: 
(1) 	
The street giving access to said lot on which a structure is proposed has already been accepted, opened, or received the legal status of a public street; or 

(2) 	
The street corresponds in its location and line with a street shown on an approved final plat; 

(3) 	
The building official prior to final plat approval, has authorized the construction of not more than three (3) units to be used as model units in a subdivision. Said units shall not be authorized for occupancy until final plat approval has been given. 


Section 600 -Effective Date 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. Read and approved this.day of ., .for a first reading, and on this .day of ., .for a second and final reading after a public hearing before the Barnesville City Council on 
Section 700 -Legal Form and Sufficiency 
"This docunfent has been approved as to its legal form and sufficiency." 
City Attorney 
APPROVED, 
bk(
Rec. by:.Z Date: I.
ARTICLE V - PAGE 20 






